
                               1 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 1, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WHITE HOUSE AIDES ASSERT WEINBERGER WAS UPSET WHEN HAIG TOOK CHARGE

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1481 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 31


White House officials said today that a difference of opinion arose yesterday
between Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. and Secretary of Defense Caspar
W. Weinberger over their respective responsibilities in the crucial hours after
the shooting of President Reagan.

The officials asserted that the disagreement did not at any time impede what
James A. Baker 3d, the White House chief of staff, termed ''a spirit of
cooperation and dedication toward one goal, the goal of keeping our Government
running smoothly during a time of distress.''

In a briefing for reporters, Mr. Baker also said that in the immediate hours
after Mr. Reagan's wounding, when the President's top aides had all rushed to
George Washington University Hospital, Secretary Haig had appropriately assumed
control at the White House Situation Room on his own, pending the return of Vice
President Bush from Texas.

Other officials at the White House said that Mr. Weinberger had been annoyed,
however, when Mr. Haig asserted at a news conference at 4:15 PM. that he was
''in control,'' since the protocol of the Situation Room dictates that the
Defense Secretary, not the Secretary of State, is in charge of operations there.


Technically in Charge of Lines

The Situation Room is in the basement nerve center at the White House that
contains secure communication lines with the Pentagon and other defense
outposts. According to a White House official, the Defense Secretary is
technically in charge of these secure communication lines, even including the
one that was established with the hospital.

It was Mr. Weinberger's assertion that Situation Room protocol should be
observed that gave rise to the disagreement with Mr. Haig, according to an
official. He said the disagreement was not angry, but was sharp enough for
Richard V. Allen, the national security adviser to Mr. Reagan, to play a
''modifying'' role in helping aides determine that Mr. Haig take charge.

Another official said Mr. Weinberger simply reminded the assembled officials
that, as Secretary of Defense, he was in command of military matters and
answerable directly to the President. The official said that Mr. Weinberger
expressed this view forthrightly but not angrily.

Mr. Baker acknowledged that Mr. Haig, as soon as he heard of the shooting,
called the White House to suggest that he be in charge at the White House. Mr.
Haig also acted without consulting senior Reagan aides in getting in touch with
other Governments and in talking to the press about his primacy in the Situation
Room. But the Administration now endorses those actions, Mr. Baker said today in
an interview with a small group of reporters.

'He Functioned Well'

''We particularly think he functioned well yesterday as the contact in the
Situation Room,'' Mr. Baker said. ''Now, just because there was some difference
of opinion between Secretary Haig and Secretary Weinberger, we now have a story
out there that the White House staff and Secretary Haig are feuding once again.
We are not.''

Mr. Baker also disclosed today that the Cabinet members were assembled at the
White House during Mr. Reagan's surgery in case a majority vote of the Cabinet
was needed to install Mr. Bush as chief of Government, as provided in the 25th
Amendment to the Constitution. Another means of transfering power, under the
''national command authority'' agreement, endorsed by Mr. Reagan and other
recent Presidents, was also discussed, he said.

The difference of opinion between Mr. Haig and Mr. Weinberger was the latest in
a series of difficulties the White House has had in the organization of its
foreign policy machinery. Previously, Mr. Haig is known to have been upset about
Mr. Weinberger's comments favoring deployment of the neutron bomb, and last week
he made public his displeasure with President Reagan's decision to make Vice
President Bush the foreign policy crisis coordinator.

Spokesmen at the State and Defense departments said throughout the day that
there had been no disagreements at all between Mr. Haig and Mr. Weinberger. But
at the White House, Mr. Baker and David R.  Gergen, the staff director, said
there was ''a difference of opinion of some sort'' between the two.

'Different Points of View'

''There were discussions and there were different points of view at various
times in the day, as one would expect in a group of 10 to 15 people in the
room,'' Mr. Gergen said, adding that the differences touched on ''some
substantive issues.'' He said that in general the meetings were ''remarkably
harmonious.''

Mr. Baker explained that the Cabinet and senior officials had assembled in the
Situation Room for two reasons: first, to decide whether to invoke the
provisions of the 25th Amendment designating Mr. Bush as acting President with a
majority vote; and second, to decide whether ''national command authority''
ought to be invoked, in effect placing Secretary Weinberger in charge of a
military readiness situation.

Both these steps were rejected, Mr. Baker said. ''The command authority only
applies in a narrow set of circumstances,'' he said, adding that the nature of
those circumstances was classified.

Another official said, however, that Situation Room protocol had always invested
the Defense Secretary with responsibility second only to the President's. This
official said that when President Lyndon B. Johnson used the room to decide
bombing targets in Vietnam, it was established that the Defense Secretary was in
charge of operations and passing along instructions, even though the Secretary
of State was present.

Thus the difference of opinion between Mr. Haig and Mr. Weinberger appeared to
reflect the difficulty of reconciling two distinct command structures that were
in existence simultaneously.

The Normal Command Structure

The normal command structure of the Presidency, embodied in law, is that the
Secretary of State is the senior member of the Cabinet and is in line of
succession after the President, Vice President, Speaker of the House and
President Pro Tempore of the Senate.

But the structure of the military command calls for the line of authority to
travel directly from the President to the Defense Secretary. Because the
Situation Room is essentially a military command post, using secure military
communications, the Secretary of Defense can technically be considered in
charge.

The disclosure of the latest difference of view between Mr. Haig and Mr.
Weinberger came as Mr. Bush took up ceremonial and certain other daily duties of
the President while asserting that Mr. Reagan was still very much in charge of
the Government.

In deference to the President, for example, Mr. Bush continued to use his own
office, not the Oval Office, as he met with staff aides, and he sat in his own
chair, not the President's, during a morning Cabinet meeting.

Bush Meets With Dutch Leader

Mr. Bush also met with Prime Minister Andreas A.M. van Agt of the Netherlands
for what was described as a ''working lunch'' in the Cabinet Room. Afterward,
Mr. Bush praised the Prime Minister for his help in supporting the
Administration's position to build up nuclear forces in Europe while at the same
time seeking arms control with the Soviet Union. He also reiterated a warning
that the Soviet Union not intervene in Poland.

White House officials said that after Mr. Reagan had met with Mr.  Baker, Edwin
Meese 3d and Michael K. Deaver, his three top aides, this morning, the President
was not interrupted for the rest of the day so he could sleep.

But Larry Speakes, the deputy White House press secretary, said that at no time
had Mr. Reagan lapsed from control of the power of the Presidency. ''The
important thing to note is that the White House did not skip a beat, the
Government did not skip a beat,'' said Mr. Speakes, referring to the hours after
the assassination attempt.

Mr. Speakes was asked if the President was accompanied at present by a military
aide in possession of the so-called ''football,'' which is the briefcase
containing the coded instructions permitting the President to authorize a
nuclear strike.

''We're very careful about discussing that,'' Mr. Speakes said.  ''Yes, the the
military aide is present. As far as any of these other matters, they're clearly
matters of national security which are classified that I can't discuss, but I
can assure you that there's certainly no problem, nor was there ever any problem
with that matter.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of George Bush Photo of al Haig Photo of White
House staff

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 2, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. HALTS ECONOMIC AID TO NICARAGUA

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 592 words


Washington, April 1 -The United States today terminated the remaining $15
million in economic aid for Nicaragua because of that country's assistance to
guerrillas in El Salvador, but held out the possibility of an early resumption
of aid if the Nicaraguans continued their recent efforts to avoid involvement in
the Salvadoran situation.

A statemnet issued by the State Department culminated a long policy review on
what to do about aid to Nicaragua.

Under United States law, the Administration is required to cancel all aid if
Nicaragua contributed to "violence" in another country.

Senator Jesse Helms, republican of North Carolina, who is chairman of the
Foreign Relations subcommittee on Latin America, had pressed for the cutoff
because of Cuban and other leftist connections in the NIcaraguan Government.

Part of a $75 Million Program

The Administration, under the law, could also have demanded immediate repayment
of the $60 million in loans already extended to Nicaragua under a $75 million
program approved by Congress last year.

But the State Department announced that in order to retain influence in
Nicaragua and to continue incentives for moderates there, the United States
would not call in those loans.

Paradoxically, the decision to terminate the remaining $15 million in aid came
as the State Department said that in the last few weels NIcaragua had virtually
halted all flow of arms from its territory insurgents in El Salvador

The statement, read by William J. Dyess, a department spokesman said that the
Reagan Administration had made "strong representations to the NIcaraguans to
cease military support to the Salvadoran guerrillas. " Their response has been
positive", he said.  "We have no hard evidence of arms movements through
Nicaragua during the past few weeks, and propaganda and some other support
activities have been curtailed."

Concern Voiced on "Other Support"

"We remain concerned, however, that some arms traffic may be continuing and that
other support very probably continues,"he said.

State Department officials said that this "other support" included political and
logistics help for the guerrillas, but Mr. Dyess refused to be more precise.

The Administration in February made public captured documents to demonstrate
that the Salvadoran insurgents had received arms shipments from Vietnam, Cuba,
and other Soviet-bloc countries by way of NIcaragua. The Carter Administration,
shortly before it left office, suspended the $15 million pending a study.

The issue of whether the aid would be terminated had become a major problem
because of a desire to help out the private sector and other moderates in
Nicaragua and not push them closer to CUba.

Important Interests at Stake Mr. Dyess said that "important United States
security interests are at stake on the region."

"We want to encourage a continuation of recent favorable trends with regard to
Nicarguan support for the Salvadoran guerrillas ," he declared.

"We also want to continue to assist moderate forces in Nicaragua which are
resisting Marxist domination,"he said. "working towards a democratic
alternative, and keeping alive the private sector."

Mr. Dyess said the United States was considering a resumption of Food for Peace
aid and additiional development assistance in the future "if favorable trends
continue there."

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 2, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THE CITY;
MAN WITH 2 GUNS SEIZED IN SUBWAY

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 143 words


A transit policeman won a standoff in a Queens subway with a man who was
wielding two loaded shotguns and carrying more than 100 shells, authorities
said.

According to United Press International, the police said the suspect, Wayman
Johnson, 32 years old, had told them he was on his way to 71st Street and
Continental Avenue in Forest Hills to "shoot at Hebrew-owned stores." The police
said that when they searched his room at the Queens Y.M.C.A., at 89-25 Parsons
Boulevard in Jamaica, they found three more shotguns and a semiautomatic rifle.

Mr. Johnson was arrested at 2 A.M. by Officer Roszell Bibb after a chase through
the Parsons Boulevard station on the IND line.  The police said the officer had
cornered Mr. Johnson, a Vietnam War veteran, three times before he dropped his
weapons.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 2, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

FORMER MARINE IN LINE TO BE CHOSEN AS HEAD OF VETERANS' AGENCY

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 11, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 257 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 1


James Webb, a much-decorated former marine who wrote a novel about the Vietnam
War, is the leading candidate to head the Veterans Administration, high
officials said today.

Mr. Webb, 35 years old, said that he was not certain he wanted the job, but he
conceded that he had talked about it with White House officials. One Reagan
Administration official, asking not to be identified, said that Mr. Webb headed
a list of nine potential candidates.

The former officer, who fought in the Vietnam War, is critical of the way the
Veterans Administration has been run, He indicated that he would give far more
attention to the readjustment problems of Vietnam veterans, for whom he says he
feels a ''spiritual commitment.''

Empathy With Vietnam Veterans

He also said that he wanted to verify whether G.I.'s exposed to the dangerous
herbicide Agent Orange, which was used in Vietnam, could suffer health
repercussions.

The Veterans Administration, with a $24 billion budget and 220,000 employees,
has been leaderless since President Reagan took office.  Mr. Webb, an Annapolis
graduate, is the author of ''Fields of Fire,'' and a new novel, ''A Sense of
Honor.'' For a time, his second book was banned by the bookstore of the United
States Naval Academy, because the school considered it vulgar and inaccurate. He
is also Republican counsel to the House Committee on Veterans Affairs.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 3, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Nicaraguan Officials Assail Cutoff in American Aid

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 95 words

DATELINE: MANAGUA, Nicaragua, April 2


Nicaraguan officials today assailed the Reagan Administration's decision to halt
economic aid to the two-year-old junta here.

The State Department yesterday cited alleged Nicaraguan support of leftist
insurgents in El Salvador for the cutoff of the remaining $15 million in aid.

Bayardo Arce, a member of the nine-man Sandinist directorate that effectively
runs the country, accused Washington last night of ''trying to convert Nicaragua
into a focal point of tension, like Poland, Afghanistan, Vietnam and Angola.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 4, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM TRUDEAU'S TALK ON REAGAN AND WORLD PROBLEMS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 984 words


Following are excerpts from remarks by Prime Minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau of
Canada at a meeting yesterday with editors and reporters at The New York Times:

Given the results of the election, I'm inclined to look at the good side of it
and I see as one of the good sides a renewed confidence in the spirit of America
and a faith in your future and in the belief that you can act with self-respect
and so on. You know, it's all intangible but it seemed to me that that was what
happened after Teheran, after Vietnam and after Watergate. And, you know, at
some point the American people have said, ''Enough'' and ''We want to assert our
pride.'' And I think that's the way they express it, by choosing a new
President.

Whether that feeling will be vindicated or not, I guess the future will only
tell. But that's the way I see it and, looking at the actions of the new
Administration, at least as they concern us, I think we have every reason to be
pleased with it.

First of all, the President himself didn't strike us as a grandstander, even
though that might be funny to say for a man whose profession used to be acting.

You have an expression in English about being over-anxious; he doesn't give that
feeling. And I think dealings with Canada bore that imprint. ''Look, we
understand your concern with fisheries, with the boundary treaties, with acid
rain, with the pipeline, with the garrison diversion and so on, and we
understand them. And we're going to work to solve them.''

And what more can you ask. They've been there for two months, you know. And ask
me in a year if I'm as sanguine about it and I might answer differently, but
right now I - well that's in bilateral relations.

World's Condition Today

The world is in a less stable state than it was five or 10 years ago. For a long
period after the Second World War we were used to thinking that the use of war
is something exceptional and to be condemned and universally abhorred. Gradually
we've grown away from that and just in the past year we've got wars all over the
place: Tanzania, Uganda, Afghanistan, Cambodia, Ethiopia, to say nothing of the
civil wars - the Salvadors and the Angolas.

I think there's an up side to the United States saying, ''There are certain
areas where we're going to be pretty strict.'' The down side is, I think, nobody
would gain from a return to the cold war, and that the United States least of
all would have an interest in destroying the potential for detente which was
existing in the mid-70's and in which the current Soviet leadership has a vested
interest. Because I can't see any scenario where the Brezhnev-Kosygin generation
would be replaced by soft-liners, as it were.

If Detente Doesn't Work

And if we establish now that detente can in no way work with the people who've
been trying to make it work for perhaps 10 years, then I think we're in for
rough times ahead and a return to the cold war with all that is dangerous in
that for world peace and sanity.

If the determination of your Administration is to see the conditions of
revolution be eradicated, that's great. And if that is joined with a kind of a
warning that while we're doing that you don't try and make things difficult for
us, that's fine. But if the American people need to regain their pride at the
expense of pushing the Soviet Union into a corner, that's not great at all.

In abstract terms, I suppose we would all pretty well agree that Marxist
penetration is generally more successful where the socioeconomic conditions are
abysmal, where civil liberties have been flouted, where extreme poverty exists
permanently alongside extreme wealth and so on.

And therefore our first task in foreign policy must be to make sure that this
type of fertile ground gradually disappears - particularly in areas which are
strategically important to us, in Central America and so on. So that's our first
priority.

Supporting the Center

And I think in our position, what we have said is that we think the problem of
Nicaragua and the problem of El Salvador should be solved politically and that
we should try and produce the political environment which would permit the
socio-economic injustices to be corrected.

And in our terms that has meant trying to support parties of the center.  We
don't export arms to areas of hostility. Once that is stated, then you're faced
with concrete situations. And, you know, I'm not bending over backwards to try
to understand President Reagan, but I can say, I suppose, to you what I've said
to him, and what I've said in Canadian Parliament. The reality is that arms were
flowing into Salvador. And they were flowing into the left - you know, to the
insurrectionists.

And if our theory of trying to help the center is correct, than we can't
possibly be scandalized if somebody is supplying arms to the other side. So we
condemn the supply of arms by both sides. We certainly don't take the view that
has been pressed on us even in our own Parliament: that we should condemn the
United States' supplying of arms and forget to condemn the other side - whether
it's Cuba or Vietnam, I don't know and I don't care. It might be Czechoslovakia
and so on. But obviously the other side had been getting arms and the best would
have been to stop them from getting arms, either voluntarily by cutting off aid
or whatever, or by other means - pressure or political pressures or, in the
worst situation, saying well if you're going to supply arms, we're going to make
sure there's arms in the other side.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: text

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 353 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 5, 1981 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

CULLING GEMS FROM FLAWED MOVIES

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section 2; Column 4; Arts and Leisure Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 1450 words


Critics and reviewers make their livings in search of perfection, but because
very few things are perfect there's frequently the impulse to see things as
being better than they are, to compromise. Some do it out of laziness or
optimism or perhaps to help the needy, and many do it out of a real conviction
that the second-rate is, indeed, first-. Compromise is not a nice word. It
suggests selling out. Sometimes, though, the critic/reviewer in his pursuit of
the perfect object not only asks more from a work than was even intended but
also leaves unrecognized the possibility that a work's imperfections are why it
works so well. Something of this sort recently happened on the stage.

When ''The American Clock,'' Arthur Miller's latest play, began life at the
Harold Clurman Theater here, it was an imperfect but invigorating blend of Mr.
Miller's own family reminiscences and ''Hard Times,'' a book of interviews by
Studs Terkel with survivors of the Great Depression. Audiences seemed to love
it, but just about anyone you asked could have pointed out what was wrong with
the play: it was not quite an Arthur Miller evening nor was it really Studs
Terkel. The play was taken to the Spoleto Festival in Charleston, S.C., where
the same imperfections were noted and then, after lots and lots of work, all
designed to remove the imperfections, the play opened on Broadway and the life
had vanished. ''The American Clock'' had been improved to death.

This tinkering is an accepted and sometimes invaluable part of the process by
which plays get put on, by which movies are made and by which certain kinds of
books are edited. (As far as I know, practitioners of the fine arts are pretty
much left to themselves.) This is a tricky business. Until a work is finished -
opened, in release or published - no one can really tell whether the tinkerings,
the improvements, have gone so far that they have undone the good work and
brought forth the bad.

Critics may or may not be brought into the tinkering business, though, as a
matter of principle, it's probably not a good idea. They know little about the
creative process and even less about what they want to see until it's put in
front of them in a finished state. Because it's not difficult for
critics/reviewers to spot masterpieces, which are rare, they must also be able
to spot the occasional joys to be found in works that are imperfect, being aware
that the joys may be there only because of the imperfections.

A typical case in point is ''Eyewitness,'' the Peter Yates-Steve Tesich romantic
melodrama that is tops as romance and very odd as melodrama, though it does
contain several very effective, more or less isolated melodramatic sequences.
Some movie ''doctor'' might possibly have been employed to make the film's
melodramatic subplot coherent, but I'm more than a little afraid that if he had
succeeded, it might have been at the expense of a number of intelligent things
that contribute to the buoyant good humor of the picture.

I think particularly of the touching, extremely comic scene - of no real value
to the melodrama at all - in which William Hurt, who plays the film's oddball
janitor-hero, and Pamela Reed, as the young woman whom their mutual friends
expect the janitor to marry, admit, at first shyly and then with a growing sense
of relief, that they don't love each other. The scene is full of reversals on
ordinary romantic behavior, including the reversal that ends it, when these two
most likable people happily realize that now that they've removed the pretense
of passion, they can become good, trusting friends, which may be as rare as
being true lovers. This scene involves the most skillful kind of writing,
directing and acting, and one might have reasonably argued that because it's of
no value to the plot, it should be cut. Yet if it had been cut, ''Eyewitness''
would not be the film it now is. ''Eyewitness'' is very special because of - not
in spite of -''superfluous'' scenes of such texture and density.

Roman Polanski's ''Tess'' received generally favorable notices, but most of the
praise (even in this column) has beem somewhat condescending. The idea has been
that though the film is beautiful to look at, it has no more real life than an
exceptionally expensive, carefully made production for television's Masterpiece
Theater. One of my colleagues pointed out correctly that poor Tess, as played by
the marvelous looking Nastassia Kinski, is less a victim of her own passions,
which seem scarcely to exist, than of the society that surrounds her. The
movie's Tess is a simple, passive victim.

The way Mr. Polanski has made the film, however, with its deliberate pacing and
its attention to detail, not simply of period and landscape but of weather and
time of day, establishes its own kind of leisurely, romantic, slightly archaic
style, which, I suspect, is why it's become so unexpectedly popular. It's all
the more welcome in this particular era of hyperactive movie making of explicit
sex and violence, all boosted and italicized by things such as zoom lenses,
freeze frames and narratives deliberately nonsequential.

''Tess'' is not a great film, but it is a satisfying one that might possibly
have been better if Mr. Polanski had presented us with a Tess of more active
abandon. On the other hand, a more abandoned Tess could have turned the film
into a Monty Python-like travesty.

''All Night Long'' is far from my favorite film of the day. It can be described
as a sort of farce, or almost a farce, which is played by actors who are
incapable of achieving the manner that prevents the self-absorbed characters of
farce from appearing to be simply meanspirited or gross. Because it is a
failure, though, it may be the first as well as last time you'll ever see Barbra
Streisand playing any part anywhere with such comparative modesty. The film is
worth seeing if only to witness this ordinarily take-over kid subordinate that
overwhelming public personality to the demands of a movie, which, unfortunately,
isn't worth the sacrifice. (Did I say sacrifice? The report is that she was paid
$4 million to play the role when Lisa Eichhorn left the production.)

A number of people seem to agree (though I'm not one of them) that there's a big
hole in the center of Martin Scorsese's ''Raging Bull,'' that hole representing
Mr. Scorsese's decision not to impose on the film any easy kind of explanation
for the behavior and the importance of its central character, the primally
charged Jake La Motta.

If Mr. Scorsese were a less powerful director than he is, the movie tinkerers
and fixers could well have forced him to give us such explanations. The probable
result: a conventional movie about a tough kid fighting his way out of his
environment, instead of the picture Mr. Scorsese actually made. ''Raging Bull''
is nothing less than a challenge to our pretensions to humane feelings. It's
easy to think kind thoughts about Goldie Hawn's Private Benjamin, about R2D2,
about John Hurt's Elephant Man. Because Mr. Scorsese chose to make an imperfect
(at least, theoretically) film biography, the Jake La Motta we see on the screen
forces us to measure the depth of what we take to be our feelings of humanity.

Some imperfect movies are, of course, deeply, thoroughly and forever joyless.
Michael Cimino's ''Heaven's Gate'' does not overstate the case. Yet the same
director's Oscar-winning ''The Deer Hunter'' was full of excesses, some of
outstanding vulgarity, which, I'm sure, contributed to that film's enormous
emotional impact. No sensible director would have allowed that early
wedding-feast sequence to go on as long as it did, but as ''The Deer Hunter''
evolved, it became obvious that the length and detail of that wedding feast were
vital to our appreciation of everything that happened afterward.

All that business in ''The Deer Hunter'' about the playing of Russian roulette
in sleazy Saigon back rooms was offensive on almost any level you can think of.
It seems to have had no basis in fact, and the detail in which the deaths were
shown indicated a voluptuous fascination with events that can't be easily
absorbed in a movie. Still, because the movie was about the unspeakable and the
indescribable, these ''imperfections'' were essential. So, too, was the note of
banality on which ''The Deer Hunter'' ended - the surviving Vietnam vets and
their friends mourning a dead comrade by sitting in a chilly, otherwise empty
tavern and singing ''God Bless America.''

''The Deer Hunter'' was a far from perfect film, but it was an unusually good
one. Luckily for Mr. Cimino, no one ''improved'' it for him. Unluckily, no one
was on hand to ''improve'' his ''Heaven's Gate.'' We'll see what happens next.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Rostow Says That U.S.  Must Contain Russians

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 189 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Idaho, April 4


The man expected to be nominated as President Reagan's chief arms control
negotiator, Eugene V. Rostow, said here this week that the United States must
return to a policy of containment of the Soviet Union. Otherwise, he said,
''anarchy and war will come.''

''We're in the midst of a world crisis caused by the surge of Soviet power since
the collapse of our policy in Vietnam'' and by American failure to respond to
Soviet moves in the last four years, Mr. Rostow said. He made his comments at
the University of Idaho's Annual Borah Symposium on the causes of war.

Mr. Rostow, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs in the Johnson
Administration, is expected to be formally nominated soon as head of the Arms
Control and Disarmament Agency.

''To arrest the slide toward war,'' he said, ''the U.S. and its allies must
announce that they can no longer accept the situation in which we live by rules
of the United Nations Charter governing the international use of force, while
the Soviets and their allies violate them on an ever-larger scale.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IS SCHMIDT BORN AGAIN AS A COLD WARRIOR?

BYLINE: By JOHN VINOCUR

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1121 words

DATELINE: BONN


Note to Messrs. Richard V. Allen and Alexander M. Haig Jr.: There's a voice on
the Rhine, muffled somewhat these days by river mists and the thickening haze of
Bonn politics, that is offering a bit of intellectual fellowship.

Make no mistake, the remarks obey the pure self-interest rule of political
survival, but Helmut Schmidt, troubled by a very visible group of young people
without apparent affection for the West German state or the idea of defending
it, is giving support to ideas that had been described by many of the
Chancellor's European friends as simplistic, misinformed and plain scary when
first expressed in Washington.

Without naming countries, Mr. Allen, the White House national security adviser,
has deplored what he regards as a growing tendency toward pacifism in Western
Europe. Now, Mr. Schmidt is saying it more plainly. There is indeed ''a certain
penchant for accepting the 'better red than dead' line'' among West German youth
and Protestant clergymen, he said.

In the face of big antinuclear weapons demonstrations announced to coincide with
Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger's visit to Bonn for a North Atlantic
Treaty Organization meeting on Tuesday and Wednesday, Mr. Schmidt is also
providing indirect support for Secretary of State Haig's thesis, so upsetting to
critics of Reagan Administration foreign policy, that there can be more
important things than peace. ''What help would peace have been,'' the Chancellor
asked last week, ''if countries had decided to turn the other cheek to a Hitler
or a Stalin?''

Mr. Schmidt's rhetoric was described as schizophrenic by Helmut Kohl, the
Christian Democratic Party chairman; it is surprising, at the least, in a man
who, before the German election last fall, characterized criticism of the
violent demonstrations against the military and atomic energy as shameful,
antipatriotic and insulting to West German youth. Yet Mr. Schmidt now seems
willing to bear the weight of his own contradictions, if this is necessary to
deal with a serious issue.

Whatever they are called, groups of young West Germans - ''norisk'' would seem
more accurate than the ''no-future'' label some have assumed - are saying they
want nothing to do with the Government, property, atomic energy, the army, or
what Mr. Schmidt insists are basic responsibilities. The best way of dealing
with the Russians, they argue, is to start dropping out of nuclear defense
altogether.

In an interview with a Protestant magazine last week, the Chancellor said the
difficulty can be traced to a minority among young West Germans who hold the
country's material well-being in contempt but who insist on taking their share.
Young people, added Mr. Schmidt, seem to seek absolute values rather than
compromise and they reach intellectual maturity later than their parents did.
They have been ''informed, disinformed, and deformed'' by the electronic media,
the Chancellor insisted, and are disturbed by the comforts of modern life.

At fault, he said, are parents, pastors and politicians ''who should be helping
youth, but who, largely out of cowardice, avoid contradicting them or offering
direction. The charges about a permissive society should be turned into charges
about the cowardice of those with responsibility.'' Mr. Schmidt specifically
blamed Protestant religious leaders, noting that most of the street violence
during the last nine months was in Protestant areas of West Germany.

However, pointing his finger at others as having insufficient resolve would be a
treacherous political task for the Chancellor. As a Social Democrat, he cannot
join critics who say that contempt for the state and citizens' reponsibilities
has developed in a generation that came to regard Government as a kind of public
self-service supply house during a decade of Social Democratic rule. It is also
difficult for Mr. Schmidt to charge that left-wing members of his party are
responsible for a revisionist view of history, current among young people. It
contends that the country's problems are rooted in superpower rivalries which,
regardless of World War II, are not the Germans' fault. And it is next to
impossible for the Chancellor, if he plays by his own rules, to employ the
patriotic levers that France has used since de Gaulle to avoid the kind of
apathy that worries him. Talk of German reunification, the one issue that could
find a deep emotional response, is a virtual taboo.

However, the interview brought out unusual new themes for the Chancellor, going
beyond his concern about German youth and indicating how his analysis of the
world situation has changed in recent months. During the last three years, Mr.
Schmidt showed remarkable caution in discussing the Soviet Union. Referring to
it often as a potential partner rather than an adversary, he complained
privately about Zbigniew Brzezinski's anti-Soviet reflexes and once even praised
Soviet ''reserve'' during the short war between China and North Vietnam.

Now he says that if Stalin had not been resisted, ''Soviet divisions would not
be standing merely on the Elbe but on the Rhine, the North Sea or on Crete.''
Stalin's successors, the Chancellor adds, seek to expand their sphere of
influence in southeast and southwest Asia, in Africa and on the Arabian
peninsula. To expect that the Russians would reciprocate a unilateral
disarmament initiative is to disregard 70 years of Soviet history. ''All that
would come out (of unilateral steps),'' he said, ''is that the people who are
afraid here now would soon have much more to worry about than they have
already.''

Curiously, in pitching hard to get his position across, Mr. Schmidt neglected
the argument he often uses in explaining to foreigners why he feels pacificism
does not have much chance of captivating West Germans. Universal military
training makes the need for strong defenses understandable to most draftees, he
often says.

If he wished, the Chancellor might also find a reassuring precedent involving
young people, their spiritual influences and how age changes them, in the
experience of the German ban-the-bomb movement of the 1950's. In those days, the
father of Hans Apel, the present Defense Minister, was a convinced pacifist. And
a young Bundestag member named Helmut Schmidt voted against creating the new
West German armed forces.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of West Germans

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Headliners;
Back to the U.S.S.R.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 9, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 297 words


The studied insult has been a favorite device of the Reagan Administration in
diplomatic dealings with the Soviet Union, and last week it was applied to
Georgi A. Arbatov, Moscow's leading expert on the United States. Mr. Arbatov had
been asked to join in a televised debate on the arms race on Friday, but the
State Department refused to extend his visa, which expires today. The reason:
Soviet spokesmen have access to American television, but the courtesy is not
reciprocated in Russia. Tass, the Soviet press agency, pounced on this ''sordid
move,'' saying it showed ''the real worth'' of American rights of free speech
and free press.

War of the Veterans

Since his election, President Reagan has been caught in the middle of a miniwar
between veterans of Vietnam and those from earlier wars over who should head the
Veterans Administration. Last week it appeared the President had decided to go
with youth. James Webb, a much-decorated ex-Marine who wrote a novel about the
Vietnam War, was said to be the leading candidate for the job. Mr. Webb, 35
years old and the Republican counsel to the House Veterans Affairs Committee,
said he wasn't sure he wanted the job but, if he took it, he would reorient the
agency in accord with his ''spiritual commitment'' to Vietnam veterans.

Escape From Teheran

During the hostage crisis, Americans began to think of postrevolutionary Iran as
a through-the-looking-glass world. Last week there came another example.
Apparently because Iran has a shortage of doctors, the authorities volunteered
Dr. Eleanore Minguez to help fill the gap by taking away her American passport.
She finally escaped, however, by slipping aboard a bus from Teheran to the
Turkish border, where she got out and walked across at an unguarded spot.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: 3 photos

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONFRONTING THE CUBAN NEMESIS

BYLINE: By Tad Szulc; Tad Szulc is a Washington-based writer on foreign affairs.
In 1961, when he was a reporter for The New York Times, he covered the Bay of
Pigs invasion.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 38, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5322 words


In the deep, postmidnight darkness of Monday, April 17, 1961, a dozen frogmen
silently slid ashore on the southern coast of Cuba, closely followed by landing
craft from five troop-laden freighters.  Soon, more than 1,500 Cuban exiles -
secretly trained, armed and directed by the United States Central Intelligence
Agency - were moving along the Giron and Larga beaches on the Bay of Pigs. The
C.I.A. had assumed that the people of Cuba would rise up against Fidel Castro
the moment the exile brigade hit the beaches. In fact, they did nothing of the
sort. Within 72 hours, the ships were sunk by a handful of Castro's
all-but-obsolete aircraft and the members of the brigade captured or killed. The
bearded revolutionary and his tiny island, just 90 miles from Florida, had
defied the mighty Uncle Sam and lived to tell the tale.

Since that American debacle on the shores of Cuba, just 20 years ago this month,
the world has undergone massive change, but Washington and Havana have remained
fiercely antagonistic. In fact, the relationship between the two today is at its
lowest ebb since the early 1960's. For, once again, a newly elected President of
the United States has made Cuba and its Soviet links a central focus of American
foreign policy.

The specifics, of course, are very different. When John F. Kennedy authorized
the 1961 invasion, three months after his inauguration, Cuba was economically
and militarily weak; Castro's energies were needed at home. But it was clear
that his ties to Moscow were growing: The imminent return of Cuban pilots being
trained in MIG jets in Czechoslovakia was a major factor in Kennedy's decision.
Historians have since said that the Bay of Pigs represented a crucial turning
point in American foreign affairs, the start of a path that would lead to
intervention in Vietnam and the Dominican Republic.

Today, as Ronald Reagan moves to stop Cuban arms deliveries to the leftist
guerrillas of El Salvador, he confronts a new Castro - firmly in the Soviet
orbit, relying upon Moscow militarily and economically, haunting and taunting
the United States all across the globe. From El Salvador to Angola to the Middle
East, almost 50,000 Cuban military and civilian advisers support third-world
revolutionary forces. At home, Cuba's regular army and reserves total 600,000 -
an amazing 6 percent of the total population - and the troops are equipped with
the latest in jet fighters and missile boats.

Moreover, the larger goals of the two Presidents, separated by two decades, are
worlds apart. Kennedy was concerned about the military threat a Sovietized Cuba
represented in the Caribbean and Latin America. Reagan clearly considers his
confrontation with Cuba, his decision to ''draw the line'' in El Salvador, as
part of a broad, anti-Soviet stand, the toughest since the cold war of the
1950's. He and Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. have charged that the
Soviet Union and Cuba are behind a wide conspiracy, a ''terrorist network,''
that is aimed at an ''ultimate takeover of Central America.''

As part of the campaign to reassert the global prestige and resolve of the
United States, President Reagan has called for major increases in the na-tion's
military budget. He has proposed sending aid to anti-Communist groups in Angola
and Afghanistan. He has made gestures of friendship toward right-wing,
anti-Communist regimes in Latin America and Asia and South Africa. He has
declared that Washington's attitude toward Moscow will be determined by Soviet
worldwide behavior, the so-called ''linkage'' approach to international affairs.
But the most dramatic steps have come in Latin America - the threat of armed
action against Cuba, for example, and the recent dispatch of Green Berets and
other American military advisers to El Salvador.

Inevitably, such moves have called forth critical comment and public pro-tests
based upon bitter memories of Vietnam. The President insists that El Salvador is
not Vietnam, and that he cannot foresee a full-scale American military
involvement in Central America. And though several agencies of the Government,
including the C.I.A., are said to be studying the feasibility of a variety of
limited actions against Cuba, the new Administration is not likely to launch
another invasion of Cuba, posing the threat of starting World War III.

Both the nature and the style of President Reagan's foreign policy to date have
become a focus of controversy. Critics have pointed to contradictory public
statements. There has been intense personal feuding within the Administration, a
confusion as to the appropriate foreign-policy roles played by Secretary Haig
and the White House.  And though the manner in which the unyielding, hard-line
approach to Cuba has evolved since the inauguration is not entirely clear, there
are indications that daily improvisation has played a major part.  ong before
Ronald Reagan entered office, he and his close political associates and his
ideological allies rejected any notion of seeking accommodation with Cuba. They
had no use for the Carter Administration's efforts at improving relations with
Havana. They viewed Cuba as a significant Soviet military presence in the
Western Hemisphere. The naval facilities at Cienfuegos, for example, are used by
visiting Soviet submarines and surface warships, and the airbase at San Antonio
de los Banos is home for Soviet TU-95 ''Bear'' reconnaissance aircraft, which
continually patrol United States and Canadian coasts in international air space.
A 5,000-man Russian combat brigade is stationed on the island. The 1962
deployment in Cuba of Soviet missiles believed to be carrying nuclear warheads,
removed only after John Kennedy risked war with a naval blockade, was not
forgotten. And the Reagan team also saw Cuba as Moscow's surrogate for the
spread of revolutionary subversion in Central America, the Caribbean and around
the world.

Though papers prepared by Reagan transition teams discussed these familiar
strategic and political aspects, there is no evidence of any specific plans for
an all-out, anti-Cuba campaign. Indeed, there is no sign of any carefully
wrought policy for the hemisphere.

During the transition period, the only official close to President Reagan
dealing full-time with foreign policy was Richard V. Allen, who subsequently
became the national security adviser. Allen happens to have a special interest
in Latin America, but he clearly had other foreign-policy issues on his mind, as
well. Indeed, it was not until a week after the inauguration that his assistant
for the hemisphere, Roger W. Fontaine, a 40-year-old senior staff member of the
Georgetown University Center for Strategic and International Studies, actually
joined the White House staff.

When his accession was assured, Secretary Haig dismissed with the State
Department transition team, including the Latin American specialists. On Jan.
20, he dispensed with the services of William G. Bowdler, the Under Secretary
for Inter-American Affairs, a 30-year veteran in the department, with no
replacement at hand. Two months later, the post was still vacant, though Thomas
O. Enders, who had been Ambassador to Canada and to the European Common Market,
appeared to be the final choice. During the interim, Haig was being advised on
Latin America by John A. Bushnell, the Deputy Assistant Secretary held over from
the Carter Administration, and by middle-rank career officers in the
Inter-American Bureau. In effect, as Reagan came into office, nobody was really
in charge of Latin America.

Meanwhile, the crisis in El Salvador had reached a climax. This tiny republic on
Central America's Pacific Coast had been the scene of a long and savage civil
war, with the civilian population caught in the middle between forces of the
extreme left and the extreme right. During 1980 alone, more than 10,000
Salvadorans had been slain. The Carter Administration had supported a junta
headed by Jose Napoleon Duarte, a centrist, and had encouraged and assisted a
farranging land-reform program in the hope that it would weaken popular support
for the Marxist-led guerrillas. The reforms were undertaken in spite of
opposition from right-wing landowners and their terrorist squads, as well as
from the far left.

Last autumn, according to diplomatic sources, Castro - and, presumably, the
Soviet Union - decided that the leftist guerrillas had a good chance of
militarily defeating the junta and establishing a pro-Communist regime. To
prepare the guerrillas for such a major attack, ever-larger quantities of arms
began to flow to El Salvador from Cuba by way of Nicaragua, where a military
dictatorship had been overthrown in 1979 and replaced by a strongly pro-Cuban,
though non-Communist, government.

In response, the Carter Administration began secret training of Salvadoran
officers and helicopter pilots in the United States and at United States
military facilities in Panama. Just as secretly, a team of five United States
military advisers was attached to the Salvadoran general staff to aid it in
protecting coffee, sugar and cotton harvests from the guerrillas; the operation
was code-named Golden Harvest. President Carter had meanwhile been openly
sending the junta so-called ''nonlethal'' military equipment (chiefly jeeps,
helicopters and communications gear), though these shipments were suspended last
December when three American nuns and a lay worker were murdered.

The election of Ronald Reagan last November apparently persuaded the Cubans and
the Russians that the guerrillas should move rapidly ahead with plans for what
they called the ''final offensive,'' so that they could take over the country
before Mr. Reagan's inauguration and present the presumably tough new
Administration with a fait accompli. The pace of arms shipments from Cuba
increased significantly, and the Carter White House, in its waning days,
responded not only by resuming delivery of nonlethal weapons but also, for the
first time, by sending lethal weapons to the junta.

The ''final offensive'' was launched on Jan. 10, but it failed, both because the
junta army fought better than expected and because the guerrillas were unable to
marshal the decisive popular support on which they had been counting. For Castro
and the Russians, it was a colossal miscalculation, born of political greed and
faulty intelligence - a surprising turn of events since they tend to limit their
involvement to ''sure things.'' The unsettled political situations in Angola and
Ethiopia, for example, where they knew the United States would not challenge
them, were more typical Communist ''targets of opportunity.'' In Nicaragua, the
Cubans did not begin supplying arms to the Sandinist rebels until the last phase
of civil war, when it was certain that the Somoza dictatorship would fall sooner
or later.  It was only after the defeat of the guerrillas that the Reagan
Administration resolved to make a world issue of El Salvador, linking it to the
broader question of East-West relations. And all indications are that it was
Secretary Haig personally who prevailed on the White House to go this route. In
his view, it represented an American version of a ''target of opportunity.''

At a White House background briefing exactly one week after the inauguration,
Richard Allen, the national security adviser, made it clear that the United
States continued to support the El Salvador junta and the land-reform program.
And though he stressed the Administration's concern that arms from Cuba were
still reaching Salvadoran guerrillas, Allen assured his listeners that President
Reagan would, basically, be following the policies laid out by President Carter
in El Salvador.

The first sign of a new direction came the following day when Secretary Haig
dismissed the outspoken Ambassador to El Salvador, Robert E. White, for publicly
opposing further United States military involvement. White thought that, with
the defeat of the guerrilla offensive, there was a chance for a political
settlement of the civil war, but clearly Secretary Haig was on another track.
The Administration was poised for a policy of confrontation with the Soviet
Union and Cuba.

As that new policy directly affected El Salvador, it called for the dispatch of
56 advisers to train the Salvadoran Army and a major increase in American arms
shipments. It also called for the use of financial leverage - the suspension of
economic assistance funds - to convince Nicaragua it must stop the use of its
territory for the shipment of arms from Cuba to the Salvadoran guerrillas. And
as part of the new confrontational approach to Moscow and Havana, Haig planned
to make maximum use of the situation in El Salvador as a way of publicly
supporting his charges of ''Soviet international terrorism.''

The implementation of these policies, however, indicated a measure of confusion
and on-the-spot improvisation, both at the State Department and at the White
House. In testimony before a Congressional committee on March 18, for example,
Secretary Haig unfolded his theory of the Soviet conspiracy in Central America,
asserting that it was a ''four-phased operation'' that started with the
''seizure of Nicaragua,'' was continuing with the insurgency in El Salvador and
would be ''followed by Honduras and Guatemala.'' The next day, the Secretary
admitted that Nicaragua had not, in fact, been ''seized'' by the Russians, that
strong democratic elements still existed there. Yet he then proceeded to talk
about the ''sophisticated weapons'' Nicaragua was receiving from Eastern Europe,
''possibly'' including tanks and antiaircraft missiles from Eastern Europe; no
evidence of such shipments was presented then or since.

Moreover, it was becoming increasingly uncertain which part of the
Administration was espousing what position - or who was winning.  When stories
about American advisers in El Salvador began dominating the front pages and the
evening television news, a feeling developed in the White House that the matter
was being overdone, distracting public attention from President Reagan's
economic program. A senior White House official privately commented that
Secretary Haig's verbosity on the issues of El Salvador and Cuba was becoming
something of a problem, that he was a ''loose cannon.'' Yet when John Bushnell
complained in an off-the-record briefing that the press was making too much of
the Salvador story, the White House press secretary, James S. Brady, shot back -
on the record - that Bushnell was speaking for himself, not the Administration.

Traditionally, there is tension between the State Department and the National
Security Council staff as to who will shape foreign policy. President Reagan
made it clear at the start of his Administration that Secretary Haig was his
principal adviser on foreign policy. But according to senior Reagan advisers,
Haig's ''turfgrabbing'' ways throughout the Government went far beyond that
mandate. Thus the President's decision late last month to name Vice President
George H. Bush to head the White House ''crisis management'' team constituted a
serious personal defeat for the Secretary, who even considered resigning over
the issue of his primacy.

Within the Administration, there has also come to be some uncertainty about the
political impact of the hard-line approach to Cuba and El Salvador. A House
appropriations subcommittee voted on March 24 to approve the Reagan
Administration's request for an additional $5 million in military aid to El
Salvador, which would bring the total to $34.5 million through October, the end
of the 1981 fiscal year. But the committee vote was a close 8 to 7, and it
hinged upon members' concerns about undermining a new President.

Meanwhile, just a week earlier, Senator Edward M. Kennedy and three other
Democratic Senators had introduced a bill to prohibit, under current
circumstances, ''the assignment to or the presence in Salvador of United States
military personnel and to prohibit the furnishing of military and other security
assistance to El Salvador.'' Three days later, with little explanation, the
Pentagon announced that 18 of the 56 advisers would be withdrawn by July, and
most of the others by September. Some White House officials suggested that the
announcement was intended to draw the teeth of the Kennedy measure. ''Let's face
it,'' said one of the officials, ''we don't have national support for this whole
policy in El Salvador.'' In fact, dozens of demonstrations were held across the
United States last month protesting increased American military involvement. And
late in March the White House reported that its mail was running 10 to 1 against
the Administration's policy in El Salvador. But when it came right down to it,
many of the officials were not sure just what was really happening about the
advisers in El Salvador -or why.

The reaction abroad to the new Latin American initiatives has been, by and
large, cautious, tending toward anxious. Thus, a State Department ''white
paper'' charging the Soviet Union with complicity in the delivery of arms to El
Salvador made little impression in Western Europe when it was distributed by a
high-ranking United States emissary. And when President Reagan visited Ottawa
early in March, he found that Canada had some deep reservations about the course
he is pursuing in Central America.

Mexico's response was consistently negative. Just as the Administration was
stepping up arms deliveries to El Salvador, President Jose Lopez Portillo sent
greetings to Fidel Castro that included a ''warm embrace to my comandante.''
When the United States Navy engaged in large-scale maneuvers in the Caribbean in
February, the Mexican Navy Minister, Adm. Ricardo Chazaro Lara, turned up in
Havana, where he delivered a speech emphasizing the ''brotherly love'' between
the Cuban and Mexican armed forces and their community of interest ''in the
struggle for our liberty and sovereignty.''

One reaction of the target nations, Cuba and the Soviet Union, to the get-tough
Reagan policy in Central America has been to issue blanket denials of the new
Administration's blanket indictments. But there were other responses as well. In
a speech at the 26th Congress of the Soviet Communist Party in February, the
Soviet leader, Leonid I. Brezhnev, launched the latest version of a Moscow peace
offensive, proposing a summit meeting with President Reagan. And according to
Secretary Haig, the flow of arms from Cuba to the Salvadoran guerrillas slowed
down during March.  An uncertainty over how to deal with Fidel Castro has
plagued every Administration since he came to power in 1959. And since the
United States broke diplomatic relations with Havana in January 1961, just
before the Kennedy inauguration, the fundamental problem between the two
countries has been Havana's ties to Moscow.

Washington's initial move to split the two was an embargo on United States trade
with Cuba, which has been in effect for 20 years. It has accomplished little, in
part at least because the embargo is ignored by most of the world.

In 1962, when the Russians deployed missiles in Cuba, John Kennedy responded
with a successful show of force; but he also made a commitment to Cuba that the
United States would refrain from any further invasion attempts. Soon, however,
possibly with Kennedy's knowledge, the C.I.A. was seeking to arrange for
Castro's assassination, even recruiting Mafia hit men for the job. And for
years, the United States continued to send in C.I.A. teams who would burn crops
and sabotage industrial projects in Cuba. Meanwhile, during the early 1960's,
Castro and Che Guevara were, in the words of American officials, ''exporting
revolution'' to the rest of Latin America. Their impact was felt in such nations
as Venezuela, Colombia, the Dominican Republic and Bolivia - until Guevara's
death in 1967.

The United States' intervention in the Dominican Republic's civil war in 1965
fueled tensions between Havana and Washington, but within two years, the Johnson
Administration and Castro were agreeing on an airlift of tens of thousands of
Cubans, including political prisoners, to Miami. In 1973, the Nixon
Administration negotiated an agreement to control hijacking of American aircraft
to Cuba; Castro has since lived up to his commitment to return the planes at
once while jailing the hijackers.

But relations dipped in 1975, when Castro sent combat troops to Angola to assure
the victory of the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (M.P.L.A.) in
the civil war that followed the end of Portuguese colonial rule. President Ford
wanted to provide factions opposing the Marxist M.P.L.A. with covert C.I.A.
support, but Congress passed the Clark Amendment, banning such aid. In 1977,
Cuban troops commanded by Russians defeated Somali insurgents in Ethiopia -
ignoring threats from the Carter Administration that negotiations for new
limitations on strategic arms would be halted.

Yet President Carter did seek a dialogue with Cuba, and the two countries
established diplomatic ''interests sections,'' manned by senior diplomats, in
each other's capitals. Starting in 1977, Havana authorized visits to the island
by thousands of Cuban exile families. But for all such atmospherics, when Cuba
opened the port of Mariel, near Havana, last spring, and some 140,000 Cuban
''boat people'' descended on Florida, Castro refused President Carter's request
to negotiate an orderly system of departures with an international commission.

The role of Cuban forces in the third world has become a major issue between
Washington and Havana. According to C.I.A. figures for 1979, the greatest
concentration is in Angola (19,000) and Ethiopia (13,000). There were about
1,000 Cuban troops in Marxist South Yemen in 1979, and the numbers may have
grown since then. Some 215 Cubans were training Zimbabwe guerrillas in
Mozambique before last year's political settlement in Zimbabwe and may now be
training South African and Namibian guerrillas.

By the end of last year, the number of Cuban civilians in the third world was
close to 15,000: economic advisors, engineers, teachers, doctors and nurses in
Africa, Latin America and the Middle East. The largest number - 6,500 -were in
Angola, where they play a crucial role in administering the country. About 1,000
were working in Libya; 1,350, in Iraq.

Castro sent more than 1,600 technicians, teachers and doctors into Nicaragua
after the fall of the dictatorship there. He kept 600 civilian specialists in
Jamaica, most of whom were expelled last fall after the election defeat of Prime
Minister Michael M. Manley, a close friend of Castro's. (The first foreign guest
at the White House after the Reagan inauguration was the man who beat Manley,
Edward P.G. Seaga.) Close to 100 Cuban advisers trained the People's
Revolutionary Army in Grenada in the eastern Caribbean, while another 1,000 are
engaged there in such civilian tasks as building a new jet airport.

The Cubans abroad have impressed their hosts. When the fighting is done, the
Cuban military forces seek to be unobtrusive in their overseas posts. And the
Cuban civilians are more respected than their superpower counterparts; the
Cubans receive wages comparable to those paid locally, they live with the local
population, they are themselves third-world people.

Castro's popularity among these nations was evidenced by his selection in 1979
to succeed Yugoslavia's Marshall Tito as the chairman of the nonaligned movement
that brings together more than 100 third-world countries. That year's nonaligned
summit conference was held in Havana. The third world seems to have no trouble
ignoring the fact that the nonaligned movement is being led by the head of a
Soviet client state, a member of COMECON, the Communist Common Market.  What
measures might the Reagan Administration take to bring about its goals in the
hemisphere? One option, clearly, is military.  Ominous warnings have been
sounded that the United States is preparing to ''go to the source'' (a phrase
used by leading Administration figures) to assure the end of the arms flow to El
Salvador. While carefully refraining from specifying whether this means that
contingency plans have been developed to use force in some fashion against Cuba,
the Administration has been deliberately blunt and menacing. On March 18, for
example, Walter J. Stoessel Jr., Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs,
told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that ''we have a wide variety of
options under consideration - political, economic, not excluding or necessarily
including military,'' adding that ''there are specific plans.''

The nature of these plans is a secret, but there is a strong feeling among
military and political specialists in Washington that the Reagan options are
quite limited. A naval blockade is technically feasible to prevent Soviet ships
from carrying arms to Cuba for transshipment to El Salvador, but that could be
considered an act of war against the Soviet Union: The Navy would have to stop
Soviet ships in international waters. There is little likelihood that the
President would order such a move. Most of the weapons for El Salvador are flown
from Cuba to Nicaragua, and an effort could be made to intercept those
planeloads, but this too would risk war, and identifying which planes were
actually ferrying arms would present difficulties. Whether an American blockade
was by air or by sea, the United States would find itself virtually isolated in
terms of international support.

Similarly, the Reagan Administration appears to have few economic and political
options. It has already suspended economic aid to Nicaragua, a move which is
said to have reduced the flow of arms to El Salvador. At the same time, the
failure of the ''final offensive'' by the guerrillas has led many diplomats to
believe that, rather than pushing for a military solution in El Salvador, the
United States may now find that chances are better than ever for a negotiated
settlement of the civil war there.

In the past, there has been a certain amount of quiet, serious diplomacy between
the United States and Havana, and that remains a Reagan option. But apparently
the Administration has chosen not to approach Cuba directly on the question of
arms for El Salvador.  Although Cuba has a senior diplomat in Washington in
charge of its ''interests section,'' the State Department never called him in to
protest or discuss the situation with him.

Nor is it clear that the Administration has ever sought to hold serious
discussions with Moscow, through diplomatic channels, about the El Salvador
issue. Washington seems inclined, for the time being at least, to prefer a
public display of indignation and, in geopolitical terms, the politics of
confrontation.

The President has indicated that the United States may increase the covert
supply of weapons to ''freedom fighters,'' as he called them, in
Russian-occupied Afghanistan. The new Administration is also asking Congress to
repeal the Clark Amendment, which bans C.I.A.  activity in behalf of pro-Western
forces in Angola. In addition to paving the way for a confrontation with Cuban
troops, such an involvement would directly align the United States with South
Africa, whose air force bombed Angola last month, and would probably turn much
of black Africa against American interests. Nigeria, for example, a major
supplier of oil to the United States, has already issued warnings to that
effect.

The President has taken other steps that win him no popularity contests within
the third world. He has, for example, made it clear that he seeks closer
relationships with nations his predecessor had kept at arm's length because of
human-rights considerations. Last month, President Reagan warmly received Gen.
Roberto Viola, the newly named President of Argentina, and Secretary Haig has
asked Congress to lift the ban on military aid to that country, imposed because
of human-rights violations. Gen. Fernando Matthei, a member of Chile's junta,
was another Washington visitor, and in his wake the Administration lifted a
Carter ban on Export-Import Bank credits to Chile.

When pro-Marxist Mozambique expelled several American diplomats in March, the
Administration, charging that Cuban intelligence agents were behind the move,
suspended food sales to that African nation. It was the first time in decades
that foodstuffs had become a tool of United States diplomacy in the third world.

The sudden decision by the Reagan Administration to delay a final agreement on
the Law of the Sea has also been unpopular in the third world. The law is
intended to regulate the relations between developed and underdeveloped nations
in sea-bottom mining, fisheries and free passage through maritime straits and
narrows. It offers protection to smaller nations against possible superpower
exploitation.  The Reagan Administration's overarching policy stance is
''linkage'' - the expectation, for example, that Moscow will eventually be
willing to hold back its weapons deliveries to Latin America in the hope of
greater trade with the United States. Russia's particular need at the moment is
for the resumption of American grain exports, which were embargoed by the Carter
Administration after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.

The move toward a summit meeting by Brezhnev has been hailed by some as directly
linked to President Reagan's global anti-Soviet stance. But most experts in this
country and among our allies believe that Brezhnev's offer was simply a standard
Kremlin response, used often before when the United States has taken a tough
line. The Soviet call for negotiations on all fronts puts the United States on
the defensive, for it has much greater appeal - to many of our NATO allies as
well as to the third world - than does a confrontational stance. The Reagan
Administration was clearly unprepared for this shift in Soviet tactics and has
not yet formulated policies to cope with it. At a recent off-the-record
conference, for example, two key State Department officials disagreed in public
statements as to whether there would be arms-limitation talks with the Russians
this year.

As to the major focus of the Reagan get-tough policy, the concentration on El
Salvador and Cuba, there is a growing consensus in the international diplomatic
community that such a stance is dangerous. It turns Central America into an
East-West arena, when - ultimately - the contest will be decided in Western
Europe, the Persian Gulf or the Middle East. It diverts attention from more
serious international problems, possibly strengthening the Soviet position and
dividing America's allies. The United States' military presence in El Salvador
in the midst of a civil war, for example, makes it more difficult for the West
to take a high moral line on the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan or a possible
Soviet intervention in Poland.

Meanwhile, for all the hard words and actions of the Reagan Administration,
Fidel Castro is plastering the Cuban countryside with huge posters that
commemorate the anniversary of the ''Victory at Giron Beach'' two decades ago.
The Reagan moves may temporarily limit Castro's revolutionary efforts in Central
America, but he will not give them up altogether. His forces in Angola may be
challenged by C.I.A.-supported rebel factions, but he will not withdraw his
armies from Africa. His economy may continue to flounder, for all the help
Moscow provides, but he will not leave the Communist fold. In February, at the
Communist Party Congress, he was one of the most honored guests, resplendent in
star-studded military uniform -having long abandoned the guerrilla's olive-drab
fatigues. At the age of 54, Castro is stubborn and proud, and he will not
retreat. He has come a long way since that April dawn, 20 years ago, when he
beat back the invasion mounted by his neighbors to the north.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Angolans welcoming Fidel Castro in 1977 Photo
of Castro in Nicaragua Photo of US adviser in El Salvador Photo of Castro at
26th Congress of Soviet Communist Party in Moscow

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SPACE AND THE AMERICAN VISION

SECTION: Section 6; Page 53, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5566 words


John Noble Wilford, science correspondent of The Times, has covered the space
program since the early 1960's. By John Noble Wilford o much rides on the fires
of Canaveral, the explosions of energy that overcome gravity and push tons of
crafted metal high into the sky and out of sight into that infinite frontier
known as space. The fires are a testing. A people are testing themselves in
relation to their heritage of steamboats, Conestoga wagons, railroads and
airplanes, seeking reassurance that over the years the old vigor and
resourcefulness have not left them. A people are testing their resolve to reach
beyond the ordinary and thereby, if history repeats, magnify the human spirit.

Twenty years ago, in the humiliating aftermath of Sputnik, Americans looked to
the fires of Canaveral for a sign that they were equal to their Russian
adversaries in the new technology of space flight. Eight years later, we were
counting on the fires of Canaveral to show the world and ourselves that we were
more than equal to the Russians. And so, in July 1969, rockets roared to life,
and carried two men to the surface of the moon, while a third waited in a mother
spaceship to return them to Earth. We watched in awe, realizing that on the Sea
of Tranquillity the species that had learned to use fire and then make tools was
taking a step toward a new destiny that need not be bound to Earth.

Today, we have reason once again to look to the fires of Canaveral. Preparations
have been under way for several weeks at Cape Canaveral's Kennedy Space Center
to propel the space shuttle Columbia - unlike any other spaceship ever built -
off on its maiden orbital voyage, with two astronauts at the controls. (Though
it is scheduled to lift off this week, the space shuttle has been plagued by
delays and accidents and may be postponed yet again). A kind of hybrid, the huge
winged vehicle will take off like a rocket, maneuver in orbit like a spacecraft
and return to a runway landing like a powerless airplane. After some
refurbishing and refueling, it will be become the first re-usable spaceship,
and, with sister ships, should be hauling orbital freight - new satellites,
replacement parts for old ones, laboratories for scientific research, components
for assembling large space stations - for the rest of the century.

The idea of sending a human being hurtling off into an alien sky is no longer so
frightening or novel. Nor will there be the same sense of history that attended
the launching of Apollo 11 to the moon. But circumstances have conspired to
burden the flight with an importance beyond its immediate objectives.

This time it is almost as though we are counting on Columbia to show us that we
are the equal of ourselves, the equal of our own traditions, of our own images
of present and future. It is as though we are looking to space to help us
resolve some of the inherent conflicts that seem to exist for us at home in the
1980's. Here we are, a nation that has for decades led the world in
technological development, that still leads the world in national production,
but that has slipped back significantly in some areas relative to some nations.
Here we are, a nation that clearly retains a fascination - as seen, for example,
in movie after movie, in book after book - with whatever innovation and
improvement mankind can attempt for future patterns of life and environment.
Yet, at the same time, here we are, a nation that has given its own leadership
an overwhelming mandate to cut back a broad range of its programs - in many
instances the very programs that have been largely responsible for placing that
nation in the forefront of general scientific research and discovery and, more
specifically, for permitting its men and machinery to soar into space more
successfully and more eloquently, if you will, than any other. It is as though
the fires of Canaveral will be testing anew not only a traditional commitment to
technology and science, but also, really, a deeper spirit of adventure and
frontiermanship.

The historian Frederick Jackson Turner said that the long experience of settling
a generally unexplored and undeveloped frontier in America shaped a distinctive
national character. He said it was one of restless energy, ''coarseness and
strength combined with an acuteness and inquisitiveness'' and a ''masterful
grasp of material things.'' Emerging from World War II, America possessed
military and economic power that seemed to be the fulfillment of what we had
come to believe was our manifest destiny. Yet, we found that we could not work
our will in Korea or Vietnam and were virtually helpless when Iranian
revolutionaries held our diplomats hostage and the OPEC nations, through their
control of world petroleum prices, held our economy hostage. For these and many
other reasons we speak no longer of manifest destiny but of limits, limits of
power and limits of growth. We feel uncharacteristically constrained.

We also grew up believing in our special gifts of mechanical ingenuity. We were
a nation of inventors, Whitney, Edison, the Wright brothers and their venerated
kind. To doubt the resulting blind faith in technology was perhaps the beginning
of wisdom: Man could command nature only so far, and the evidence of nature's
incipient mutiny was on every hand. But what has become more troubling to the
national psyche has been not the realization of technology's dark side (after
all, pastoral idealism, too, has run through the national consciousness, as
witness Jefferson and Thoreau). Rather, it is that our technology does not seem
to work as well as we used to think. Automobiles are always being recalled
because of defects; cities are blacked out by power failures; arena roofs
collapse; design flaws ground a fleet of jetliners; a nuclear plant breakdown
causes near panic; even the helicopters for the attempted hostage rescue mission
fail. And buses made by the same manufacturer that built the lunar module -that
genuine model of zero-defect engineering - cannot stand up to a few weeks on New
York City's streets. Have we lost, we ask, the technological touch?

Columbia alone cannot restore the old bouyancy to the national psyche. The
Apollo lunar landings, as great a technological and human accomplishment as they
were, could not do that. No single achievement can. Self-confidence, whether
personal or national, is lost through an accumulation of real or imagined
reverses, and usually can be restored only with time, a realistic reordering of
goals and the fresh taste of success. The reordering and restoring may take
time. In an article in The Futurist last August, Daniel Yankelovich, the
public-opinion analyst, and his co-author Bernard Lefkowitz wrote:
FIRST JUMP
''The public is still in the early stages of what psychologists call 'a working
through' process. People have yet to reconcile themselves to the conflict and
disappointment created by the need to adapt to new, unwelcome conditions.''

But if the public is still struggling to reconcile the ideas of human
limitations and the dreams of unlimited human achievements, if trying the
impossible and yet learning for the first time about the very existence of the
impossible, if, indeed, working out that struggle and reconciling those
conflicts will take time, still Columbia's success could remind us now that we
are not quite the paralyzed giant of our darkest self-image. Columbia might not
lead overnight to any great expansion of our space program, because of the many
conflicting claims on the troubled economy, but it would clearly open the door
to countless opportunities. Our forays into space so far have been brief,
tentative explorations, and our effort in the last decade has been in a virtual
state of suspended animation, awaiting revival through the introduction of these
versatile, re-usable spaceships. If they live up to advance billings, they
should make flight into space more common and begin to establish whether there
is a future in space for man. But much depends, too, on whether we are ready to
believe again in success.

The impact of a failure, unfortunately, would be more immediate and more
stunning. It would set back the whole enterprise for years. But far more
important would be a failure's effect on the national temperament. Dr. Carroll
Purcell, a historian of science and technology at the University of California,
Santa Barbara, says Columbia's failure ''would be another nail in the coffin of
our technological confidence.'' Columbia was a long time reaching this moment of
testing. In a sense, its fitful development to this point was also a metaphor
for the national condition. A few months before the 1969 moon landing, the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration considered potential post-Apollo
goals. The agency's leaders proposed as ''the next logical step'' permanent
space stations in Earth orbit, bases on the moon, manned flights to Mars and a
fleet of re-usable space planes for shuttling to and from space. But they had
misread the national mood. The optimism and dynamism of the earlier decade,
which found expression in Apollo and the various wars on racial injustice,
poverty and Southeast Asian communism, had dissipated, leaving a general
weariness and suspicion of great endeavors. This was particularly true of
anything involving big technology, as borne out by the resounding ''no'' given
to the development of the supersonic transport.

Moreover, NASA was a victim of its own success. Apollo was perceived primarily
as a race to the moon against the Russians; NASA did nothing to discourage this
limited view, for it was the surest way to the national treasury. But,
consequently, when the goal was reached and the Russians beaten, the feeling was
widespread that, since we had won the war, now we ought to bring the boys home.

NASA was thus told to shelve plans for large space stations and manned flights
to Mars. Space would no longer be a high national priority. The only major
proposal to survive was the space plane - the shuttle. At first, NASA's
engineers envisioned a totally reusable shuttle featuring two large vehicles.
One would be a huge rocket booster the size of a Boeing 747 airliner that would
supply the initial thrust, then be piloted back to runway landings and used
again. The second stage would be an orbiter vehicle the size of a Boeing 707,
which would ride atop the booster and, after separation, propel itself into
orbit. When its mission was accomplished, it, too, would be flown back for a
runway landing, and, likewise, re-used. By eliminating rockets that consumed
themselves and one-flight spacecraft, NASA believed that the shuttles would, in
time, reduce the cost of space flight.

When the Administration of Richard M. Nixon saw the $10 billion price tag,
however, it directed NASA to come up with a less expensive alternative, which
was finally approved in January 1972.  The result is the Columbia and its
cluster of supporting hardware.

The shuttle, officially designated a Space Transportation System, consists of
three components, only one of which is fully re-usable.  The orbiter, Columbia,
is a 122-foot-long delta-wing vehicle, about the size of a DC-9, with a
60-foot-long cargo bay capable of carrying up to 65,000 pounds into low Earth
orbit. In its launching configuration, the orbiter is attached to the back of a
mammoth bullet-shaped external tank, which carries the liquid hydrogen and
liquid oxygen propellants for the orbiter's three main engines.  Attached to
each side of the tank are the solid-fuel boosters, which burn an explosive
aluminum powder to give added thrust during the shuttle's first two minutes of
ascent. Then, with their fuel spent, the two boosters separate and drop by
parachute into the ocean off Florida, where they are retrieved for re-use after
extensive refurbishment. The big 154-foot tank drops off after eight minutes,
falling to destruction in a remote area of the Indian Ocean, and then the
orbiter climbs the rest of the way into orbit on the strength of its two
secondary rockets, the orbital maneuvering system. It is these rockets and 44
smaller ones that give the orbiter maneuverability in space and control its
initial re-entry into the atmosphere. But its final approach and landing are
dead-stick - the orbiter comes down, powerless, like an 80-ton glider.

NASA once thought the first shuttle would be ready for flight in 1978, then
1979. The agency, flush from its Apollo triumphs, may have underestimated the
difficulties of building a re-usable space plane. The orbiter's main engines
proved to be the greatest technological challenge. They had to operate at
pressures three times higher than the Saturn 5 moon rocket's engines, and in
ground tests they had the distressing habit of cracking or catching fire. Then,
after the engines were redesigned and retested, NASA encountered the peskiest of
problems, application of the 31,000 thermal-protection tiles that cover much of
the orbiter's aluminum skin. These delicate silica tiles replaced the heat
shields of previous spacecraft, which were inappropriate for a re-usable vehicle
because they charred and flaked off during the intense frictional heat of
re-entry. But some of the tiles fell off during Columbia's shipment from the
Rockwell International plant in California to Cape Canaveral, and nearly all of
them had to be reinforced and rebonded, a task that largely accounted for the
launching delays of the last year.

In the public mind the shuttle was being lumped with all the other things that
were not working. It was either a lemon or a hangar queen, an inspired creation
that never seemed to get off the ground.  And all the delays and redesigns were
costing money. NASA had won approval for the project on a pledge to build and
test the first two orbiters at a total cost of $5.2 billion in 1971 dollars. In
1979, when the project outlook had grown bleak, panels of consultants appointed
by the Carter Administration discovered that the shuttle had suffered from years
of underfunding, forcing NASA to take engineering shortcuts and stretch out
procurement. NASA had not called attention to its many problems out of a fear
that the entire project might be scrapped. Under pressure from the Defense
Department, which would be one of the shuttle's chief users, the Administration
gave NASA a substantial financial transfusion. The project is now expected to
cost nearly $10 billion, or even more by some estimates, which after inflation
represents a 30 percent cost overrun.
SECOND JUMP

But now, three years late, the first shutle appears to be ready.  John W. Young
and Capt. Robert L. Crippen of the Navy plan to pilot Columbia on a 54 1/2-hour,
36-orbit test run, taking off at Cape Canaveral and landing at Edwards Air Force
Base in the Mojave Desert of California. It will be the first time American
astronauts have gone into space in six years and the first time they have ever
gone aboard a vehicle that had not undergone prior test flights unmanned or with
chimpanzees. If all goes well, Columbia will be put through its paces again in
about five months and then twice more before it is finally cleared for regular
flight service, probably toward the end of 1982.

Three more orbiters - Challenger, Discovery and Atlantis - are in production,
and NASA would like to begin work on yet another one.  Although NASA once
predicted that each orbiter could be made ready for flight after only two weeks
on the ground, no one is now sure how long the ''turnaround'' time will be.
Nevertheless, NASA is expecting the fleet of shuttles to be making 30 to 40
flights a year by the mid-1980's, perhaps 50 flights by 1990.

Standing in the Kennedy Space Center firing room during the countdown for a
Columbia engine test in February, Leroy E. Day, director of shuttle systems
engineering, said with a sense of relief: ''It's been quite an experience
watching things go from two dimensions on paper to three dimensions in
hardware.'' Then, noting that much of NASA's leadership is reaching retirement
age, having been in their jobs since well before Apollo, Day remarked: ''This
will be sort of our legacy to NASA's next generation.''

How fully and wisely the legacy will be used, assuming Columbia's success, is by
no means certain. The United States will possess a revolutionary means for space
travel, but to what ends?

NASA developed the shuttle without a detailed long-range program for its use,
only some dreams and schemes that were forever being pushed aside in the face of
the repeated budget cuts. In fact, during the decade of shuttle development,
NASA was expressly forbidden to commit itself to any specific major projects for
using the shuttle's special capabilities.

Not that the shuttles will want for business when they start flying. NASA
reports that it already has commitments for cargoes on the first 60 or so
shuttle missions. About one-third of these missions have been reserved by the
Air Force for deploying its communications, navigation, weather and surveillance
satellites; the Pentagon is now spending as much - if not more - on space
activities as NASA's annual $6 billion and eventually will have its own shuttle
launching site at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. Most of the other
future missions have been spoken for by domestic and international
communications operators, the one big profit-making industry in space. Once the
shuttle's reliability is demonstrated, there will probably be more demand for
its services by military and commercial users. Space clients can rent the entire
cargo bay for one trip for $35 million. Smaller ''getaway specials'' can be
flown for as little as $3,000 for a 60-pound experiment package.

Even though these activities promise the surest short-term return on investment,
the shuttle is for them little more than a presumably more efficient substitute
for conventional expendable rockets. This would not advance the space enterprise
much beyond its by-nowtraditional pursuits.

One exception is the giant space telescope, which is supposed to be deployed in
Earth orbit by the shuttle in 1985. This 96-inch telescope, operating high above
the distorting effects of the atmosphere, should enable astronomers for the
first time to see any planets around nearby stars, to observe objects 100 times
dimmer than those that can be seen through ground-based telescopes and perhaps
to detect light emanating from the very edge of the visible universe. Not only
would the telescope be larger than anything that could be launched by
conventional rockets, but its orbital lifetime should extend into the next
century because of periodic visits by shuttle astronauts bringing up replacement
parts and fuel.

So far, however, scientific space exploration has generally been more hurt than
helped by the shuttle. Its development costs siphoned off money that might have
gone to new scientific projects, and its many delays caused costly postponements
in those few projects that were initiated.

Planetary exploration was hit especially hard. After a decade of such
spectaculars as the Viking landings on Mars and the Voyager flybys of Jupiter
and Saturn, the fruits of initiatives begun in the 1960's, there will be no new
American launchings to the planets for five or six years -chiefly because of the
shuttle's money drain - unless the success of the project does prompt a
reordering again of national budget priorities.

Highest on NASA's list of eventual goals is a permanent space station in Earth
orbit. The shuttle was originally conceived as a means of ferrying people and
supplies to stations that would resemble something out of ''Star Wars.'' Indeed,
according to many space engineers, it would have made more sense to build such
stations and ferries first, for exploiting the potential of near-Earth space,
and then contemplate going to the moon. In any event, such stations could be
constructed from components transported into orbit by the shuttle. A complex of
assembled structures, like orbital Tinkertoys, the station would be far more
capacious than Skylab, which was a makeshift laboratory built from Apollo
leftovers, or the highly successful Salyut 6, which has been occupied in recent
years by several dozen Soviet astronauts, whose function is primarily one of
testing human endurance. Such a United States permanent space station would
serve as the command post for associated scientific laboratories, Earth-survey
experiments, possible manufacturing facilities taking advantage of the
microgravity environment and a staging point for crews building and maintaining
giant antennas, communications relay stations or solar-power collection devices.
Eventually, the stations might be launching bases for journeys to the moon and
other planets. These are not, however, definite national goals or projects, as
yet.

When Ronald Reagan was elected President, NASA leaders were hopeful that he
might see in an expanded space program a means of fulfilling his campaign
promises to revive American technology and restore American prestige.

So far, however, NASA has had to continue to take its budgetcutting lumps along
with everyone else except the military.  Harrison H. Schmitt, the
geologist-astronaut who went to the moon on Apollo 17, is now a Republican
Senator from New Mexico and chairman of the Senate Subcommittee on Science,
Technology and Space. After the election, Senator Schmitt said, he met with Mr.
Reagan and was encouraged to believe the new President ''understood the
importance of space to our defense, our technology and in reestablishing our
leadership in the minds of people around the world.''
THIRD JUMP

But since the inauguration, one of the few pronouncements on space by the new
Administration has come from David A. Stockman, director of the Office of
Management and Budget, responding to a question at a news conference. A larger
American space effort, he said, was ''a very constructive and very important
investment for the country to make, not only because of its technological
spin-off, but simply because of the boost that that gives to our economny and
our aspirations.'' A few days later, Mr. Stockman announced that the new Reagan
budget would trim NASA spending by several hundred million dollars, sparing the
shuttle itself but allowing nothing for several shuttle science missions.

Asked if, after Columbia's flight, President Reagan might announce his
longer-range goals for space, Senator Schmitt said: ''There's a chance, a good
chance. The most obvious statement of purpose would involve a permanency of
American presence in space. I do not believe that statement has to have dollars
attached to it any more than President Kennedy's statement that we should go to
the moon.  Kennedy's statement did not have dollars attached to it, but it did
provide the framework in which the space program moved forward for better than a
decade. But the main thing lacking right now is that there just isn't anybody
with a science or space perspective in a close advisory position to the
President.''

With the Administration's emphasis on military strength and economic recovery,
any pronouncement it might make would likely fail to satisfy people like Drs.
Richard Goody and Michael McElroy of Harvard University and Dr. Philip Morrison
of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

In the Bulletin of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences last May, these
scientists wrote that military and civilian applications of space technology in
near-Earth orbit were ''worthy and productive'' but do not ''offer that
inspirational view of ourselves and our future which could provide the
motivation for the dazzling achievements in innovative engineering that have
characterized the space program.'' They added that ''no fundamental principles
of physics, no short-term biological issues and no questions of sound
engineering practice appear to stand in the way of proposals for the
construction of space colonies, the return of raw materials from space to Earth,
or the extraction of almost unlimited energy from the sun.'' To embark on some
ambitious, long-range thrust in space, by building on the shuttle, would require
a commitment to the future that has been lacking in the last few years, rather
than intensifying. Some would undoubtedly oppose any larger effort in space in
any case, as they opposed Apollo, on the grounds that it represents ''misplaced
national priorities.'' They tend to agree with Dr. Purcell, the University of
California science and technology historian, who says that space ''is just not
very important in the whole scheme of things.''

But the inertia of our pessimism may be a stronger force militating against a
real recommitment to explore outer space. Dr.  Leo Marx, professor of American
cultural history at M.I.T., says that pessimism is running so deep that ''people
are kidding themselves'' if they think Columbia's success would have any impact
on the national mood. According to Daniel Yankelovich, the pollster, Americans
in the 1950's and 1960's generally believed the present to be a better time than
the recent past and anticipated that the future would inevitably improve over
the present. In 1978, however, the pattern totally reversed itself. Now
Americans, he said, believe that the past was a better time than the present,
and they anticipate that the present, however bad, is likely to be better than
the future.

Still, it is hard to believe that the national mood is so pessimistic that with
leadership and renewed resolve it cannot be stirred again to commitments toward
great accomplishments. We know we must defend ourselves and revive our economy.
We first must survive, but we need to do more than survive if we are to remain
truly alive.

The space shuttle affords us one opportunity to extend ourselves, to take risks
as reaffirmations of our vitality and to recapture a belief in ourselves. The
shuttle is not being developed for one mission or one goal or simply to match or
beat the Russians; it is far superior technologically to anything the Russians
have shown a capability for. The shuttle should enable us to take fuller
advantage of space as a place - not only as an arena of geopolitics, which it
still is, of course, and probably will always be. But space is a place, a
frontier, for extensive human activity on many fronts: scientific research
expanding knowledge, exploration, adventure, commercial pursuits, military
advantage, industrialization or solarenergy stations perhaps and, who knows,
maybe even colonization.

We are a spacefaring people who, in all likelihood, are going to make ourselves
at home in space someday, and there may be more support for getting on with the
task than has been assumed in recent years. Though we have our doubts about
technology, which are often justified, we continue to look to technology to
improve our lot. Nor are we as antiscience as many scientists have feared.
Science magazines and television shows are finding expanding audiences; Carl
Sagan's television series,''Cosmos,'' was one of the most popular programs ever
run by the Public Broadcasting Service, and the book based on the series is a
best seller. The biggest tourist attraction in Washington is not the White House
or the Capitol
Page 120
but the National Air and Space Museum. At least a dozen space advocacy
organizations have formed in the last few years. Senator Schmitt believes that
public enthusiasm for space exploration has been seriously underestimated.
''It's higher now than it's ever been,'' he said. ''I think the public will
support strong leadership in this area.'' We still respond to frontiers, it
seems, and as hard as we are on ourselves, in our time of pessimism, we need not
believe we have lost the ''acuteness and inquisitiveness'' of our national
youth. We may have been slow to recognize space as a frontier because it is so
unlike the old frontiers. The major difference, noted by Dr. Bruce Mazlish, an
M.I.T. history professor, in the autumn issue of The Wilson Quarterly, is that
in space there are no flora and fauna, no people to conquer or convert. Still, a
leap into space, Dr. Mazlish said, can be justified because ''it is man's
destiny continually to test himself against the unknown, to know himself by his
exertions.''

This, in the deepest sense, is the testing of ourselves in the fires of Cape
Canaveral.

Samuel C. Florman, a New York engineer and author of ''The Existential Pleasures
of Engineering,'' says that the appropriate response to the present condition is
neither optimism nor pessimism but ''the tragic view of life.'' This tragic
view, he says, is not to be confused with world-weary resignation. Rather, in
the dramatic sense of the word tragedy, it is the recognition that life is
destined to have its failures and limitations and yet affirms the value of life
and challenges that destiny. ''I want to ally myself,'' Mr. Florman concludes,
''with those who, aware of the dangers, and without foolish illusions about what
can be accomplished, still want to move on.''

Michael Collins, one of the more thoughtful and articulate of the astronauts,
reflected on these matters during the 10th-anniversary celebration of the Apollo
11 moon landing. ''When the history of this galaxy is written, and I think it
may already have been,'' Mr.  Collins said, ''if the planet Earth gets mentioned
at all, it won't be because its inhabitants visited their own moon. The first
step, like a newborn's first cry, would be automatically assumed. What would be
worth recording is what kind of civilization we earthlings created and whether
or not we ventured out to other parts of the galaxy. Were we wanderers? Human
history so far indicates we are indeed. This country in particular has a
tradition of exploring, of expansion, of pushing back the frontier, across the
mountains and plains, and then upward - with the Wright brothers and on to the
moon. It's human nature to stretch, to go, to see, to understand.  Exploration
is not a choice really - it's an imperative.''

The question is whether America still has its national willingness to stretch,
to understand, to explore -whether it will pick up that imperative. Senator
Schmitt, in addressing the question, said recently that he and Neil Armstrong
had each concluded, independently, that four conditions must exist: ''First, a
base of technology must exist ... . Second, a period of national uneasiness
about America's place in the scheme of human activities must exist.  Third, some
catalytic event must occur that focuses the national attention on the direction
to proceed. Finally, an articulate and wise leader must sense these three
conditions and put forth with words and action the great thing to be
accomplished.''

It is clear that the first two conditions exist already. No one can predict
whether a catalytic event will occur, or when, but it does seem that there is a
paradoxical willingness now on the part of the American people to go in either
direction - that they can be convinced of the worthiness and excitement of great
exploration, or, conversely, that they can be talked into budget savings and
largescale cutting back. So, in the end, the fires of Cape Canaveral will be
testing not only a people, but, more important, their leaders as well.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photos and diagram of space shuttle Drawings of various
spacecraft

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THREE NOVELS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1400 words


THE FURTHER ADVENTURES OF HALLEY'S COMET By John Calvin Batchelor.  508 pp. New
York: Congdon & Lattes, Inc.  Cloth, $17.95. Paper, $8.95.
THE ANTS OF GOD By W.T. Tyler.  278 pp. New York: The Dial Press. $10.95.
IDLE HANDS By William O'Rourke.  435 pp. New York: Delacorte Press. $12.95.

By DAVID QUAMMEN

''The Further Adventures of Halley's Comet,'' John Calvin Batchelor's wildly
ambitious first novel, is drastically uneven and meant to be; it takes a hatful
of reckless gambles, some of which pay off rather well. But it has two things
working against it. First, the book is packaged to seem a piece of whimsical
fluff, with a cartoon cover and a very prominent blurb from Tom Robbins, the
critical essence of which is ''Wow!'' Second, it begins with a turgid and
pretentious prologue - a bad caricature of the language of ''Finnegans Wake'' -
that is by far the book's most off-putting section. If you make it past these
discouragements (the cover problem is minor; the prologue is, I think, a
near-disastrous error in editorial judgment), the rest of the novel offers a
variety of charms.

The main narrative line is a swashbuckling adventure that combines the trappings
of chivalric costume drama and science fiction with a good bit of factual
astrophysics. Set in a futuristic but recognizable 1986, when Halley's comet is
making its next expected pass close by Earth, this story is decked out with
bizarrely named characters (Aaron Verbunko, Wavy Rufus, Schleppend & Swinyard),
shameless verbal and visual puns, capricious behavior and surreal events, a
Manichaean struggle against a powerful but dimly understood enemy (the Proto
Industrial Trust, a.k.a. PIT), arcane clues, astrological symbols and
eschatological intimations. If it all sounds familiar, it should: These are the
trademarked devices of Thomas Pynchon. Mr. Batchelor seems to acknowledge at
several points that he is working Mr. Pynchon's game, but pushes on with
goodnatured brashness, and mainly gets away with it. In fact some of his Pynchon
is better than some of Thomas Pynchon's Pynchon.

Interrupting this costume drama are certain tenuously connected but interesting
digressions, including a pseudo-historical flashback to the last four earthly
appearances of Halley's comet, a disquisition on cometology in the form of
Wittgensteinian propositions and, most noteworthy, a four-installment parable
entitled ''The Annals of the Straw People,''
---------------------------------------------------------------------
David Quammen is a freelance writer based in Montana.
wherein Mr. Batchelor sketches the decline of the Republic from 1968 to 1978.

''The Further Adventures of Halley's Comet'' is full of mordant humor, lofty
ambitions and silliness. Much of it works, and much of it doesn't. But any
conspiracy novel that quotes slyly from Tug McGraw and trots Henry Kissinger
through disguised as a short gorilla in black-rim glasses has its heart in the
right place.

*

''The Ants of God'' is as dust-dry and quiet as the Ethiopian borderland village
where much of the action takes place. Its central event is the brief affair
between a bush pilot named McDermott and a missionary's widow named Emily Farr,
but to label this book a love story would be no less misleading than to call
''One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich'' a novel about food and warmth. ''The
Ants of God'' is largely about how much fortitude can be achieved by a man and a
woman who are given so little solace.

In the southern Sudan during the civil war of the mid-1970's, McDermott is
flying in guns and supplies from Ethiopia to African Anya-nya rebels fighting
against the Arab Government that controls their country from Khartoum. McDermott
is a mercenary, not a believer, hired by the Israeli secret-service operatives
who are supporting the Anya-nya uprising. He is an emotional anchorite, a victim
of certain soul-burnings who has resolved not to be burned again, who detests
nothing so much as being expected to talk about him-self. Nowhere does McDermott
even think about himself, so that we know almost nothing about him but what we
see him do and hear him say. It is enough. Still, we do know these further
things: During McDermott's court-martial in Thailand, an Air Force psychiatrist
described him as ''distinctly antisocial before Vietnam made him homicidal as
well''; he was reared in a Methodist orphanage; he is involved in the Sudanese
conflict only because, in his words, ''I like the flying.''

Emily Farr is a fiercely solitary woman in her mid-30's, suffering the late
stages of emotional desiccation at a small mission clinic she runs near the
Sudanese border. She remains there not as a missionary but as a nurse. She has
no faith. The one thing she hates more than sanctimonious missionaries is the
guerrilla war and the misery it causes the African tribes she serves.

McDermott literally descends on her from the sky, bringing to Emily Farr both a
quickening of hope and the ravages of the war. Their encounter is uneasy,
unpredictable, triumphantly joyous, and fleeting. The bleak final action of the
book seems out of character, until McDermott's court-martial is recalled. This
is a beautiful sad story.

*

In ''Idle Hands'' William O'Rourke has accomplished something unusual, charting
the odd middle ground between a picaresque of softcore pornography and a serious
novel, while giving us little of either. The book is a chronicle of one youngish
man's lifetime ''involvements'' with the opposite sex. But the hero's
first-person account of all this coupling is too earnestly reflective to be
salacious and too narrowly focused to offer much genuine illumination. The
compromise is about as interesting as a dissertation on gynecology.

Mr. O'Rourke's Andy Orr is a playwright of wholesome Midwestern and
Irish-Catholic background, leftish politics, liberal mores, gentle sympathies.
And he is a student of women, more particularly of the possible ways for a man
to experience women. Yet his chief personality flaw (insofar as his personality
can be said to exist) is not hedonism but overseriousness. And that's it; that's
virtually all we learn about Andy Orr. In place of character development or
story, we get the details of his consecutive (concurrent in some cases) liaisons
with Jenny, Andra, Phyllis, Rachel, Rosalie, Zelda, Gunilla, Monica and so on.
They all blur together, a tiring succession of briefly sketched mannerisms and
lovingly described bodies.

Along the way we hear something of Orr's intermittent employments - in an opera
company, a fish-packing factory, and later as an assistant professor of theater
at a small college - and of his first produced play, a Vietnam-era polemic
entitled ''Wargasm.'' But mainly we listen to Andy Orr endlessly pondering and
savoring the nuances of sex. At one point he lets drop the simple statement,
''My father was still trying to battle his way into the middle class,'' and that
bit of workaday information comes like a spring breeze into the stale air of a
cathouse.

William O'Rourke is enormously articulate and has been highly praised for his
nonfiction book about the New Catholic Left, and ''Idle Hands'' contains several
flashes of spry humor - notably in the cameo portrait of a television producer
called Edgy Eddie. So it is a mystery why Mr. O'Rourke has used his gifts to
create a novel so constricted in its vision and so relentlessly overwritten.
Already on the second page Andy Orr has delivered the pithiest of all his many
self-assessments: ''Women preoccupied me.'' It's the epitaph of a stillborn
character.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TROUBLE AT THE ACADEMY

SECTION: Section 7; Page 15, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 725 words


--------------------------------------------------------------------

Carey Winfrey is a former New York Times Reporter (and former Marine Officer)
who is writing a novel.
A SENSE OF HONOR By James Webb.  324 pp. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

K.TK.

By CAREY WINFREY

IT was indeed another time and place: February l968 at the United States Naval
Academy. Outside its cloistered walls, Americans were reacting with shock and
horror to reports of a Tet offensive 7,000 miles away in Vietnam. Inside, the
shocks and horrors were of a different order: upperclassmen doing unto others -
the hapless plebes - what had been done unto them their own first humiliating
year in transition from civilian to naval officer.

Still, an occasional tremor from the outside world penetrates this metaphorical
castle. There are funerals of recent graduates to attend and friends - what's
left of them - to visit in hospitals. And when it comes time for the
soon-to-graduate first classmen to choose between the Navy and the Marine Corps,
the smaller service gets even shorter shrift than usual. Too much Marine blood
has been spilt on the evening news.

In James Webb's taut second novel, the author of ''Fields of Fire,'' returns to
terrain he has personally reconnoitered. A l968 graduate of Annapolis, he writes
as only an insider could of that peculiarly costly education. His uncanny ear
for the raunchy vocabulary of military life (he must have taken notes), is
matched by his evocation of its spit-and-polish claustophobia and its inherent
contradictions: lonliness in the midst of camaraderie, brutality mixed with
decency, pain in pride, honor at the disposal of death and destruction.

No surprise then that the novel has already encountered flak. The publisher
claims that the Academy cancelled an order for 130 copies because the book is
critical of Academy life. No, said the Lieut.  Commander in charge of the
Academy bookstore, the cancellation was to save valuable warehouse space. But he
added that the book ''takes an extreme position. It takes the worst of an
organization and portrays as commonplace things that are not commonplace.'' He
formed that judgement on the bases of having read a little more than half of it.

That exchange could have been lifted from the novel: boycotting half-read books
is the kind of military mindlessness Mr. Webb cherishes. And delights in
skewering. His Academy is a place where faculty officers are judged by the
number of demerits they can hand out to midshipmen who sneak back to bed after
reveille. In its hallowed halls, the brightest are invariably bested by
martinets, or worse, by civilians.

Yet even Mr. Webb's flawed Academy ultimately emerges (read on, Commander) as a
place where such out-of-fashion concepts as duty, honor and country can still be
evoked without irony. And as drafted here, its architecture can still inspire.

Much of the plot also reconnoiters familiar terrain. John Dean (why does that
name sound familiar?) is a sensitive, scholarly and totally unmilitary plebe,
who'd better shape up or ship out. Fogarty, a gungho first classman, decides to
hasten Dean's maturation with methods which, though tolerated, are officially
relics of another day. Under Fogarty's harsh-but-well-intentioned ''guidance,''
Dean begins to get with the program. But to which North, magnetic or true, is
Fogarty's moral compass pointing?

Mr. Webb manages to keep the balance so delicate that readers will have to
decide that one - as well as negotiate a number of other moral shoals - for
themselves. The closest the author, himself a former Marine Officer, comes to
giving his own feelings away are the words he puts in the mouth of a
disillusioned Marine officerinstructor at the Academy. ''I love the military all
the way down to my nerve-damaged toes,'' the Marine tells his girlfriend.
''It's the chicken-feed I hate.''

It is Mr. Webb's considerable accomplishment that even readers who know nothing
about the military will understand that.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HAIG INVITATION TO FAIRFIELD COMMENCEMENT SPARKS A PROTEST

BYLINE: By ROBERT E. TOMASSON

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 1, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 799 words


IN addition to the personal milestone, college graduations also mark the
culmination of a competition of another sort. This is the effort by colleges,
large and small, to enlist a commencement speaker of stature, one whose words to
the graduating class and family will be reported in the national press,
affording the institution a prideful measure of attention by association.

Heads of state and government officials have occasionally used such
commencements to make major policy statements, and some speeches have endured
long afterwards, such as Winston Churchill's address at Westminster College in
Fulton, Mo., in 1946 in which he talked of a ''curtain of iron'' descending
across Europe.

In Connecticut this year, commencement attention may be focused on Fairfield
University, where Alexander M. Haig Jr., the Secretary of State and one of the
nation's more controversial public figures, is to deliver the annual address on
May 24.

The controversy that has attended the Secretary in his brief tenure in the
Reagan Administration, and in his earlier post as White House chief of staff in
the last days of the Nixon Administration, has preceded him to the Fairfield
campus.

''We find it very difficult to participate in a ceremony that grants an honorary
degree to Haig and which presents Haig as the honored commencement speaker,''
states a petition now circulating among faculty members at the university.

Among objections to his being honored, the petition cited ''past behavior with
respect to Watergate, Vietnam, Cambodia and Chile during the Nixon
Administration'' and his more recent activities relating to El Salvador.

So far, however, the faculty protest does not seem to have made much of an
inroad among students.  ''Basically, there's a feeling on campus that we've got
the Secretary of State and let's make the most of it without making a moral
stand,'' said Thomas Callahan, a student who is the editor of the Readers' Forum
in The Fairfield Mirror, the campus newspaper.

By the middle of last week, the newspaper had received 15 letters or proposed
articles on the Haig visit. Four students and two faculty members were in favor,
and four students and five faculty members were opposed to the Haig visit, Mr.
Callahan said.

The newspaper, which is undergoing a change of editors as it does at the end of
each school year, has not yet taken an editorial position on the commencement
speaker, who will be receiving an honorary degree to mark his ''devotion to
public or academic ideals.''

The faculty petition was circulated among the 150 full-time faculty members in
the undergraduate college of liberal arts and sciences, said Kevin Cassidy, an
assistant professor of politics and one of four faculty members who initiated
the petition.

''We have about 35 signatures,'' Dr. Cassidy said, adding: ''You must remember
that Fairfield University does not have what you would call a liberal and
certainly not a left-wing faculty, but rather a conservative group usually not
too active politically.

The professor said that he and some of other faculty members had met with the
college president, the Rev. Aloysius P. Kelley, but had not been able to
persuade him that the Secretary of State's visit ''was not in keeping with the
school's sense of Catholic social justice and Jesuit tradition.''

Father Kelley had said earlier that ''the impression I have is that the majority
of students are happy he's coming.'' Mr. Haig had been invited to give a
commencement address some years ago, not only for his prominence in the
Government and later as president and chief operating officer of the United
Technologies Corporation, but also for his ties to Roman Catholicism.

Before he attended the United States Military Academy, Mr. Haig was enrolled at
the University of Notre Dame. His brother, Frank, is a Jesuit priest and the
chairman of the physics department at Loyola College in Baltimore.

Mr. Haig had agreed to be the commencement speaker last year, but was prevented
when he underwent heart surgery.  Dr. Cassidy said that, while he and his group
saw little chance of forcing a revocation of Mr. Haig's invitation, ''we are
planning a dignified protest at the commencement designed not to interrupt, but
to inform people of the issues of why we find it inappropriate for him to be
honored here.''

Father Kelley responded to plans for a demonstration by noting that the
commencement ceremonies are private and that outside groups planning to
demonstrtae would not be allowed on campus.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Long Island Journal

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 3, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1481 words


NEXT Wednesday morning, the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater will help to
celebrate the International Year of the Disabled - designated by the United
Nations - by giving a special performance in the 700-seat, barrier-free
auditorium of the Sacred Heart School in North Merrick.

The free performance is sponsored by Catholic Charities in cooperation with the
Council of Agencies to Coordinate Homebound Services, a nonprofit charitable
organization in Westbury founded to aid the disabled and the homebound.

Financing has been made available through the New York State Council of the Arts
and Hospital Audiences Inc. of Manhattan, a nonprofit agency that provides
theatrical entertainment for the disabled and prison inmates in the metropolitan
area.

All coordinators of services for the disabled and individual disabled members of
Long Island communities are invited to reserve seats and attend.

''So far the response has been quite enthusiastic,'' said Mary Jane Palma, the
president of Council of Agencies to Coordinate Homebound Services.

Huntington Town officials will have a few extra months to file financial
disclosure forms, but ''at least they'll be on record before the primaries and
election,'' said Richard Bornstein, executive vice president of the Huntington
Chamber of Commerce, who opposed a proposal to move the deadline to the fall.

The town board, in a resolution adopted at its March meeting, changed the filing
date from Jan. 1 - which the board said was ''insufficient time'' -to July 15.

It's a more reasonable decision, Mr. Bornstein said, than an earlier proposal to
allow officials to file 30 days after submitting income tax forms to the I.R.S.

''If the officials were to take the valid extension period that runs as late as
Oct. 15,'' he said, ''some of these forms would not be filed until after the
election and wouldn't do the public much good.''

On Palm Sunday morning, more than 50 members of the Woodmere-Lawrence Methodist
Church will assemble in the church's parking lot to march through the streets of
the village.

Accompanied by a marching band, choir and members of the Sunday school, the
members of the congregation, carrying palm fronds and singing a traditional
12th-century hymn, will ''dramatically and symbolically'' re-enact the original
Palm Sunday procession of Jesus's entry into Jerusalem, according to the Rev.
David L. Parker.

Mr. Parker, who has held the religious march for the past three years, believes
that his is the only church in Nassau County to make this procession. ''One
generally bears witness inside a church,'' Mr. Parker said. ''This small, active
witness in public is a tribute we like to make to our faith.''

The Long Island division of Cablevision has received approval from the New York
State Commission on Cable Television to proceed with construction of its $10
million project to serve the entire Town of Huntington within two years.

The Woodbury-based company, the only cable company to operate in both Nassau and
Suffolk Counties, according to its president, Irwin Polinsky, is under contract
with the town to complete servicing to unserved areas of the town first. It will
eventually provide service to all areas of the town, including those now
serviced by Huntington TV Cable, which has held the franchise since 1967.

Underground wiring will be installed in those areas - mostly the unserved
portions - that have underground facilities, and overhead wiring will be
installed elsewhere.

Area No. 1 - to be completed the first year according to the contract -begins at
the Huntington-Oyster Bay border in Cold Spring Harbor and extends south of the
Northern State Parkway to encompass two-thirds of the unserved areas. Area No. 2
- the remainder of the unserved area - must be completed three months later, or
within 15 months.

By the end of the second year, Mr. Polinsky said, the entire town will be wired.
From its antenna atop Nassau County Medical Center to its receiving site in
Syosset, the company will transmit 35 channels at costs varying from $4.50 for
basic service to $30.75 for all channels.  Programs will include Home Box
Office, blacked-out games of professional teams in the New York metropolitan
area and other professional and scholastic sports events.

Cablevision currently serves 160,000 customers in Bergen County, Yonkers,
Chicago and parts of Nassau County, according to Mr.  Polinsky. About 400 of its
600 employees, he said, live on Long Island.

Elderly citizens and other Long Island residents who require aid in preparing
income-tax returns can receive help from some Hofstra University accounting
majors. They volunteered about 10 hours a week during March, and will provide
tax-return information at Nassau and Suffolk County libraries through April 15.

Robert Katz, an assistant professor of taxation at Hofstra University in
Hempstead, who initiated the volunteer efforts four years ago, said that in 1979
more than 2,300 people who could not afford to hire private tax preparers were
assisted by the students.  They are ''quite professional,'' he said, being
''just six months away from receiving their accounting degrees.''

The program, which began with 35 students at six libraries on the Island, now
has 100 students at 33 libraries.  ''It is a good experience for our students,''
Mr. Katz said.  ''Classroom training is one thing, but experience with live
clients is invaluable.''

The program is sponsored by the Internal Revenue Service, which provides
training materials and a support system for the students.

If John W. Hinckley Jr., accused of shooting President Reagan, was really acting
out the role of the psychotic former Marine in the 1976 movie ''Taxi Driver''
because of a fantasy about the actress Jodie Foster who portrayed a teen-age
prostitute in the film, he wasn't following the story line according to Richard
Elman, the Stony Brook author who wrote a novel based on the film script.

Federal investigators suggest that Mr. Hinckley may have envisaged himself as
Travis Bickle, the character in ''Taxi Driver'' who befriends a 12-year-old
prostitute named Iris, played by Miss Foster. Bickle plans the assassination of
a United States Senator after his romantic overtures toward one of the Senator's
aides are rejected.

Both in the novel and in the film, Bickle stalks the Senator, but is frightened
off by the Senator's bodyguard and, instead, stages a murderous rampage in a
seedy hotel on Manhattan's Lower East Side, killing the young prostitute's pimp
and a number of other men, including a wanted criminal. As a result, he is
widely regarded as a hero rather than the assassin he started out to be.

Mr. Elman followed the film's plot but altered the mood and character portrayal
in his novelization of Paul Schrader's script.  Mr. Elman said he found the
screen production ''full of gratuitous violence.''

''The movie romanticizes psychotic personality,'' he said. ''I tried in the
novel to portray what makes people like Travis Bickle psychotic. He was an
illiterate, dissociated man full of rage and trained in the techniques of
killing in Vietnam. He is a loser obsessed with being remembered in history.''

Both the novel and the movie differ from real life in another way, Mr. Elman
added. ''In the book and film script,'' he said, ''the people who sold guns to
Bickle were portrayed as criminals - dealers in contraband. In real life,
however, anyone can buy and sell guns.''

The museum division of the Nassau County Department of Recreation and Parks is
seeking volunteers to serve as guides at the 209-acre Sands Point Park and
Preserve. Falaise, the former Gold Coast estate of the late Capt. Harry
Guggenheim and Castlegould, an estate built by Howard Gould, the 19th-century
railroad heir, are part of the preserve.

The duties of the guides will include, among other things, interpreting and
explaining the art, architecture, furnishings and life style involved in Captain
Guggenheim's efforts to transplant from abroad Renaissance and medieval art and
architectural fragments, and to integrate them within the interior of his summer
retreat.

The training program begins Tuesday. The new volunteers, who will be trained by
museum curators and naturalists, will be selected to join 100 members on the
present roster. For further information, call 364-1050.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AN 'OLD WARRIOR' SEEKS NEW BATTLES

BYLINE: By JUDITH GREENE; Judith Greene lives in Huntington.

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 26,; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 876 words


TURNING 50 and out of work. That had to be the key. Why did a perfectly happy
woman married to the same man for 25 years suddenly turn into an ''old bat?'' I
got the first inkling at the wedding of a former student of my husband's. We
were the oldest except for the immediate families.

It was a lovely June day. Lots of booze and little food. We moved off in our
separate ways, as we often do at social gatherings. I found myself skirting a
group of handsome young men -fledgling bankers and account executives. Camera in
one hand, Scotch in the other, I felt sure they would receive me as an unsung
Diane Arbus or Jill Krementz. What focused was a graying Berenice Abbott or
brittle Imogen Cunningham.

After a few tries at ''What do you do... I buy pictures...'' these young men
with the grace of slow motion ebbed away. At once my husband was by my side,
supporting my elbow. Kindly, and like the old doctor at a family funeral, he
whispered, ''They're gone - they've moved on.''

I was always an interrupter, sometimes rude but never inciting and hardly ever
boring. My latest skirmishes were taking place at banks, restaurants and grocery
stores. No more arguments over Vietnam, Cambodia or Chinese communes. I was an
18th-century peasant, pike in hand, defending myself over Italian parsley.

At the checkout counter, the pink-cheeked adolescent pressed ''49 cents'' on the
register.  I corrected her, ''That's 39 cents for the parsley.'' ''Watercress is
49 cents,'' she replied politely.  ''But that's not watercress. It's Italian
parsley - 39 cents a bunch.'' I smiled sweetly. Little old lady in tennis
sneakers.  ''Well, all right,'' she accommodated, ''but I'm sure it's
watercress.'' ''Look,'' I explained, ''watercress is a tight little bunch. This
is long and flat, different from curly parsley, don't you know?'' Heads looked
up and over. A frosty Englishwoman stopped at my counter to admonish me.
''People do make mistakes, madam,'' she said.  My unconscious tea-tax memory
rose and I stared at her. I was torn between defeating Lord Cornwallis again or
showing the counter girl what watercress really was.

Choosing the latter course, heavy bag in hand, I marched to the vegetable stand
and borrowed one bunch of Italian flat and one gnarled globe of watercress.
Hoisting my heavy groceries, I trooped back to the counter to demonstrate, a
Macy's kitchenware salesperson.

''Here,'' I commanded. ''One bunch of Italian parsley; one bunch of
watercress.'' ''I thought parsley was all curly,'' she minced.  ''There are
three items in question,'' I replied in my best schoolteacher manner. ''Curly
parsley, flat Italian parsley and watercress.''

''It's the first time I've ever heard that,'' she answered, bored.  I have to
hand it to her. She never flinched under fire. What did she know? Ten million
years ahead of her to find out all there was about parsley and watercress.

Exhausted by this confrontation, I parked at a nearby McDonald's for coffee. I
hadn't been there for years, since the children were small. Pencil poised, the
striped nymphet took my order. In a hushed tone, I added, ''And a danish.''

Waiting, I watched young workers push packaging around. Glazed and at their
first job, they came alive when friends bolted through the door. I huddled in my
parka, afraid of being recognized. I should have been sipping afternoon tea at
the Plaza's Palm Court or drinking with a colleague at the St. Regis. What was I
doing at McDonald's in the middle of my life?

''Ninety cents'' the waitress murmured, checking the surroundings for eligible
males.  ''What is this,?'' I asked belligerently. My danish had been delivered
in a large plastic mummy case.  ''You ordered it,'' she replied, opening the
cover. ''One danish and coffee.'' ''Why isn't it on a plate?'' I whined. ''This
plastic box is a waste. What will happen when our petroleum sources really dry
up? All this wasted plastic.''

I moaned and shook my head.  Jolted from her romantic reverie, she stared at me
and retorted, ''People like it this way.'' I paid her, slunk out and devoured my
snack in the car.  Refreshed, I tossed the bag into a garbage pail. Things could
have been worse. The day might have offered no opportunity for oration.  I had a
few minutes to get to the bank. Another withdrawal, since my last freelance
check would be late in arriving. The form filled, signature properly inscribed,
I handed over my passbook with a smile.

''Would you please endorse the back of this slip?'' the confident teller asked.
I hesitated. ''But you already have my signature on the front.'' ''We want you
to get used to endorsing checks and slips in front of us,'' she explained
patiently.  ''But it's my signature and it's my book,'' I answered.  ''We don't
know you,'' she tried again with some irritation.  ''I don't know you,'' I
answered haughtily. ''I've been coming here for 16 years. It's you tellers who
change.'' I quickly scratched my signature with a flourish.  Money in hand and
frowning, I returned to the car. No one would dare rob the old bat. I yanked my
knit hat over my ears and checked the rear-view mirror. A glance revealed an
angry stare, my own.

''Where to?'' I asked myself. Then, smiling, I knew. I'd uncovered a new
occupation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 6, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Helping the Wrong Veterans

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 450 words


In the name of sustaining the military, President Reagan has exempted every
major program for older veterans from his budget cutting. But to reduce
spending, he wants to kill every Federal program designed to help the youngest
war veterans, those who served in Vietnam. We think he has it backwards.

Keeping the Vietnam veterans' programs would, at minimal cost, continue
important services for people who need them badly. It is the traditional
veterans' programs that are ripe for pruning.

Federal programs specifically for veterans of Vietnam were set up piecemeal in
various agencies over the past 10 years. Cutting them would not save much -about
$70 million of the $48 billion in proposed budget reductions. The funds support
education, health care and employment services for the Vietnam veterans, and
sustain a network of 91 counseling centers where veterans help each other deal
with the psychological scars of the war that ended in 1974.

There is no doubt that such scars remain. A recent Government study shows that
Vietnam veterans continue to have significant psychological problems and
difficulties at work. Another study shows that women who served in Vietnam still
struggle with depression, anxiety and painful flashbacks from the war.

Meanwhile, the traditional benefit programs for veterans that Mr.  Reagan wants
to maintain almost intact now cost the nation $25 billion a year and employ some
200,000 people in the Veterans Administration. In fact, billions could be cut
from these programs.

Most veterans are not, as the Administration suggests, among the nation's
''truly needy''; they do not belong in the President's safety net. Study after
study has shown that large sums paid out to the nation's 30 million veterans
have nothing to do with true need - or even with service-connected illness or
disability. And some veterans' benefits are simply too generous or duplicative
of services that the Government already provides through programs like Medicaid
and Medicare.

As Budget Director David Stockman wrote in 1975, most of the Veterans
Administration budget ''benefits ex-servicemen who do not have even a hangnail
to show for their harrowing experiences in uniform.'' A recent analysis by the
conservative Heritage Foundation has suggested that $8.2 billion a year could be
cut by focusing benefits on the neediest veterans.

President Reagan has lamented the nation's ''shabby treatment of those who
returned'' from Vietnam. If he means it, and also wants to save money, he would
do better to put their special programs first.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 6, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1030 words


By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt
MAKING SCENES. A Personal History of the Turbulent Years at Yale, 1966-79. By
Robert Brustein. 341 pages. Illustrated.  Random House. $15.

IN an uncharacteristically stuffy moment in ''Making Scenes,'' Robert Brustein
recalls, apropos of a public quarrel that Lillian Hellman had some years ago
with Diana Trilling, how he felt ''fear for a while that intellectuals might
soon be remembered more for their arguments than for their achievements.'' If he
really did feel afraid - and one can just picture Mr. Brustein lying awake at
night in a cold sweat over the eventuality - then he has not done much in this
memoir to allay such a fear.

For throughout this ''personal history'' of his 13 years as dean of the Yale
School of Drama and director of the Yale Repertory Theater, which he founded,
Mr. Brustein seems always to be engaged in argument. The book begins with the
arguments he carried on with the incumbent staff of the drama school over his
determination to professionalize the institution, and it moves into low gear
with his arguments with the rather conservative New Haven community over the
avant-garde productions he began staging at his new repertory theater.

It picks up speed and heat with the arguments he carried on first with the drama
school student body and then with the Yale community at large when he
discovered, during the campus upheavals of the late 1960's, that his cultural
radicalism and opposition to the Vietnam War were not consistent with the
political and behavioral radicalism that some of his students and colleagues
were professing, particularly in their insistence that students have an equal
voice with the faculty in running the drama school's affairs.

And Other Adversaries

After that discovery he began to argue with students who refused to acknowledge
the legitimacy of authority and professionalism, with minority groups who
believed their claims for justice superseded those of art and free speech and
with the majority of the Yale faculty, which, Mr. Brustein felt, was too
reluctant to draw lines beyond which rebellious students should not be allowed
to go.

Then, when things began to settle down at Yale, he found himself arguing with
theater critics, foundation executives, populist opponents of cultural elitism,
university proponents of affirmative action and faculty members worried about
the drama school's apparent indifference to Yale undergraduates. Finally, Mr.
Brustein gets into his biggest argument of all, the disagreement with a new Yale
president, A. Bartlett Giamatti, which led to Mr. Brustein's departure as dean
in 1979.

As a matter of fact, it would not be farfetched to construe ''Making Scenes'' as
a book written to settle this argument with Mr.  Giamatti, or indeed to take
revenge on Mr. Giamatti for Mr.  Brustein's dismissal from Yale. By planting an
early scene in which Mr. Giamatti appears to behave like a manipulative
hypocrite, the narrator goes out of his way to develop the president-to-be into
a mustache-twirling villain. And by far the best written and most dramatic
scenes in the book are those involving Mr. Giamatti's moves and Mr. Brustein's
countermoves in the chess game they played to determine the Yale Drama School's
future.

Yet if the book is in fact an act of revenge, it is at least a reasonably
high-minded one. Great pains are taken to define the larger meaning of the
disagreement between the antagonists -that is, the question of whether the drama
school should have been turning out professional theater people, as Dean
Brustein felt, or should have reoriented itself to the needs of Yale University
in particular and of educational theater in general, as Mr. Giamatti appears to
have believed.

And as an effective act of revenge, the book is effective. Mr.  Brustein goes to
great lengths to explain his ideals for the school and repertory company,
documenting, occasionally almost to the point of tedium, the reasoning that went
into every major production put on by the Yale Rep and the motive behind each of
Mr. Brustein's administrative acts. And he does a winning job of presenting
himself - almost always blaming himself when his moves turned out to be
blunders, deftly ridiculing himself whenever his behavior verges on the
preposterous and offering a most touching portrait of his wife, Norma, whose
death made the windup of Mr. Brustein's career at Yale all the more wrenching.

A Vital Center

Under Mr. Brustein's leadership, the Yale Drama School became a vital center of
theatrical activity, an intellectually and creatively stimulating place, which
attracted many of the people on whom the future of the American stage depends.
This reviewer can personally testify to that from having attended the drama
school in the pre-Brustein days when it was virtually a creative and
intellectual wasteland, although it did fulfill its purpose of graduating scores
of people equipped to teach the traditional rudiments of theater.

On the other hand, one can see even from Mr. Brustein's own account how the
drama school must have come at least to seem like a locus of disdain for the
rest of the university and how Mr. Brustein's expression of his ideals and
intentions must have rubbed many people the wrong way.

Whether Mr. Brustein or Mr. Giamatti was right, or whether there was actually a
serious dispute between them, depends finally on one's judgment of the true aims
of a university drama school. But in ''Making Scenes,'' Robert Brustein proves
that his fear for the reputation of intellectuals was ungrounded. He shows that
they can argue endlessly and still be remembered for their achievements, indeed
that endless argument is virtually a prerequisite for achievement.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Robert Brustein

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 7, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FOUNDATION URGES EFFORTS FOR GENERAL EDUCATION

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 3; Science Desk

LENGTH: 613 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 6


A private foundation is urging the revival of general education in American
colleges, saying the pendulum has swung too far toward specialized studies that
feed ''self-preoccupation and social isolation.''

Students need exposure to courses that ''concentrate on those experiences that
knit isolated individuals into a community,'' the Carnegie Foundation for the
Advancement of Teaching said in a 72-page report released today.

The foundation said that today's college students, who grew up in the
''fractured, atomized world'' caused by the assassinations of John F. Kennedy
and Martin Luther King Jr., by race riots, Vietnam and Watergate, ''are more
committed to their personal futures than to the future we face together.''

General education ''is rooted in the belief that individualism, while essential,
is not sufficient,'' Ernest L. Boyer, the foundation's president, and Arthur
Levine, a senior fellow of the foundation, said in the report.

'Notion of Social Cohesion'

''This is not to say,'' they added, ''that general education should promote
intellectual conformity or a sterile acquiescence to the notion of social
cohesion.''

The report said: ''All students should come to understand that they share with
others the use of symbols, membership in groups and institutions, the activities
of production and consumption, a relationship with nature, a sense of time, and
commonly held values and beliefs.''

Their report will be discussed by 200 academicians and scholars at a two-day
conference at the University of Chicago starting tomorrow.  A growing number of
the nation's colleges are already requiring students to take a common group of
courses, or ''core curriculum.''

Mr. Boyer, who was the United States Commissioner of Education from 1977 to
1979, and Mr. Levine have long been advocates of restoring such a curriculum.

''On campus after campus, there is no agreement about the meaning of a college
education,'' they said, adding that many general education programs are
''bankrupt.''

'Hodgepodge of Uses and Misuses'

''In the absence of clear-cut goals, a hodgepodge of uses and misuses of general
education have been spawned, and a plethora of incoherent programs have
emerged.''

They said general education should cut across academic disciplines and not be
restricted ''to a study of specialized courses or to randomly selected themes.''
Many Western civilization courses ''offer students a breathless dash through
history, an eclectic muddle or a study of one isolated period devoid of its
connections to the present,'' they said.

Among other things, the report made these points:

- Students should not only be literate, but ''understand how language has
evolved'' and ''how feelings and ideas are conveyed through literature.'' They
should explore music, dance and the visual arts, as well as television and
computers.

- Students should learn that ''all life forms on the planet earth are
inextricably linked'' and be taught not just the basic facts of science but its
methods of trial and error.

- History studies should emphasize ''the convergence of social, religious,
political, economic and intellectual forces.''

- Students should study how societies decide what is right and wrong, enforce
values and react to unpopular beliefs.  The report said that colleges must be
more willing to hire faculty members ''who may have nontraditional credentials
and who think in new, creative ways.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 8, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Winburn Thomas, 75, Missionary In the Far East and Asia 30 Years

SECTION: Section D; Page 23, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 120 words


The Rev. Dr. Winburn T. Thomas, a missionary for the Presbyterian Church in the
Far East and Asia for more than three decades, died of a heart attack on April 1
in Dacca, Bangladesh. He was 75 years old and had formerly lived in Larchmont,
N. Y.

Dr. Thomas retired as a missionary 10 years ago but returned to the Far East two
years later as a volunteer in development work. In 1971 and 1972, he was
associated with the National Council of Churches in relief and rehabilitation
programs in South Vietnam.

Dr. Thomas graduated from the University of Oklahoma, the McCormick Theological
Seminary in Chicago and received a doctorate from Yale University.

He is survived by two sons, Kenneth and Robert of Brooklyn.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 9, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

61 Vietnamese Reach Malaysia

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 41 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia, April 8


A boatload of 61 Vietnamese refugees landed on the northeast coast of Malaysia
and those aboard complained of raping and looting by Thai pirates, police
officials said here today.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 9, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HOLLYWOOD WRITERS TO VOTE TOMORROW ON A STRIKE

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 19, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 759 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, April 8


The threat of a strike by Hollywood's television and movie writers, which has
been lurking in the wings since last October, moves to center stage this week.

Members of the Writers Guild of America will decide Friday whether to call a
strike against movie studios and television networks for Saturday. Few people in
Hollywood think the strike can be averted, and the guild has already alerted its
members to be prepared for mass picketing of 20th Century-Fox on Monday.

However, Melville Shavelson, guild president, said that he felt ''expectant''
rather than beleaguered, and was also happy that ''management has been
forthcoming in many areas we didn't expect.'' Negotiations will continue through
Friday noon, and management's ''last best offer'' will be brought to a Friday
night meeting of guild members.

Networks Working Ahead

The guild contract expired March 1 but was extended with the provision that
either party could terminate the extension on two weeks' notice. The guild gave
notice March 27 because, according to Mr. Shavelson, it had become concerned
about the recent heavy stockpiling of scripts, particularly by television
producers. He feels the stockpiling will ''drastically reduce'' the guild's
bargaining power.

Such shows as ABC-TV's ''Fantasy Island'' and ''The Love Boat'' are already 6 to
10 scripts ahead for next season; NBC-TV and CBS-TV are keeping in reserve 2 to
4 of the 24 segments they ordered this year of ''Archie Bunker's Place,'' ''One
Day at a Time'' and ''Diff'rent Strokes.''

The central issue between producers and writers is payment for original
programming for pay-television, video cassettes and videodisks, the same issue
that caused a strike of 60,000 actors last summer. After a nine-week walk-out
that cost an estimated $47 million a week in lost expenditures for goods and
services, the actors settled for 4.5 percent of the gross revenues of original
programming made for pay-television, payment to begin after a program had played
10 exhibition days on every pay-television system within one-year.

Cost-of-Living Rise Asked

Mr. Shavelson has vehemently said that the writers will not settle for the
''lousy deal'' the producers gave the actors. As of early this week, the
producers had offered the writers only 1.2 percent on the same 10-day formula.
''That formula could mean 720 free plays per picture,'' Mr. Shavelson said.

In the other key area of difficulty, the guild is asking for a cost-of-living
increase in writing minimums, while management is offering 5 percent a year for
television writers and 7 percent for screenwriters. ''I think they think
television writers eat less,'' Mr. Shavelson quipped.

The guild is no stranger to long strikes, having gone on a 14-week strike in
1953 to get television residuals, a 20-week walk-out in 1960 over the issue of
compensation for theatrical films sold to television and a 15-week strike in
1973 that was basically over control of hyphenates, those writers who also
produce or direct. A spokesman for the producers, who preferred to remain
anonymous, said that the mood of the writers' negotiating team seemed curiously
enigmatic and not particularly militant.

Paramount Starts 8 Films

Next Wednesday, the producers will be negotiating with a historically less
militant guild, the Directors Guild of America, whose contract expires June 30.
Although the directors have never gone on strike and their president, George
Schaefer, insists that they do not wish to strike this year, Hollywood is
already deep into preparations for a directors' strike.

Paramount Pictures will be rushing eight movies into production during the next
10 days - including ''Some Kind of Hero,'' starring Richard Pryor as a Vietnam
veteran now driving a cab, and ''An Officer and a Gentleman,'' a Navy story with
a love theme starring Richard Gere and Debra Winger - in order to finish
principal shooting by June 30. Ray Stark, producer of ''Annie,'' pushed that
Columbia picture schedule up to April 29 so that ''Annie'' will be finished with
its location shooting in New York and New Jersey by June 19.

According to Michael Eisner, president of Paramount, ''There's probably never
been an industry better prepared for a strike than this one is.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 9, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: RICHARD THOMAS SPARKS 'FIFTH OF JULY'

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1101 words


IF there were any doubts about the merits of Lanford Wilson's ''Fifth of July,''
they can at last be put to rest. Thanks to a major casting change, which was
officially unveiled to the press this week, the full beauty of this comedy has
finally been uncorked. And how much beauty there is! Mr. Wilson's powerful play
seems infinitely wise about love and family, about America's past, present and
future. When this show opened at the New Apollo last November, one could see its
broad outlines and its woolly humor, but were audiences sobbing for much of Act
II? They are now.

The difference is Richard Thomas, the television veteran who has succeeded
Christopher Reeve in the pivotal role. In ''Fifth of July,'' Mr. Thomas not only
gives a performance that gracefully builds to shattering dimensions, but he has
also sparked the rest of the company to follow suit. In every case, the
supporting cast is rewarding the text with greater depth than before. The show
plays so differently that repeat viewers may wonder at first if they've wandered
into the right theater.

Though written earlier, ''Fifth of July'' is a sequel to Mr.  Wilson's
''Talley's Folly.'' Once again, the setting is the Talley family farm in
Lebanon, Mo., but the year is now 1977. Mr. Thomas plays Kenneth Talley Jr., a
paraplegic Vietnam War veteran who wishes to sell his family homestead to a pair
of visiting friends from his old college days at Berkeley. Because the buyers
want to convert the farm into a recording studio, the play's central plot
recalls ''The Cherry Orchard.'' But Mr. Wilson's reach doesn't end there. Along
the way, he dredges up two overlapping love triangles (one homosexual, one
heterosexual) from Kenneth's past, stirs the ashes of the 60's antiwar movement
and illuminates a tri-generational family saga.  What's more, he accomplishes
all this without ever pleading causes or asking his characters to debate issues.
On the surface, ''Fifth of July'' is a bubbly Independence Day idyll, rhapsodic
with sunshine, moonlight and the hum of crickets.

Perhaps the most impressive aspect of Mr. Wilson's talent is his ability to
empathize with all kinds of people. In ''Fifth of July,'' one finds characters
of every sex who range in age from 13 to 64. The playwright's compassion for
each of them never stops - and neither does his wit. Mr. Wilson somehow packs
his play with comic asides that cover phenomena as varied as eskimos, U.F.O.'s,
Betty Grable, botany, Columbia Records and Karl Marx. Even so, he never loses
sight of his delicate theme. Without waxing sentimental or camouflaging painful
realities, Mr. Wilson shows how people can rise from personal and political
bitterness to embrace what is good in one another and their country.

At the center of it all is Mr. Thomas's Kenneth. Having lost his legs in a war
he didn't want to fight, this man no longer believes in anything - his family
legacy, his teaching career, his devoted lover. In the evening's early stages,
Mr. Thomas shuts out Kenneth's past and future with an unsettling, yet amusing,
pose of detached cynicism. Once drugs and booze start to bring back his old
memories, the actor reveals his feelings of anger and loss, lashing out with
red-faced fury at friends who betrayed him. When Kenneth finally must realize
that he, too, shares in the blame for his fate, his anger curdles into
self-hatred: He topples from his crutches to the floor in a convulsion of grief
and rage that seems to rip open the festering wounds of a generation. Mr. Thomas
makes us believe that the healing process, at long last, can truly begin.

In November, ''Fifth of July'' was dominated by Swoosie Kurtz's hilarious
performance as the visiting Gwen, a drug-sotted copper heiress with aspirations
to rock stardom. Miss Kurtz's character is now in proper perspective, and her
performance is even better. Gwen's dizzy, bombed-out wisecracks arrive from
behind an ill-disguised haze of almost tragic psychological disorientation: When
Miss Kurtz gets her big laughs, she saddens us at the same time. Her final,
unexpected triumph over her emptiness - once an amusing plot twist - has been
transformed into a cause for cheering.

But everything has been transformed. Jeff Daniels, as Kenneth's quiet lover, can
now play opposite a real partner. Jonathan Hogan, as Gwen's predatory husband,
and Mary Carver, as old Aunt Sally, have become full participants in the
confrontations of Act II; they have a tremulous complexity that wasn't there
before. Joyce Reehling as Kenneth's sister, an ex-militant who now finds
politics ''a crock,'' has added grace notes of earthiness to her rightfully
angry role. As Miss Reehling's illegitimate daughter, Amy Wright is a volcanic
Tennessee Williams girl-woman who at times even passes for a 13-year-old. Ben
Siegler, a newcomer to the cast, is no less funny as the play's one
unreconstructed 60's freak.

If Mr. Thomas has been the catalyst for these changes, credit must also be given
to the entire company, and to Marshall W. Mason, the director. Together they
have created the tightly-knit community that Mr. Wilson's familial, democratic
vision demands. Given the scant competition, it's probably disingenuous to say
that ''Fifth of July'' now stands as the best American play of the Broadway
season. With all due respect to ''Talley's Folly,'' why not throw in last season
as well?

Beauty Uncorked
FIFTH OF JULY, by Lanford Wilson; directed by Marshall W. Mason; setting by John
Lee Beatty; costumes by Laura Crow; lighting by Dennis Parichy; sound by Chuck
London. Presented by Jerry Arrow, Robert Lussier and Warner Theatre Productions
Inc. At the New Apollo Theater, 234 West 43d Street.  Kenneth Talley Jr.
.....................Richard Thomas Jed Jenkins
..............................Jeff Daniels John Landis
............................Jonathan Hogan Gwen Landis
.............................Swoosie Kurtz June Talley
............................Joyce Reehling Shirley Talley
.............................Amy Wright Sally Friedman
............................Mary Carver Weston Hurley
.............................Ben Siegler

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Richard Thomas

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 9, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

TV: 'PARK PLACE,' NEW CBS COMEDY

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 727 words

DATELINE: CBS


TV is apparently determined to stuff most of its new series into a New York City
setting. On the drama front, ''Nurse'' does its Thursday night rounds at a
fictional New York hospital. As for situation comedies, Monday's ''The Two of
Us'' offers the host of a Manhattan television talk show coping with her new
English butler, and tonight's two new entries -''Checking In'' at 8 P.M. (which
wasn't available for previewing) and ''Park Place'' at 8:30 P.M.  (which was)
-have Big Apple addresses. William S. Paley might justifiably expect a thank-you
note from Mayor Koch.

''Park Place'' takes place in a legal aid clinic the way ''Barney Miller'' takes
place in a police station. That is, the business at hand is secondary to the
collection of characters, both the weekly regulars and those who wander into a
single episode. The boss in ''Park Place'' is David Ross (Harold Gould), a
rather distinguishedlooking man who oversees his staff of looney underlings with
a calm suggesting intense desperation. When all else fails, he looks out the
window at a nearby building in which a young woman seems constantly to be
undressing.

The other workers include Howie (Don Calfa), who is looking among the huddled
masses for the Constitutional case that will be his ticket to a lucrative
partnership; Frances (Alice Drummond), the secretary with a compulsion to
announce that ''Jesus loves you''; Ernie (Cal Gibson), the receptionist who
witheringly gives waiting clients a number ''much like in a bakery''; Aaron
(Lionel Smith), a disabled Vietnam veteran who is skeptical about Frances's
religious message; and Jeff (David Clennon), who is strange only in that he
appears to be sensible.

With this core group deftly introduced and established, the premiere episode is
constructed around a Mrs. Rothman, played deliciously by Florence Stanley.
Arriving at the office, she announces sweetly that she has just murdered her
husband. This isn't a police station, of course, but she explains that ''I
wasn't sure what was proper.'' An avid televsion watcher, she is especially fond
of Lawrence Welk and ''S.W.A.T.'' Why did she shoot her husband? It seems they
had an argument over whether to have chicken or a roast for dinner. As she
reasonably argued, the chicken was already thawed.

The devising and producing of ''Park Place'' is credited to Reinhold Weege, who
also wrote the first episode. Peter Bonerz's direction unearths enough appealing
daffiness to make the series at least promising.

Tonight at l0:30, WNET-TV, Channel l3, is carrying ''Broken Arrow,'' a half-hour
documentary out of San Francisco station KQED-TV. Produced by Jonathan Dann and
Stephen Talbot, the program recently won a George Polk Award for local
reporting. The words Broken Arrow constitute the Pentagon code for a nuclear
weapons accident. The subtitle of this report is: ''Can a Nuclear Weapons
Accident Happen Here?'' Specifically, here is the San Francisco Bay area.

The producers quickly establish that the area is indeed a major storage and
shipment site for nuclear weapons. They also get the Pentagon to acknowledge
that the number of previously admitted accidents, pegged officially at l3, was
too low. The new total is 26, plus others that ''cannot be discussed for
political or security reasons.'' Retired Admiral Gene LaRoque, who used to
command ships carrying nuclear weapons in the bay area, warns bluntly: ''We can
expect to have a nuclear accident of a very severe nature certainly in the
not-too-distant future.''

In the process of compiling the documentary, the producers and their cameraman,
Fred Cook, were offically detained by the Navy for filming outside the Concord
Naval Weapons Station. Their film was confiscated by the Federal Bureau of
Investigation. After six hours, however, it was determined that national
security had not been violated. The men were released and the film was returned,
defusing a First Amendment confrontation. ''Broken Arrow'' raises a number of
important security and information questions. They are still being answered, in
San Francisco and Washington.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

End of Counseling Units For Veterans Criticized

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 248 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 9


The Veterans Administration was involved in a dispute today over its a decision
to close storefront counseling centers for Vietnam veterans despite agency
concerns, disclosed yesterday, that up to a million of the veterans might still
suffer stress, depression and other psychological trauma from combat.

The Reagan Administration has decided to close the 91 centers Sept. 30 for a
saving of $31 million in the agency's $24 billion budget. A report by the Office
of Management and Budget this week said, ''A nationwide system of outreach
centers is not a cost-effective way of reaching the remaining veterans in need
of help.''

But a confidential V.A. evaluation of the readjustment centers, prepared in
November but not made public, praised the two-year-old program, under which
52,000 Vietnam veterans have received counseling and advice from fellow
veterans.

At a hearing of a House Veterans Affairs Subcommittee, Dr. Carl W.  Hughes, the
veterans' agency's assistant chief medical director for professional services,
said that the centers had helped men who might otherwise shun veterans'
hospitals.

Representative John Paul Hammerschmidt of Arkansas, the subcommittee's senior
Republican, predicted that Congress would override the budget office decision.

Opposition also came from Robert O. Muller, executive director of Vietnam
Veterans of America.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 27, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 781 words


By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt
LOVE, DAD. By Evan Hunter. 407 pages.  Crown. $12.95.

THE various sections of Evan Hunter's 16th and latest novel, ''Love, Dad,'' are
called ''1968,'' ''1969,'' 1970,'' ''1971'' and ''1979.'' In the background,
naturally enough, are Vietnam, John Updike's ''Couples,'' the moon landing,
Chappaquiddick, Woodstock and the Pentagon Papers.

In the foreground, Melissa (Lissie) Croft, the 17-year-old daughter of a
prosperous photojournalist and his speech-therapist wife, is confined for a
month to her prep-school campus for dormitory hijinks and for having been
present at party where marijuana was smoked.  Though Lissie's dad keeps her
company for two of her confinement weekends, he fails to persuade the school's
headmaster to lift her sentence. When the sin of this failure is compounded by
Dad's refusal to indulge several other of Lissie's whims, she resents her doting
father and begins to slide.

Was Vietnam a Curse?

First, she starts smoking marijuana in earnest. Then she drops out of school to
live with the shiftless rock musician she has met at the Woodstock Festival.
Then she runs off to Europe via San Francisco without troubling to inform her
parents of her whereabouts. Pretty soon, she's hitching her way to India,
writing intermittently and giving her parents fits.

Meanwhile, the friends are getting killed in Vietnam or are committing suicide.
Dad has taken up with a young concert flute player because Mom resents his
having stunted her career and pleads a headache whenever he wants to have sex
with her. And, almost choruslike, a couple of silly psychoanalysts keep spouting
oversimplified explannations of everyone's bad manners.

What is going on here? Is Mr. Hunter simply painting a portrait of the dismal
era? Or does he subscribe to one of the many theories that keep cropping up in
his story - that Vietnam was the cause of it all, that it was simply a case of
the old resenting the young, that the parents were hypocritical what with all
their drinking and adultery and that the kids saw through them and felt
disillusioned, or that it was all just a natural case of generational conflict?

I'll have to admit that Mr. Hunter had me fooled for a while.  Partly because of
the silly psychoanalysts and all those hints of other theories that might be
operating, and partly because the narrative subtly downplays until very near the
end the real causeand-effect mechanism at work, it took me the length of the
novel to understand what is really the trouble between Lissie and her father,
and to catch the double meaning of the title, ''Love, Dad.'' This was probably
dumb of me, considering the heavy hints one can see in retrospect. But then, I
enjoy being fooled by a story.

The only trouble is that as long as one is fooled, one assumes that Mr. Hunter
is only trying to paint a panoramic portrait of the era.  And his scenes and
epistolary exchanges are just not strong enough to hold one's interest for their
own sake. There are a couple of excepions of course, like the night scene at the
Woodstock gathering in which Lissie's new boyfriend is inspired to recite the
Chorus's speech from ''Henry V'' that precedes the Battle of Agincourt. But in
general, the major incidents in ''Love, Dad'' give one the feeling that Mr.
Hunter is trying to make some point and hurry on.

Part of the Story

On the other hand, once you have caught on to what the author is up to, the
whole point of the novel seems overspecific. What's worse, it seems in
retrospect to endorse that familiar bar-thumping claim that the whole trouble
with the world in the 60's and 70's was that the people who grew up in the
Depression were trying too hard to protect their children from what they
themselves had gone through.  This claim may well have been accurate, but it was
only part of the whole story.

Still, for all its failings, ''Love, Dad'' succeeds rather well in capturing the
frustration of a father who loves his daughter and can't understand why he is
losing her, why she keeps evading and lying to him, and why the more he tries to
appeal to her the more he seems to alienate her. And for all I know, it catches
the daughter's point of view just as well. The novel may not be exactly
visionary in its prose or in its conception of those now familiar scenes of the
period. But it's clever enough to manipulate our emotions nonetheless.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Evan Hunter

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 12, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TWO NOVELS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1106 words


HOME GROUND By Cecelia Holland.  371 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $13.95.
THE OFFICERS' WIVES By Thomas Fleming.  645 pp. New York: Doubleday & Co.
$15.95.

By JANE LARKIN CRAIN

NRAGED and disillusioned after separating from her lover of 10 years, the
heroine of ''Home Ground'' - 34-year-old Rose McKenna, veteran of the
counterculture, hardcore pothead, sometime writer and woman in need of a respite
- abandons her life in Los Angeles and seeks refuge with her brother, the owner
and head of a communal ranch in the wilds of northern California.

River Ranch, peopled by a collection of leftovers from the 1960's, quickly
reveals itself to Rose as a poor excuse for Utopia. The collective is riddled
with petty rivalries and dissension, her brother sinks daily to new lows of
alcoholism and irresolution, and the group's chief troublemaker, a mean-spirited
drifter named Preston, roams the ranch with a rifle, claiming to protect its
marijuana crop from would-be plunderers.

But Rose decides to bide her time at River Ranch, mostly for want of anything
better to do. She sets up a primitive camp for herself in the surrounding
wilderness, works furiously to put on paper the stories that crowd her head and
cultivates in secret her own garden of marijuana.

The people and events of River Ranch continue to impinge on Rose's imperfectly
constructed solitude: she takes a lover who brings her as much pain as
consolation; Preston shoots someone, whom Rose and her lover nurse back to
health; and, in what is portrayed as a mindless excess of bureaucratic zeal, the
local police raid the ranch and destroy the marijuana crop. Seeing her fellows
on the brink of economic ruin, Rose determines to share the profits of her own
secret cache with them, thus rescuing the collective financially. This gesture
of solidarity costs Rose her lover, who wants to take the money and run, but it
earns for her a rightful place in the commune.

At the heart of this novel is Rose's search for a shape her life can assume, a
quest she ultimately completes simply by deciding to remain at River Ranch:
''She understood herself here; she knew how to act.'' In the novel's terms, this
epiphany is meant to serve as Rose's declaration of independence; she stays at
River Ranch because she has found inner strength
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Jane Larkin Crain is a writer and critic whose work appears frequently in the
Book Review.
there, a setting for her life that holds a promise of moral and emotional
harmony. Her life seems to work at River Ranch.

It is a tribute to the author's considerable powers as a writer that this
narrative often manages to transcend its own confusions and implausibilities.
The author evokes with precision and control the essentials of emotional need,
rage, grief, consolation; scene after scene is fleshed out with the telling
details of speech, gesture, ambiance. Rose's relationship with her River Ranch
lover resonates with the poignant perversities of the heart; the natural
outlines of River Ranch are vividly drawn; each hapless member of the commune is
drawn with amplitude and particularity.

The fact remains, though, that the novel founders on the very seriousness and
integrity ascribed to the enterprise at River Ranch and to Rose's decision,
meant to be taken as an act of personal redemption, to throw in her lot with an
assortment of ne'er-do-wells who expect to support themselves by farming
marijuana. In her virtual sanctification of marijuana and in her effort to make
the enterprise at River Ranch stand as a venture in heroism, the author betrays
her novel's best qualities by exalting the ridiculous.

*

Thomas Fleming's 11th novel, which spans the political and cultural history of
America from the days of the Korean War to the aftermath of the Vietnam era,
opens with the weddings of three graduating West Point cadets and their college
sweethearts on a sunny day in June 1950.

In this sprawling tale of military life, the overlapping destinies of these six
characters unfold. Adam and Honor Thayer, Pete and Joanna Burke and George and
Amy Rosser embark on their careers armed with the kind of optimism and
self-confidence vouchsafed middle-class Americans in the 1950's. Adam Thayer,
who quickly sours on his beautiful but dim wife, establishes himself as a
brilliant strategist, serves valorously in the Special Forces in Southeast Asia,
but is eventually undone by his peers for his vehement opposition to the Army's
inept conduct of the Vietnam War. George and Amy Rosser, model military
politicians, scheme their way up through the ranks to become Mr. and Mrs.
General, not even daring to wonder if the struggle was worth it. Pete Burke
emerges as a pure warrior, a hero who endures the nightmares of combat in
Vietnam only to be broken by the failure of his marriage. His wife Joanna, after
undergoing a long period of moral and emotional disarray, is granted one of the
few personal victories in the novel.

Orchestrating these histories, Mr. Fleming is attentive to both the dynamics of
his characters' private lives and to the wider worlds in which they develop. He
dissects the workings of class and careerism, brings in an array of fully
realized supporting characters and captures vividly the ambiance of locales from
Japan through Saigon to Washington, D.C.

Thomas Fleming, who can be ranked with Herman Wouk and James Jones, has written
a satisfying novel that illuminates matters as diverse as the changing status of
women, the ordeals and consolations of marriage, the permutations of religion -
or any form of idealism - that arise in a rapidly changing culture and the
bitter fallout from America's involvement in Vietnam. He probes the heart of the
American experience over the last 30 years with subtlety and intelligence. He
mourns the loss of a sometimes arrogant but undeniably heady American innocence,
speculates on the promise of what endures and closes on a note of cautious
affirmation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 13, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NATION'S HOPES CARRIED ALOFT BY SHUTTLE

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1477 words

DATELINE: CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla., April 12


For two thunderous minutes this morning, a plume of white fire ascended into the
Florida sky before disappearing, and a mighty cheer arose from the crowd below.

''Goodbye, you beautiful Columbia,'' a woman yelled. In common with
approximately one million other spectators, she had spent a mostly sleepless
night swatting mosquitoes and listening to announcements. Tears streaming from
her eyes, she added, ''Come home to us safely!''

For everyone, the launching of the space shuttle had been a great show, as
beautiful as a Fourth of July fireworks display. Those who had come just for the
show went away satisfied.

For many, the launching was also welcomed as a reaffirmation of America's
ability to do difficult things.

Delay Caused Some Disquieting Doubts

For some, the snags that arose at the last minute Friday morning, causing a
postponement until today, left some disquieting doubts - doubts that were
amplified when it was learned that the shuttle had lost at least a few of its
heat-deflecting tiles.

But it seemed good to have American astronauts in space again.  In the 1960's
and early 1970's, Americans became accustomed to frequent manned space missions.
Then, abruptly, the thrilling countdowns, space dockings and moon landings
ended. They seemed to have gone the way of military invincibility, cheap fuel,
the sound dollar and even unquestioning confidence in American technological
supremacy.

In Laos there is a lusty festival every spring in which big skyrockets are
launched into the clouds over the Mekong River, symbolically impregnating the
sky to begin the rainy season. Laotians regard their annual rocket festival as a
traditional vehicle for rejuvenating society.

America had begun to look forward to its own rocket festivals, but after the
docking of an Apollo craft with a Soviet Soyuz, American manned flights ceased.
Before today, the last time an American astronaut had been launched into space
was 1975, the year the American flag was hauled down in Vietnam.

Unmanned Mission Lacks Some Drama

Of course, America's unmanned planetary probes, including the recent visits of
Viking craft to Jupiter and Saturn, have told us more about the solar system
than had been known throughout previous human history. But an unmanned mission
lacks the flesh-and-blood human drama that draws crowds and television viewers.

Meanwhile, many individual Soviet astronauts have logged more time in space than
that of all their American counterparts combined. The European Space Agency and
Japan are building rockets and conducting space experiments, too, some of them
beyond the current financial reach of America's threadbare space budgets.

One American scientist remarked last week, ''I'm going to hate telling my son
that we used to be first in space.'' Those were some of the reasons the space
shuttle looked so beautiful to so many.  A crowd of normally boisterous
journalists fell silent on the visit they were permitted to make to Columbia's
launching pad Thursday night. It was their last close look at the ship before
her maiden flight.

An Impressive Close-Up View

For an hour, they stood under the towering cluster of shafts making up the
shuttle. As a red sun slid beneath perimeter signs warning against the poisonous
snakes that infest the area, one billion candlepower's worth of floodlights
blazed against the gleaming white spaceship.

''It's a Hollywood movie set!'' one writer exclaimed. ''That's about the size of
it,'' an official of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration replied.

The 80,000 people who came to the Kennedy Space Center by special invitation
were similarly awed by this most complex of all spaceships, fitted together like
a jigsaw puzzle by 49 different corporations. Among the people invited were
retired astronauts, aerospace workers, socialites, novelists, government
dignitaries and all kinds of space buffs, many of whom had been here for earlier
space launchings.

Some seemed haunted by nostalgia for the great space shots of the 1960's and the
sense of American supremacy those missions had evoked.  The last week was a time
for reminiscences and reunions of old space hands at traditional hangouts like
Ramon's Restaurant in Cocoa Beach. The shuttle became an occasion to catch up on
news about families, jobs and scandals. It had been a long time since the last
reunion.

Changes in Nature of Space Flight

But despite the superficially familiar atmosphere here, there have been changes
in the nature of space flights since the mid-1970's.  This time, the real pilots
are not the two astronauts aboard Columbia but the committee of five on-board
computers that fly the ship and make all its essential decisions. So important
are those five ''redundant'' electronic brains that the mere failure of one of
them to communicate properly with the other four on Friday was deemed sufficient
reason to stop the launching.

Things have changed on the ground, too. In 1975, it took 500 people in the
firing control room to launch an Apollo mission. But because of the rapid
advance in the capabilities of computers, only 150 firing room experts were
needed to launch a ship vastly more complicated than the Apollo moon rockets. As
shuttle launchings become routine, the number needed is expected to decline to
50.

Everyone here worries about the safety and well-being of the two human beings
aboard Columbia, but the new stars of space navigation are computers.

NASA officials designated to talk to journalists seemed curiously out of touch
with the changes in emphasis from human to electronic piloting. After Friday's
postponement, they were barraged with questions about the precise technical
reasons for the unexpected failure of five computers to communicate. But while
they seemed eager to talk about the state of health and morale of the
astronauts, they seemed unprepared or unable to give detailed answers about the
computers, beyond vague analogies with unmeshing gears.

Pioneering Romance a Bit Lacking

Today's launching lacked some of the pioneering romance of earlier space
flights, and not only because its real captain was electronic rather than human.

The shuttle flight differed from the 1969 Apollo 11 flight to the moon as
markedly as the first 1940 lend-lease bomber flight across the Atlantic differed
from Col. Charles A. Lindbergh's epochal solo flight in 1927.

Today's launching, as NASA officials reiterated often, was not to achieve
novelty but to institute routine: a continuous American presence in space.

Within two weeks, if all goes well, Columbia will be back at her perch here,
being readied for the next shakedown flight late this year.

Some compare the shuttle's forthcoming career with the mail planes that opened
the first air routes in the 1920's and 1930's.  While the shuttle is not
surveying passenger routes, today's launching did mark the first time a human
being had ever been shot from the ground by solid-fuel rockets, the first launch
in which the main rocket was fueled by hydrogen and the first time human pilots
had gone into space on an unt@ested new spacecraft.

Endless Possibility of Mishap

The possibilities for minor or even catastrophic mishaps seemed endless, despite
the public confidence of NASA officials and the astronauts themselves.

To embark in the shuttle, the astronauts John W. Young and Robert L. Crippen
therefore needed as much courage and intelligence as the pioneers of civil
aviation. But future shuttle pilots, whose main work will be to instruct
machines to think and act, will be different in kind from the helmsmen who
insired the seafaring novels of Herman Melville and Joseph Conrad.

Some of the old pilots - Antoine de Saint-Exupery, Andre Malraux, Ernest K. Gann
and Lindbergh among them - created a literature of flight that long outlived
their aeronautical careers. Through them, readers came to feel both the
extraordinary beauty and om@nipresent danger of flight, and a generation of
people became ''air minded.''

It remains to be seen whether future shuttle pilots may create a literature of
space.  For that matter, the shuttle itself may fall short of hopes and
expectations. Heady predictions were made for the great zeppelins of the 1920's
and 1930's, too.

But whatever the case, America witnessed a great show today.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of liftoff

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 13, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

KENNEDY BIDS BIDS DEMOCRATS FIGHT REPUBLICAN 'REACTION'

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 919 words

DATELINE: ST. PAUL, Minn., April 12


Senator Edward M. Kennedy, sharing a platform with a possible Presidential rival
of 1984, told former Vice President Walter F. Mondale and 4,000 other Minnesota
Democrats yesterday that if the Democrats want to regain power they must
forthrightly oppose Republican ''reaction'' now.

''The answer to the problems of the Democratic Party is not for us to pretend
that somehow we are similar to the Republicans,'' he said, adding that Democrats
must ''reject the cliche of today which sees progressives as part of the past
and reaction as the wave of the future.''

''Now is not the time for silence, delay and ambiguity,'' he said.  The people,
he added, ''will return to the Democratic Party if we have not turned away from
them.''

Budget Cuts and Human Beings

In his most comprehensive prescription for his party since he failed to win its
Presidential nomination last year, Mr. Kennedy warned, ''We are talking about
more than abstract numbers or political maneuvers.''

The Reagan Administration's budget cuts demand opposition because they will hurt
''real human beings,'' he said, and ''the children who will be born retarded
because of cuts in protein supplements for their mothers do not have time to
wait for a better political opportunity.''

Mr. Kennedy preceded Mr. Mondale in addressing the crowd, a record for local
fund-raising efforts, that had been drawn by the chance to see the two most
talked-of 1984 Presidential possibilities compete for its favor.

But there was no overt competition. Though Mr. Mondale said of the Senator from
Massachusetts that ''we're inspired by your message and we're heartened by your
vision,'' he said for himself, ''I don't want to deliver a speech tonight,'' and
he used the occasion instead to praise Minnesota Democrats and thank the party
here for helping him and former President Carter carry Minnesota in 1980.

Compassionate Government

''I would rather lose with Minnesota than win without my state,'' he declared.
''Even though we lost the Presidency and the Vice Presidency, you stayed with
me, and I will be grateful for that as long as I live.''

Mr. Mondale came no nearer to discussing the range of issues Mr.  Kennedy had
raised than to say ''I am absolutely convinced the American people did not vote
against compassionate and caring government on Nov. 4.''

Mr. Kennedy argued that it was up to the Democrats to stand for that kind of
government now and not to try to adapt to election returns by running ''out on
those who have always depended on our party as their hope and their help.''

He ridiculed the view that the Republicans had become the party of ideas. It was
Democrats, not Republicans, who achieved deregulation of the airline and
trucking industries, he said. And it was the Democrats, he continued, who
''reduced the burden of Federal rules on small business and cut excessive
paperwork and red tape'' and fought for effective anticrime measures ''without
infringing on civil liberties.''

As for the heralded new ideas of the Republicans, he said, ''Their new ideas
seem new only because they are so outworn that we have nearly forgotten them.''
Today's Republican criticism of occupational health and safety laws recalls
their past opposition to the minimum wage and maximum hours, he said, just as
their policies on arms control and Central America recall ''the most dangerous
days of the cold war and their endless enthusiasm for Vietnam.''

Sense Carried to 'Nonsense'

And supply-side economics, he said, originated with the investment tax credit
enacted by Democrats in 1962. Its current Republican version, in the three-year
tax cut advanced by the Reagan Administration, ''is a sensible notion carried to
the point of nonsense,'' he said.

''We can all agree on the need for carefully targeted incentives for investment
and productivity,'' the Senator continued. ''But their untargeted and
inequitable tax cut is a caricature of such incentives. It is presented as
economic patent medicine that can cure all our economic ills in three pleasant
swallows over the next three years.''

One of the most enthusaistic bursts of applause in the cavernous St. Paul Civic
Center came when Mr. Kennedy called for new controls on pistols, not always a
popular stand in Minnesota. After offering gratitude for President Reagan's
recovery from the assassination attempt of March 30, Mr. Kennedy said:
''Something else must be said before the latest flash of gunfire fades from our
conscience into the pages of history. At long last, we must take the cheap
handguns from the violent killers, the criminals and the psychopaths.''

''We have aboslutely no intention of taking rifles and sporting pistols from
hunters,'' he said. ''We will not limit the right of law-abiding citizens to
defend their families.''

The potential rivalry for the next Democratic nomination was a continuing
undertone. Before Mr. Mondale spoke, he was presented with a suitcase, a
reference to his explanation in 1974, when he eschewed a Presidential candidacy,
that he did not want to spend two years living out of suitcases and motel rooms.
In response to the gift, Mr. Mondale said he had recently seen some of those
motel rooms and ''they've all been redone and look a lot better.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Edward Kennedy

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 13, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 916 words


By John Leonard
GEORGE ORWELL: A Life. by Bernard Crick. Illustrated. 473 pages. Atlantic-
Little, Brown. $17.95.

REVIEWING a book by Lewis Mumford on Herman Melville, George Orwell said: ''The
criticism which sets out to interpret - to be at the deepest meaning and cause
of every act - is very well when applied to a man, but it is a dangerous method
of approaching a work of art.  Done with absolute thoroughness, it could cause
art itself to vanish.''

Bernard Crick, a professor of politics at the University of London and the
editor of Political Quarterly, takes this admonition so seriously that he omits
most of Orwell's art from his new biography; he will stick with the evasive man,
who was not above ''rearranging'' his own past.

The result is absorbing but odd. Mr. Crick admires Orwell without quite trusting
him. Orwell, according to Mr. Crick, was a political theorist on the order of
Hobbes and Jonathan Swift, a late-blooming socialist of invincible sincerity,
''a revolutionary in love with the Edwardian era'' and - in the words of V.S.
Pritchett - ''a man who went native in his own country.''

Still, he fiddled with his facts. Prep school was not so awful as he said it
was. He was more ambivalent than he would have us believe about his role as an
imperial policeman, he had his doubts about the Communist Party before he went
to Spain, he was rather tardy in coming to support England's rearmament against
the Fascist threat, his broadcasts during the world were insufficiently
anticolonial and so on.

Citizen as Participant

In no sense does Mr. Crick seek to debunk. His business is to polish the warts
after he has exposed them. If Orwell occasionally fudged the truth about his
Burmese days, the famous hanging, being down and out in either Paris or London,
well, the fudging was in the service of a higher cause. That cause was to insist
on the idea of the citizen as an active and angry participant in the culture. If
he rarely addressed, in his journalism, such subjects as music, theater, art,
schools or travel, it was because politics - power and class - were more
important.

The myth - that once upon a time there was a decent man - doesn't suffer. Mr.
Crick still subscribes to it, and so do I after having read his inquest. The
absent father was really absent, St. Cyprian's and Eton actually happened, Burma
was traumatic, Paris and London smelled, Spain was disgusting, and the Stalinoid
English left was just as despicable as he described it. Orwell did, indeed,
teach himself ''the plain style'' for which he is deservedly celebrated, and he
taught himself in the only way a writer can -by doing it over until you get it
right. When he began to write, an acquaintance recalls, ''he was like a cow with
a musket.''

And he was a patriot. And he could be accused of what is now called homophobia;
see his several references to ''the pansy left.'' And, from school days, he was
obsessed with the rats that would ultimately attack Winston Smith in ''1984.''
And, exactly as we expected, he was influenced decisively by the fiction of H.G.
Wells, Jack London and other adventure books for boys, not to mention Blake and
Shakespeare.

Mr. Crick is straightforward about the women in Orwell's life, without being
very instructive; perhaps the widow's thumb is on his tongue. But he never
engages the women in Orwell's fiction, and this brings me to my impatience with
a book as plainspoken and toughminded as Orwell himself would have wished, even
though Orwell didn't want any biography at all.

The Invented Orwell

Mr. Crick's Orwell is a fish in political waters, a thin and glittering polemic.
Art is either humbug or reserved for another hand and another net. Mr. Crick is
pulling on a single line. Women, humor, loneliness, self-doubt, envy and
vengeance are mere ripples or shadows on the narrative. They vanish. Mr. Crick
has invented the Orwell he needs.

So do we all. Mary McCarthy, in ''The Writing on the Wall,'' was inclined to
think that Orwell would have supported United States adventurism in Vietnam.
Raymond Williams, in his ''Modern Masters'' monograph, suggested that Orwell had
somehow ''tied the knot'' of Western thinking into a cold-war bind. George
Woodcock seems to feel that Orwell was always a closet imperialist. The
Freudians look for the missing father, the Stalinists would prefer that the
anarchists were among the missing, and Noel Annan, in the current New York
Review of Books, invokes Orwell to explain what is happening today to the
British Labor Party.

He can't be Plastic Man, certainly not in the service of so many disparate
causes. He invented himself, as each of us should have done, as Melville did.
Maybe we invent him, instead of inquiring into our own specifications in
designing a new personal model. He was, on the whole, right about the 20th
century, but he was also and ultimately an artist. Those rats are real, and so
was the aspidistra. They are real because the citizen who imagined them invented
a way of writing it all down that was better than anybody else could manage at
the time. The country in which he went native was the English language.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of George Orwell

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 14, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

N.A.A.C.P. ASSETS REAGAN BUDGET PROFITS THE RICH AT EXPENSE OF POOR

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times UF14

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 610 words

DATELINE: PITTSBURGH, April 13


The board of directors of the National Association for the Advancement of
Colored People sharply attacked the Reagan Administration's budget proposals
today and submitted its own ideas for combating inflation and unemployment.

The board, concluding a weekend meeting, also called for the dismissal of Jeane
J. Kirkpatrick as the chief United States representative at the United Nations
because of her meeting early in March with South African military officers. In
addition, the rights organization urged President Reagan not to create a
''Western Hemisphere Vietnam by sending arms to El Salvador.''

Benjamin L. Hooks, executive director of the N.A.A.C.P., said the Reagan
Administration budget proposals were based on ''an Alice in Wonderland approach
that takes from the poor and gives to the rich.''

He said the proposals had brought despair to millions of people and that the
N.A.A.C.P. ''will move against this iniquitous treatment.''

Higher Tax Exemption Urged

In a resolution adopted today, the association proposed that the exemption from
income taxes that is granted to a family of four that earns no more than $7,400
annually be extended to include families of four with incomes up to $10,000.
Association officials said that 43 percent of black working people did not earn
more than $10,000 a year.

It said the higher exemption would offset cuts in programs that are designed to
aid the working poor and would also make up increased Social Security taxes.

The N.A.A.C.P., which said it had called on a number of economists to help draft
its alternative proposals, maintained that its plan, if adopted, would fight
inflation by increasing productivity. Such policies, the association estimated
in a 12-page executive summary, would result in a Federal deficit of $55 billion
to $60 billion, in contrast with the $45 billion deficit projected by the
President.

The organization also advocated requiring private employers to train members of
minorities for jobs and to provide day-care centers for children of employees
before they could qualify for tax benefits on investment and capital equipment.

Help for Small Business

Other proposals included the promotion of research and development and
technological innovations, aggressive enforcement of antitrust laws, and help
for small businesses.

Mr. Hooks said there was no proof that a deficit budget caused inflation and he
asserted that the President's monetary policies ''are tilted against the poor.''
While conceding that the N.A.A.C.P.  did not hope to achieve all its economic
goals, he described the 72-year-old organization as a ''long distance runner''
that in the past won major victories through persistent efforts over long
periods.

The organization also proposed channeling all Federal funds for education
directly to public school systems to assure quality desegregated public
education. It said voucher systems or tuition tax credits for parents whose
children attended private schools were not acceptable.

The call for Mrs. Kirpatrick's dismissal was based on the fact that South
African military delegations are not permitted to visit the United States on
official business. This is rooted in a ban on the sale of military equipment to
South Africa.

The association described reports of her meeting with Lieut. Gen.  P.W. Van der
Westhuizen, chief of South African military intelligence, and three aides as
''an insult to the intelligence of American people.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 15, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

A SPCECK PIERCES HORIZON

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 932 words

DATELINE: EDWARDS AIR FORCE BASE, Calif., April 14


First came the sonic boom announcing that it was near: two loud shocks that
reverberated like cannon blasts across the desert floor.

Over the public address system, the voice of Mission Control read out the
orbiter's speed and altitude, now rapidly declining: ''Columbia, you're right on
the money, right on the money,''

''Where is it, where is it?'' perhaps 10,000 voices asked at once from the edge
of Rogers Dry Lake.

Dropping to the Desert

Then, the sharpest eyes on the ground, squinting upward, saw it: a tiny, moving
speck high over the horizon, dropping fast through a dusty, luminescent haze
that rose from the surface of the parched dry lake like a cloudy mist. Suddenly,
the tension broke.

''There it is!'' the first voice said, and then others. The spectators, in
clusters and large crowds, some who had been up all night waiting, broke into
cheers as the space shuttle orbiter Columbia glided gracefully toward the
hard-packed, cream-colored desert runway.

''Incredible!'' shouted Joseph Lyon, who sells plywood for a living. ''Can you
believe it?'' he asked, as he recorded the Columbia's descent with his portable
home video recorder.

Continued Cheers From the Crowd

The Columbia, perhaps only 60 seconds after it had first been seen from the
desert gallery, touched down, and the spectators continued to cheer.

The craft then rolled to a stop and seemed, from a distance, to become mired in
a shimmering lake, a desert mirage that gave the illusion that the prehistoric
dry lake was no longer dry.

Even before the Columbia had stopped its landing roll, a convoy of 21 service
vehicles whose operators had been been training for that moment for almost three
months, was moving in a phalanx toward the craft, stirring up a cloud of dust
like a battalion of tanks moving over the Sahara before battle.

''It's a great day for the country,'' Albert Wheelon, an aerospace executive in
the crowd said when he spotted a friend. ''America's confidence ought to be up
100 percent.''

It was a thought expressed repeatedly in the crowd of spectators, estimated by
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration at more than 250,000, who had
come here to watch a spaceship for the first time return from orbiting the earth
and land like an airplane.

Almost nostalgically in some cases, many people who were interviewed after the
landing spoke of the event as a reason to be proud of the country again after a
period of setbacks for the national ego.

''It can't help but make you feel proud of your country,'' said Beverly Rogers,
a dental assistant, who waited for the landing last night in a motor home with
her husband, Joe. ''You know, with Vietnam, and the hostages and everything
else, it's nice to think we are ahead of other people on this; we need something
for our morale.''

Dr. Alan Lovelace, acting administrator of NASA, made much the same kind of
boast at the brief ceremonies after the landing in which the astronauts John W.
Young and Robert L. Crippen predicted that their flight was merely the beginning
of a series of major triumphs in space for the United States.

''This flight,'' Dr. Lovelace said, ''proves once again that the United States
is No. 1 in space.'' Although the Columbia's flight seemed to stir a spirit of
national pride among the spectators here, it was the prospect of witnessing a
spectacle that brought many of them here to begin with.

Merely to be present at a historic first, many spent hours under an
often-punishing sun on a sage-brush-covered desert while dodging rattlesnakes to
catch a glimpse of the orbiter's brief glide to earth.

Talk of Cosmic Things

But the event was turned into a kind of social happening by many.  They camped
out in tents, drank beer, sunbathed in swimsuits, and, last night, listened to a
country and western band provided by the Air Force. And, in at least a few
instances, they talked about cosmic things.

''Last night,'' George Cook, a mechanic who lives in suburban Los Angeles, said,
''we stayed up all night and looked at the stars. They were beautiful, and we
thought about how someday a spaceship like the space shuttle will go to one of
those stars out there.''

While most members of the general public such as Mr. Cook watched the Columbia's
landing from a primitive desert site, more than a thousand other people, guests
invited by NASA and other Government agencies, were given somewhat better
accommodations.

The space agency set up two large circus-style tents at the edge of the dry lake
and placed television sets in them to give the guests, including several
Congressmen and such entertainment celebrities as Roy Rogers, Leonard Nimoy and
the actress Nastassia Kinski, a choice of watching the landing under the hot sun
like everyone else or inside the tent. Most opted for the view outside.

At the post-landing ceremonies, the two astronauts, looking fresh and untired,
received congratulations from senior NASA officials and Secretary of the Air
Force Verne Orr, who represented President Reagan, and they were given a state
decoration, ''The Order of California,'' from Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr.

''We're not too far,'' Mr. Young told the audience, ''from going to the stars
and Bob and I are mighty proud to be part of that evolution.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: 2 photos of space shuttle landing

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 15, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THUMPING CANNON SOUND A HERO'S TRIBUTE TO OMAR BRADLEY

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1005 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 14


General of the Army Omar N. Bradley served the cause of patriotism one final
time today as he was accorded a military hero's funeral and was laid to rest as
the last of the five star officers to command in World War II.

The remains of the general, who died Wednesday at the age of 88 after an
extraordinary military career of seven decades, were interred at Arlington
National Cemetery in spring sunshine amid green fields of buried warriors from a
century of wars past.

The general's body was borne by caisson from Washington, moving to the grave at
brisk military march time in a ceremony of thumping cannon, glistening bayonets
and billowing flags that seemed as much triumphant as dolorous.

In accordance with his wishes, a brassy, jaunty version of the infantry song,
''Dog Faced Soldier'' was played at the graveside to complement the more hymnal
''Onward Christian Soldiers.''

Brings Defeat to Germans

Veteran officers and enlisted men watched from the sidelines of the procession,
marking the day's funeral as a special postscript in their own memories of the
catastrophic war that engulfed the earth four decades ago. It was 36 years ago
this month that General Bradley, as field commander of the largest group of
armies in American history - 1.3 million men - signaled the defeat of the German
armies as he joined the Russian armies from the Eastern front on the Elba River.

''I respected him for his integrity in handling people,'' said J.C. Sossoman of
Morganton, N.C., a gray haired infantry veteran who went to National Cathedral
for the service. ''He's the last, a man of great compassion,'' declared the
former enlisted man who had fought in the Battle of the Bulge under General
Bradley.

''The essence of the man was the integrity of his decisions, and his broad
understanding of human beings, his willingness to identify with them,'' said
another gray-haired veteran, Richard C. Hagan, a retired major general.

This city of desk-bound generals did not turn out in large throngs for the
passing procession of the flag-draped coffin followed by a riderless dark Morgan
horse, ''Majestic Kid,'' caparisoned in heroic fashion, with the empty boots of
a fallen warrior reversed in the stirrups. But there was a heavy mix of military
uniforms to be seen among the onlookers, and sharp salutes were offered at the
final passing of the general.

Dignitaries at Cathedral

Vice President Bush, President Reagan's wife, Nancy, and a large congregation of
family, Cabinet officers, members of Congress, military officers and diplomats
gathered at the cathedral for the Episcopal service of the Burial of the Dead.
The display of brass and braid included 71 three- and four-star generals,
according to the Army military district of Washington, which conducted the
ceremonies.

The military honors - a 19-gun salute, swooping warplanes, the crack of rifle
volleys - contrasted vividly with the requiem gentleness observed at the
cathedral.

''All we go down to the dust,'' the congregation prayed as the silvertoned
casket rested in the cathedral, ''Yet even at the grave we make our song:
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.''

General Bradley's final alleluias took the form of some old songs played by
bands along the march. There was ''Army Blue,'' familiar to old West Point
graduates, and ''Where the Turf Meets the Surf at the Old Del Mar.''

Buried Beside First Wife

The general was buried next to his first wife, Mary, beneath a marble stone
marked with a circle of five stars. The grave is set in a gentle slope marked by
the stones of other ranking officers, a galaxy of multi-starred graves set with
larger stones than the rank and file graves stretching uniformly below toward
the Potomac.

As six gray horses pulled the caisson up to the grave site, birdsong sounded
from up in a twisted old oak tree to the east of the grave. Precision marching
teams were massed to the rear, and a long line of gray-haired veterans of the
Army and the wars shook hands and smiled as they gathered together. General
William C. Westmoreland of the Army, retired, who once commanded the troops in
Vietnam, came arm in arm with Bob Hope, the comedian who has made a specialty of
entertaining troops in wartime and peacetime.

General Bradley's widow, Kitty, a slight woman all in black, hugged and touched
many of the gravesite mourners. Prominent among these was one retired general in
civilian trenchcoat, Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr., Secretary of
Defense Caspar W. Weinberger and W. Averell Harriman, the longtime diplomat and
Presidential envoy.

Words of Soldier-Poet

''Give our brother Omar peace and rest in this grave,'' Chaplain Francis L.
Sampson, a retired Army general, prayed above the open earth. At the cathedral
he had cited the general by reading the Gospel of Matthew on the good centurion
who turned to Jesus to plead for help for a wounded soldier. Chaplain Sampson
also read from a soldier-poet, Joyce Kilmer: ''Who fights for freedom goes with
joyful tread.''

The three hours of prayer, funereal marching and military homage made up the
most elaborate funeral for a military man since the death of Dwight D.
Eisenhower, the general and President, 12 years ago. It amounted to an event of
military pride as much as grief.

''Time like an ever rolling stone bears all its sons away,'' the congregation
prayed in one theme. Then the Army Chorus sounded the second theme in the form
of the West Point Hymn, sung for the tactician and teacher who graduated with
the class of 1915.

''They are here in ghostly assemblage,/ The men of the corps long dead,'' the
chorus sang, stirring the crowd. ''Grip hands, tho' it be from the shadows/
While we swear, as you did of yore,/ Or living, or dying to honor/ The Corps,
and the Corps, and the Corps.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Gen. Omar Bradley's coffin

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 15, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Health Group Sees No Need To Ban Herbicide 2,4,5-T

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 122 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 14


There is no convincing evidence of human health damage from the herbicide
2,4,5-T to support efforts to ban it, a consumer health group said today.

The American Council on Science and Health said that its examination of previous
studies of 2,4,5-T, used in the Vietnam War as a component of Agent Orange, had
concluded that the chemical was not a hazard to humans if used properly.

The conclusions were challenged immediately by environmental groups and others
pressing for a total ban on the chemical, which some Vietnam veterans say has
caused illness and birth defects.

The council, a nonprofit group based in New York City, generally takes a more
politically conservative view of health issues than other study groups.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 15, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PRIDE ON THE MOJAVE;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 968 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 14


To the millions of citizens who watched the space shuttle Columbia glide to its
flawless landing today, the newest space exploit was sweet vindication of
American know-how.

The automobile industry may be beset by Japanese competition and the military
establishment may feel that Moscow has gained the advantage of momentum in the
strategic arms race, but the nifty twowheeled touchdown in the Mojave Desert
provided a quick, jubilant lift for a nation that has been suffering from
technological selfdoubt. After the shuttle's many frustrating delays, the
successful flight was something to cheer about.

President Reagan caught that mood when he told the two Columbia astronauts,
''Through you, we all feel like giants again.''

'A Shot in the Arm'

''This flight,'' added H. Guyford Stever, chairman of the engineering assembly
of the National Research Council, ''proves that, in spite of the ups and downs
of international public opinion about our technological capabilities, we know
how to do some things very well.''

''Our technology isn't falling to bits,'' Mr. Stever said. ''Our technology is
strong and that's a shot in the arm.'' In Washington, Government planners
calculate the spinoff benefits from the Columbia mission in terms of scientific
exploration or military competition with the Soviet Union in space. But to
others, a potentially more important impact is psychological, even if it is only
temporary.

''No matter what it's doing scientifically and technologically, which is
enormous, the strongest impact of the space program is in the psychological
arena,'' observed Patrick Caddell, the pollster who served former President
Carter. ''It's certainly going to help the public mood. We haven't done anything
like this in quite a while.  This gives us very positive feelings.''

But while other social scientists acknowledge the immediate sense of elation and
achievement stirred by the mission's broad publicity, they contend that these
effects will be fleeting.

''The fervor will die down in a few days,'' said Amitai Etzioni, director of the
Center for Policy Research here. ''Our polling and interviews indicate that it
is not a genuine, deep emotion that has been tapped here - as the abortion issue
does or the civil rights movement did in the 60's. This is remote and not
consequential to people's lives.''

Even with all the excitement generated by the pinnacle of public interest in
American space achievements, the landing on the moon in July 1969, Dr. Etzioni
and others saw no convincing evidence that the Apollo missions of that era had
lasting impact on the nation's mood, perhaps because the bitterly divisive issue
of Vietnam overwhelmed other concerns.

Nor did incumbent Presidents like Lyndon B. Johnson or Richard M.  Nixon harvest
significant political dividends from the space achievements then. Now, political
scientists are doubtful that President Reagan will benefit greatly either, for
he merely happens to be in office when a project begun years ago has come to
fruition.

The tangible message that Mr. Reagan drew from the mission dealt more with the
nation's ability to compete with Moscow and with friendly Western nations. ''Our
friends and adversaries are reminded that we are a free people capable of great
deeds,'' he said to accolades from abroad.

Back to Practicalities

But some others question how the obvious success of such highly specialized
equipment as the Columbia's computers, instrumentation and propulsion components
can have a practical effect on an economy hobbled by flagging productivity in
many fields and a widespread public frustration with inflation.

''It is a rather remarkable achievement,'' Carl N. Degler, a social historian at
Stanford University, remarked. ''But I think the whole space effort has waned as
an achievement and become more commonplace, and people wonder what impact it has
on their daily lives. Technology as an answer for revitalizing the American
economy is not going to be affected by the achievement of Columbia.''

Along with the short-term alarm or euphoria that has greeted various Soviet and
American space exploits, there has been a national uncertainty toward space
adventure since the dawning of the space era. In 1957, Neil H. McElroy, who was
Secretary of Defense under President Eisenhower, dismissed the Soviet sputnik as
merely ''a neat scientific trick'' though the nation was to be shocked into
pouring money into scientific education in an effort to catch up.

'Nuts' to National Prestige

Mr. Eisenhower himself remarked, after leaving office, that ''anybody who would
spend $40 billion in a race to the moon for national prestige is nuts.''

But President Kennedy turned the moon race into the moral equivalent of war,
using it to rally the nation's spirits and deliberately defining space as one of
the principal vistas of his New Frontier.

''We choose to go to the moon in this decade and do the other things,'' Mr.
Kennedy declared, ''not because they are easy, but because they are hard,
because that goal will serve to organize and measure the best of our energies
and skills, because that challenge is one that we are willing to accept, one
that we are unwilling to postpone, and one which we intend to win.''

Millions may feel a similar sense of pride and determination in the wake of the
Columbia's successful mission, but political Washington is too hard-headed today
about budget cuts and fighting inflation for any leader to sound a ringing echo
of Mr. Kennedy's clarion call.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Robert Crippon 2 photos of space shuttle

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 15, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

YOUNG DRIFTERS IN AMERICA: WHO WHERE AND WHY

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS E. KNEELAND

SECTION: Section A; Page 28, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1885 words


Thousands of young middle-class and upper-middle-class Americans, reared and
nurtured with the high expectations of parents and teachers, slip each year
through the cracks of a conventional society.

Some are drifters, from school to school, from job to job, from town to town.
Others stay closer to home, eking out an existence from easily obtainable, and
as easily abandoned, unskilled work. Reared in comfort, if not in affluence,
they are unwilling or unable in their early adult years to come to terms with
the presumed responsibilities and demands of the world in which they grew up.

''I couldn't imagine myself at all -under any conditions - I just plain can't
imagine myself being in a situation where I'm making money for someone else - I
just won't do it,'' said Peter Johnston, 26 years old, who said his father had
risen from ''dirt poor'' to an executive vice presidency in a major
pharmaceutical company. Mr.  Johnston said that he had been accepted into
several good colleges in the Northeast but preferred supporting himself by
playing his guitar, doing photography and writing music and advertising jingles.

No one knows the number of the youths like Mr. Johnson, except that there are a
lot of them. They are not as visible as they were in the 1960's era of the
flower children or in the years of protest against the war in Vietnam. They are
not likely to be set far apart from their more conventional peers by dress, by
hair style or by strong political views.

And no one would pay them much attention these days if it were not for the
events of the last two weeks.

Suspect in Shooting of Reagan

But John W. Hinckley Jr., accused in the assassination attempt against President
Reagan, is one of them. The 25-year-old son of a wealthy businessman in
Evergreen, Colo., he had apparently been drifting since dropping out of college
after seven years of fitfully trying to finish at Texas Tech University.

Edward M. Richardson, 22, who was indicted last week and charged with
threatening Mr. Reagan's life, would seem to be another. The son of a retired
postman in Drexel Hill, Pa., he was arrested in New York City with a loaded
pistol. An indictment charged that he had left a letter in a New Haven hotel
room that said he would ''finish what Hinckley started.''

By all accounts, Mr. Hinckley and Mr. Richardson appear to be on the extreme,
perhaps emotionally disturbed, edge of the youthful subculture.

''These people who have been shooting at our people are peculiarly not exemplary
of a class,'' said John L. McKnight, associate director of the Center for Urban
Affairs and Policy Research at Northwestern University in Evanston, Ill., in
discussing assassinations and assassination attempts in general. ''They are
peculiarly a nonclass phenomenon.''

Distortion of American Dream

He contended that apparent efforts to gain recognition through assassination
attempts reflected a personality that had not willingly spurned success, but
rather had been frustrated in attempts to achieve it. ''They tend to be people
who are expressing the American dream in this wildly distorted way,'' he said.

Dr. Lawrence Z. Freeman, chairman of the Institute of Social and Behavioral
Pathology at the University of Chicago, pondering the persistent subculture of
middle-class and upper-middle-class young adults who walk away from the dreams
of their fathers and mothers, cautioned:

''They're not all Hinckleys. We don't want to scare all the uppermiddle-class
people in Lake Forest.'' But noting the success-oriented demands on the parents
in many communities like that wealthy Chicago suburb, which was the site of the
recent Academy Award-winning movie ''Ordinary People,'' he went on: ''These are
really deprived kids, emotionally deprived kids.''

Recalling the difficulties of the well-to-do family depicted in the movie after
a suicide attempt by a son who was guilt-ridden after his brother's drowning in
a sailing accident, Dr. Freedman said he thought it was difficult for people who
were economically less fortunate to understand that apparently successful people
had problems, too.

Stress of Enviable Situation

''There is a lot of strain and stress that the very circumstances that are
envied create,'' he said.  The children in such families, especially those whose
parents have risen to affluence through their own efforts, have particular
problems, he said.

''Born into affluence, you're a useless person,'' he added.  ''Affluence in
itself is not an end.'' David Riesman, a Harvard sociologist and educator
emeritus, said that he had been troubled for some time by the lack of attention
paid to affluent young people. In his latest book, ''On Higher Education,'' he
described them as being among those ''who may detest ambition and competition
and prefer (an often gently cushioned) downward social mobility.''

Those Who Do Not Attend College

In the book, which was published last fall, he said, ''No one seems to have made
a study of the proportionately small, but numerically sizable group of students
from well-to-do families who are not attending college.''

''There's nothing special about these people,'' he said in an interview. ''They
may not be interesting. They're just bright and, on the whole, decent.''

As an educator, Mr. Riesman attributed much of the phenomenon of young dropouts
from the affluent society to the attitudes of teachers and administrators in
high schools and colleges.

''Envy I would not ignore,'' he said,''a good deal of envy.  Teachers are not
themselves middle class, they're lower-middle class. They come from the working
class.''

Choosing to Drop Out

He said he was convinced that many such teachers had the attitude that ''if
these kids want to mess up, that's their lookout.'' But a sampling of young
adults who acknowledge that they fit the pattern of dropouts from conventional
middle-class and upper-middleclass society indicates that many feel they made
the decision by choice, not because of any lack of concern on the part of
teachers or parents.

Although there are still some remnants of those once known as street people in
such university towns as Berkeley, Calif., Cambridge, Mass., and Madison, Wis.,
and a few aging flower children in San Francisco and hippies in Taos, N.M., the
favorite magnets of the new youth subculture appear to be such comfortable spots
as Aspen, Colo., Key West, Fla., Santa Fe, N.M., and Provincetown, Mass.

Drugs and other hedonistic pursuits were certainly part of the older youth waves
as they are for many in the new group. But the current breed, perhaps because of
the tighter, inflationary economy, seems less likely to be living off the land
and more likely to have at least part-time or temporary jobs.

Tension With a Stepfather

Among those who have drifted into Key West is Chris Walker, 26, a bartender, who
said he grew up in an affluent Denver neighborhood of professional people. He
said tension grew between him and his conservative stepfather after he spent six
years going to college without getting a degree.

The stepfather, Mr. Walker said, had become a quadruple amputee in the Army but
had gone on to college and had become a successful lawyer.

''I'd say my stepfather is definitely discouraged,'' said Mr.  Walker, who
dropped out of school for good after having visited Key West on a Christmas
vacation. ''We barely talk. To him it represented even a greater disappointment
because of the fact of what he has overcome and where he has gotten and how he
perceives he got there.''

Mr. Walker said he had made seven false starts at getting a college degree but
had changed his mind each time.

Losing Interest in Projects

''If I feel like I have to do something, then I automatically don't want to do
it, and that's probably why I never got a degree,'' he said. ''When I first
started school, I started in art, and enjoyed doing art, but as soon as there
was a deadline, and a description of the project that had to be done and you had
to do it this way, then it no longer interested me, so I'd go on to something
else. That's what seems to be a cycle I'm experiencing so far.''

Recalling older family friends and relatives who had been unhappy in their
careers, Mr. Walker said: ''They put so much energy and effort into going to
school and becoming a doctor or a lawyer or whatever professionally, and then in
the end they didn't really enjoy it. My stepfather hated being a lawyer. I think
it's true of anybody who does something for a certain period of time. They just
get tired of it.''

In Aspen, Joe Dugas, 22, a bellman at the Continental Hotel, who worked on an
oil rig in New Mexico last summer, said: ''I like being open and free. To move
somewhere and then try to survive there. That's exciting. I left college because
I didn't have any goals. My goal is to be independent and work in spurts.''

Return to Hometown

Mr. Dugas, who was reared in a Minneapolis suburb and dropped out after a year
and a half in a junior college, said he planned to go back to his home town this
summer to try to make a living for a time as a house painter.

Although no one has any numbers, it is generally agreed by many outsiders and by
members of the youth subculture that the style of life attracts more men than
women.

One who was attracted is Susan Garsoe, 33, a ski instructor in Aspen.  ''I did
my thing,'' said Miss Garsoe, who was raised in Cumberland Center, Me., the
daughter of an editor on The Maine Times. ''I taught in Boston for six years in
public schools and at Simmons College. I came to Aspen for a week and decided to
stay. I thought I was expending energy and returns were minimal. I was tired of
living at the minimal and carrying 24 hours of responsibility. Now I'm free to
work as much as I want at whatever I want.''

No 'Goals or Faith in Myself'

Another member of the Aspen community is Craig Frankel, 22, who came from
Fairfield, Conn. He has been a ski racer, has worked in ski shops and has run
his own cleaning business called ''Clean as Snow.''

''I tried college but found it a waste,'' he said, ''since I didn't have goals
or faith in myself. I quit and traveled and worked and that has meaning. Now
after four years I'm going back to school in Denver and study business
administration.''

Although he is now planning to go back to school, Mr. Frankel, the son of a
doctor, is certain that he was right in dropping out as he did.

''Any society is set in its ways,'' he said. ''Society doesn't control us. We
change and society doesn't. That's where the problem begins. And that's why I
quit school and came out here.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 15, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Q&A

SECTION: Section C; Page 4, Column 3; Living Desk

LENGTH: 550 words


Q. I have often read that the ancient Romans used a powerfully flavored fish
sauce called garum. I have heard that it is still made today. Can you tell me if
this is so and how it is made?

A. A.J. McClane, in his Encyclopedia of Fish Cookery (Holt Rinehart and Winston,
1977), writes that the much-prized fish sauce of Vietnam called nuoc nam and
that of Thailand called nam pla are today's counterparts of garum. The sauce,
according to Mr. McClane, is made ''by placing ungutted whole fish in a heavy
brine solution in a container and exposing the mixture to the sun.'' When
fermentation results, the liquid is extracted.

Q. When I cook for company, I generally tend toward recipes that can be made
ahead and reheated. When I want to serve a dish such as chicken divan, which is
made with a white or cream sauce, I am frequently faced with a problem: Can
dishes made with a cream sauce be made ahead, refrigerated for several hours and
then baked and served?

A. There may be exceptions to the rule, but I believe that most dishes made with
a cream sauce can be assembled, chilled and reheated before serving. In the case
you mentioned, chicken divan (made with cooked chicken, cooked broccoli plus a
cream and cheese sauce) the chicken when reheated may be a trifle drier but to a
negligible degree.

Q. A few days ago, while preparing a dish that called for one cup of milk, I
discovered that there was no milk in the refrigerator.  There was, however, a
cup of half-and-half cream. Could the halfand-half have been substituted for the
milk? If so, should it be diluted with water? And can half-and--half be
substituted in recipes that call for heavy cream?

A. You can substitute half-and-half for both milk and heavy cream, but the
results of your dish will be different. If you substitute half-and-half for
milk, the end result will be far richer than called for. You could diminish this
richness by diluting the mixture with a little water, but I prefer diluting it
with a chicken, beef or vegetable broth.

If you substitute half-and-half for heavy cream, the result will be less rich.
Also, heavy cream when cooked down, as it is in many French recipes, tends to
thicken and become saucelike in its consistency. You will not get the same
saucelike consistency if you substitute half-and-half.

Q. I have a menu that I brought back from Italy last year. I can read most
Italian menus, but there is an item in the desserts of which I have no
knowledge. Can you tell me what sfogliatelle and arex are?

A. They are turnovers that are made, preferably, with flaky or puff pastry,
although a short pastry will do. The usual filling is made with a blend of
ricotta cheese, candied fruit, egg, vanilla and a pinch of cinnamon. The pastry
is cut into circles, the filling is added and another pastry circle is placed on
top and sealed all around. These are then baked until done.

Readers are invited to send in questions about food and cooking techniques to
Craig Claiborne, Food Editor, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York,
N.Y. 10036. Unfortunately, unpublished questions cannot be answered
individually.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Drawing

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 16, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENT REAGAN PARDONS 2 EX-F.B.I. OFFICIALS IN 1970'S BREAK-INS

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1172 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 15


President Reagan announced today that he had granted unconditional pardons to
two former officials of the Federal Bureau of Investigation who were convicted
of conspiring to violate the constitutional rights of Americans. The two men
authorized Government agents to break into homes in search of antiwar radicals
in the early 1970's.

Mr. Reagan said that W. Mark Felt, who was the second highest official in the

Text of Reagan statement, page A22.
bureau, and Edward S. Miller, who was chief of the intelligence division, had
served the bureau and the nation ''with great distinction.''

''To punish them further - after three years of criminal prosecution proceedings
- would not serve the ends of justice,'' the President said in a statement
released this afternoon by the White House.

Idea of White House

Mr. Felt and Mr. Miller had not formally applied for pardons.  Justice
Department and White House officials said that the pardons had been initiated by
the White House. The normal procedure is for a defendant to apply for such
clemency. Justice Department rules stipulate that before requesting a pardon a
person should wait three to five years from the date of conviction.

The two defendants, who were found guilty last November after a seven-and-a-half
week trial in Federal District Court here, were appealing their convictions.

They were were found guilty of authorizing bureau agents to break into the homes
of friends and relatives of fugitive members of the Weather Underground
organization in 1972 and 1973. The bureau was trying to find clues to the
whereabouts of Weatherman radicals who had taken responsibility for bombings at
the United States Capitol, the Pentagon and other public buildings.

Signed Before Shooting

Mr. Reagan signed the ''full and unconditional'' pardons on March 26, four days
before he was shot in the chest by a gunman. But Mr.  Felt, Mr. Miller and their
attorneys said that they had learned only today of the President's action. White
House lawyers said there was no particular reason for not having announced the
pardons before the shooting.

Mr. Felt, now 67 years old, who was acting associate director at the time of the
break-ins, said today that the pardons had ''tremendous'' symbolic value. ''This
is going to be the biggest shot in the arm for the intelligence community for a
long time,'' he said.

Mr. Miller, 57 years old, who had served in the bureau for 24 years, said that
the pardons were ''a very fine thing for the present F.B.I.'' because they would
erase any reluctance that agents might have to ''do their job 100 percent.''

John W. Nields Jr., the chief prosecutor at the Felt-Miller trial, said that he
was deeply distressed and surprised by President Reagan's action. ''Nobody spoke
to me about it,'' he said. ''I would warrant that whoever is responsible for the
pardons did not read the record of the trial and did not know the facts of the
case.''

Mr. Felt, who had served in the bureau for more than 31 years, said: ''I feel
very excited and just so pleased that I can hardly contain myself. I am most
grateful to the President. I don't know how I'm ever going to be able to thank
him. It's just like having a heavy burden lifted off your back. This case has
been dragging on for five years.'' He said that acceptance of the pardons did
not constitute an acknowledgment of guilt in any sense.

In his statement, President Reagan, recalling that Jimmy Carter had granted a
pardon to thousands of draft evaders of the Vietnam War era, said: ''We can be
no less generous to two men who acted on high principle to bring an end to the
terrorism that was threatening our nation.'' Most pardons are granted after a
defendant has served time in prison or paid a fine, but there were no such
conditions attached to Mr. Reagan's action today.

Thomas A. Kennelly, a lawyer for Mr. Miller, said at a news conference in his
office here that the pardons represented ''a complete expungement of any taint
of guilt.'' Further, he said, they ''restore both defendants to exactly where
they were before the indictment was returned'' on April 10, 1978.

Dropped Case Against Director

L. Patrick Gray 3d, Acting Director of the bureau at the time of the break-ins,
was indicted with Mr. Felt and Mr. Miller on the same charge. However, the
Justice Department formally dropped the case against Mr. Gray last December,
saying that the evidence against him was ''unconvincing.''

Mr. Reagan said the record demonstrated that Mr. Felt and Mr.  Miller had
''acted not with criminal intent, but in the belief that they had grants of
authority reaching to the highest levels of Government.''

Mr. Nields, the prosecutor at the trial, took exception to that statement,
saying that ''the pardons, done in secret, are trivial in comparison with the
jury verdict, which was done in a court of law pursuant to established
procedures.''

Neither Mr. Felt nor Mr. Miller had been sentenced to serve any time in prison.
Mr. Felt had been fined $5,000 and Mr. Miller had been fined $3,500.

Defense Attorneys' Plans

Mr. Kennelly said that he would move to have Mr. Miller's appeal dismissed.
Brian P. Gettings, an attorney for Mr. Felt, said that he and his client had not
decided whether to pursue their appeal.

Many law enforcement officials and former bureau agents had written letters to
Mr. Reagan and lobbied privately with his aides to encourage support for the
pardons. Mr. Kennelly, Mr. Miller's attorney, said that Edwin Meese 3d,
counselor to the President, had broached the idea of a pardon in a telephone
call to him on Jan. 30.

Thomas P. DeCair, a spokesman for Attorney General William French Smith, quoted
Mr. Smith as saying, ''I wholeheartedly approve'' of the pardons. Mr. DeCair
said that there had been consultations between Mr. Smith and White House
officials, but he declined to give details.

At their trial, Mr. Felt and Mr. Miller contended that they did not need the
approval of the Attorney General or President Nixon for the searches, which were
known in the bureau as ''black bag jobs'' and ''surreptitious entries.'' The
defendants acknowledged that no search warrants had been issued, but insisted
that the entries were justified on the ground of national security, because the
Weather Underground had connections to hostile foreign powers.

Asked today what he would do if confronted with a similar situation again, Mr.
Felt said, ''Knowing what I know now, I think I would authorize a surreptitious
entry where there was foreign involvement.'' However, he noted that the bureau
had clarified its procedures and now required the Attorney General's approval
for foreign-intelligence searches directed against American citizens.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of William French Smith (page A22) photo of W.
Mark Felt and Edward S. Miller

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 16, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

'Boat People' Exodus Increases, In Reversal of Last Year's Trend

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 83 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 15


The number of Vietnamese refugees arriving in Thailand and other Asian nations
increased last month, in a reversal of last year's downward trend, a United
Nations agency said today.

The High Commission for Refugees said 5,154 ''boat people'' were counted
arriving in East Asia or Southeast Asia in March, or 1,144 more than in
February.

Almost half those arriving in March came to Thailand; the others went mostly to
Malaysia, the Philippines, Indonesia and Hong Kong.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 16, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN STATEMENT ABOUT THE PARDONS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 326 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 15


Following is the text of a statement by President Reagan today on his pardon of
two former officials of the Federal Bureau of Investigation who had been
convicted of illegal procedures:

Pursuant to the grant of authority in Article II, Section 2 of the Constitution
of the United States, I have granted full and unconditional pardons to W. Mark
Felt and Edward S. Miller.

During their long careers, Mark Felt and Edward Miller served the Federal Bureau
of Investigation and our nation with great distinction. To punish them further -
after three years of criminal prosecution proceedings - would not serve the ends
of justice.

Their convictions in the U.S. District Court, on appeal at the time I signed the
pardons, grew out of their good-faith belief that their actions were necessary
to preserve the security interests of our country. The record demonstrates that
they acted not with criminal intent, but in the belief that they had grants of
authority reaching to the highest levels of government.

America was at war in 1972, and Messrs. Felt and Miller followed procedures they
believed essential to keep the Director of the F.B.I., the Attorney General and
the President of the United States advised of the activities of hostile foreign
powers and their collaborators in this country. They have never denied their
actions, but, in fact, came forward to acknowledge them publicly in order to
relieve their subordinate agents from criminal actions.

Four years ago, thousands of draft evaders and others who violated the Selective
Service laws were unconditionally pardoned by my predecessor. America was
generous to those who refused to serve their country in the Vietnam War. We can
be no less generous to two men who acted on high principle to bring an end to
the terrorism that was threatening our nation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 16, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Quotation of the Day

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 82 words


''Four years ago thousands of draft evaders and others who violated the
Selective Service laws were unconditionally pardoned by my predecessor. America
was generous to those who refused to serve their country in the Vietnam War. We
can be no less generous to two men who acted on high principle to bring an end
to the terrorism that was threatening our nation.'' - President Reagan,
pardoning former F.B.I. officials. (A22:1.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 16, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK;
THE SOUND OF ONE VOICE TALKING

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1510 words


HAVE you noticed lately that too many playwrights are suffering from
monologue-itis? No fewer than four recent Broadway shows - ''The Survivor,''
''Lolita,'' ''Rose'' and ''Fools'' -have featured central characters who insist
on stepping forward and addressing the audience as if we were old chums. Because
at least two of the characters in question (three, if you count the professorial
narrator of ''Lolita'') are teachers, there's not much fun in their asides. If
audiences really seek instruction at night, they're not so likely to go to a
play as to enroll at the New School.

Such monologues are as old as the theater, of course. As Peter Shaffer
demonstrates in ''Amadeus,'' they still have their theatrical uses. But ''The
Survivor,'' ''Lolita,'' ''Rose'' and ''Fools'' are all failures and, in each
case, the narrations serve only one, bizarre purpose: to call attention to
what's most wrong with each show. Like criminals who unconsciously leave
self-incriminating evidence at the scene of a crime, these plays' authors devise
monologues that inadvertently advertise their own worst-laid dramatic plans.

David Marshall Grant, the hero of Susan Nanus's ''The Survivor,'' opened that
Warsaw Ghetto melodrama by telling us that the forthcoming play would be
''unbelievable, but every word is true.'' Since he didn't take a polygram test,
we immediately suspected - and it was all too quickly confirmed - that ''The
Survivor'' was indeed unbelievable. ''Rose'' opens with a crackling scene in
which a mother complains about life to her schoolteacher daughter in a Midlands
wine bar. The mother (Jessica Tandy) is a fascinating kvetch; the daughter
(Glenda Jackson) seems a chirpy, even-tempered bore. No sooner does Miss Tandy
leave the stage than Miss Jackson steps forward and tells the audience, ''This
isn't about her - it's about me!'' Now why has Andrew Davies, the playwright,
written this defensive line? If you ask me, he's confessing up front that he
wrote his play about the wrong woman.

Edward Albee, in ''Lolita,'' apparently tried to use his narrator, the ''certain
gentleman'' played by that fine British actor Ian Richardson, to recreate the
novel's shifting voices. (There are at least three voices in the book, those of
Humbert Humbert, an academic named John Ray Jr. and the elusive Nabokov.) Mr.
Albee's device never worked; he generally used his gentleman to announce the
plot, just as he used the similarly loquacious narrator in his adaptation of
Carson McCullers's ''Ballad of the Sad Cafe.'' One of the first sentences out of
Mr. Richardson's mouth, however, was the pronouncement that ''we live in an age
of drugstore fiction - art as commodity.'' And what was the Broadway version of
''Lolita'' if not an attempt to turn art into a commodity? Mr. Albee raised an
unfortunate issue about his play even before he had gotten it rolling.

In Neil Simon's ''Fools,'' the main character who steps forward to talk to us
from time to time is Leon (John Rubinstein), a schoolteacher who has come to
cure a mythical Ukrainian village called Kulyenchikov of its curse of stupidity.
Though his asides are supposed to give this evening of Polish jokes some saving
moral, they instead raise questions about Mr. Simon's ability to concentrate on
his own play. At one point in Act II, Mr. Rubinstein contemplates the morons
around him and sentimentally announces, ''I love them all!'' But a little later,
he is telling us that ''there are so many Kulyenchikovs in this world,'' and his
accusatory, preachy tone suggests that such pockets of fools should be stamped
out. By making such self-contradictory remarks about the play's titular subject,
Mr. Rubinstein gives final confirmation to our growing suspicion about
''Fools'': Mr. Simon dashed off the play with no point in mind whatsoever.

A few weeks ago I went to the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater for a bona fide academic
monologue: a reading and lecture by the writer Tom Wolfe. Mr. Wolfe - who,
wearing glasses and his trademark white suit, looks not unlike Max Wright in
''Lunch Hour'' - talked about many subjects, including that old favorite, the
New Journalism. As always, Mr. Wolfe argued that novelists have abandoned the
great public subjects of our time - from, say, the Vietnam War to the space
program - to journalists. And he didn't think that was a good thing.  Why don't
novelists report on something other than their own lives, he asked, and start
reclaiming the contemporary world for fiction?

Mr. Wolfe might be pleased to learn that his directive isn't needed in the
theater. On, off and off off Broadway, there has been a nonstop flow of plays
that spring from journalistic premises. Over the last year or so, writers have
dealt with Vietnam and its aftermath (''Fifth of July,'' ''How I Got That
Story,'' ''Division Street,'' ''Still Life''), South Africa's apartheid (''A
Lesson from Aloes,'' ''Glasshouse''), nuclear holocaust (''Dead End Kids''),
teen-age prostitution (''Forty-Deuce''). There have been fictionalized stage
biographies of such recent real-life figures as Edith Piaf and Son of Sam.
There's also been that oddity, ''Real Life Funnies,'' a musical revue
purportedly based on ''verbatim'' transcriptions of everyday conversations
overheard among anonymous New Yorkers.

Yet, as Mr. Wolfe would probably agree, real-life events can't do all the work
by themselves in plays or novels. They must be filtered through the imagination
of a writer who can give them a shape that intensifies the reality, that invests
it with meaning and makes it compelling. While ''Real Life Funnies'' and ''Still
Life'' (not to mention ''The Survivor'') claimed to be strictly accurate
accounts of real events, none offered anything that looked remotely like truth.
Facts, yes - but facts that were spouted by non-characters who completely
severed the information they delivered from recognizable human experience.

If those nonfiction plays were shapeless - and roughly as involving as last
year's newspaper headlines - others have the wrong shape.  This year's
splashiest offender is ''Piaf,'' which disembowels its subject as coldly as if
she were Eva Peron (just as ''Evita'' treated Eva Peron as if she were Edith
Piaf). By consciously reducing virtually all of Piaf's friends, lovers and
associates to indistinguishable nonentities, Pam Gems, the playwright, deprived
her heroine of an emotional context and transformed her into a mere symbol of
abject self-destructiveness.

Had Mrs. Gems done a better job, she still could have had an unappealing Piaf,
if that was her wish, but she would have had one with the tragic dimension that
the creators of the film ''Raging Bull'' gave to their unappetizing real-life
protagonist, Jake LaMotta. In that movie, the antihero's psychosis is so
passionately presented that our ultimate moral judgment of him becomes,
dramatically speaking, a moot point. It says a lot about the difference between
''Piaf'' and ''Raging Bull'' that a minor character who figures in both works -
the middleweight boxer Marcel Cerdan - is far more vivid in ''Raging Bull,''
where he is on view for only a few moments and has no lines of dialogue.

''Piaf'' is worth seeing anyway -thanks to Jane Lapotaire, a powerhouse actress
who insists on filling in the emotional tissue that Mrs. Gems leaves out. Miss
Lapotaire, it must also be said, is just one of a crowd of superb actors who
have visited us from the British Isles this season. We've also had the pleasure
of watching Derek Jacobi (in ''The Suicide''), Ian McKellen and Tim Curry
(''Amadeus''), Roy Dotrice (''A Life''), David Bowie (''The Elephant Man'') and
Nicol Williamson (''Inadmissible Evidence''), as well as Miss Jackson and Mr.
Richardson.

By saying this I don't mean to slight American actors, who have contributed just
as many exciting performances to the season. Nor do I mean to say that British
actors are superior to their local counterparts. They're just different. If
there's a single characteristic that unites this season's visitors, it's that
they are all bland, if appealing-looking people; they're not the sort of actors,
like many American stars, whose personal magnetism alone could cause riots on
the streets. That's why, perhaps, we're all the more startled when they
transform themselves into charismatic figures on stage.

And, yes, that undying cliche is true: English actors do speak uncommonly well.
If a playwright really must have characters address the audience from down
front, Mr. McKellen, Mr. Richardson and Miss Jackson are definitely the people
to get.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Ian McKellen in 'Amadeus' photo of Glenda
Jackson in 'Rose'

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 16, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SAVINGS OUTFLOW IN MARCH A RECORD

BYLINE: By CLYDE H. FARNSWORTH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 3, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 493 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 15


Savers withdrew $1.7 billion more than they deposited at the nation's 4,400
savings and loan associations last month, the largest monthly outflow ever
recorded, the United States League of Savings Associations reported today.

A record outflow is also expected to be reported for March by the 460 mutual
savings banks. A preliminary estimate by the National Association of Mutual
Savings Banks places the figure between $500 million and $600 million of their
more than $170 billion on deposit.

Nevertheless, the $1.7 billion outflow from the savings and loan associations
represented well under 1 percent of the total estimated deposits of $520 billion
at these institutions.

The old outflow record of $1.5 billion, in July 1966, represented a higher
percentage of the total deposits at the savings associations then. That was a
period when interest rates and inflation began to increase, largely as a result
of the cost of financing the Vietnam War.

Leading Mortgage Lenders

Both the savings associations and the mutual savings banks, the nation's leading
mortgage lenders, are under severe earnings pressure because the average yield
on their mortgage portfolios is well under what these institutions pay to
attract and hold deposits.

William B. O'Connell, the league's executive director, attributed the record
outflow of savings last month to ''unfair competition from unregulated money
market mutual funds.'' The money market funds, which have attracted more than
$40 billion in new funds since Jan. 1, pay higher interest rates than the thrift
institutions are permitted to pay.

The league has asked Congress to give the Federal Reserve Board authority to
impose reserve requirements on the money market funds, which would result in a
lower rate of return to investors in these funds.

Marshall A. Kaplan, acting director of the office of planning and economic
research at the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, said that, while money market
funds might have been responsible for some withdrawals from the thrift
institutions, he thought another contributing factor was the high rate of
general consumption.

The League of Savings Associations reported mortgage lending by its members
during March at $4.4 billion, down 17 percent from the March 1980 level. For the
first quarter, the lending volume of $12.1 billion was 13 percent below the
first quarter of a year ago.

Mr. O'Connell said that mortgage money was likely to remain ''tight and very
expensive until the savings associations improve.'' Mortgage rates have again
started rising. One measure is the rate the Federal Home Loan Mortgage
Corporation pays for conventional mortgages at weekly auctions. This week the
rate was 15.812 percent.  Last week it was 15.724 percent, while a year ago the
rate was 15.306 percent.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 17, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ANTI-SEMITISM CHARGES CLOUD REAGAN NOMINATION

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 673 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 16


The Reagan Administration said today that the nomination of Warren S. Richardson
to a ranking post in the Department of Health and Human Services was ''under
review'' after allegations of anti-Semitism wer made.

Mr. Richardson, the Administration's choice to be Assistant Secretary for
legislation in the department, has been strongly criticized by a Connecticut
Congressman and two Jewish organizations for his work as general counsel and
chief lobbyist of the Liberty Lobby, a rightist group whose favorite targets
include Zionism, taxation and international aid.

He has also been criticized for a 1971 article on the Op-Ed page of The New York
Times in which he assailed the ''pro-Zionist'' press.  ''Liberty Lobby is a
racist, anti-Semitic organization,'' said Representative Sam Gejdenson, Democrat
of Connecticut. ''Its publication, Spotlight, espouses white supremacy and
refers to the holocaust as a Jewish myth. Richardson's association as chief
lobbyist for Liberty Lobby disqualifies him for any job in the U.S.  Government,
including his present one.''

Both Mr. Richardson and Liberty Lobby have denied that they are anti-Semitic.
Mr. Richardson, who is now a special assistant to Richard S.  Schweiker, the
head of the department, said in a statement released by the agency, ''I am not
now nor have I ever been anti-Semitic. I am deeply concerned and upset about
these allegations and will do everything I can to prove they are untrue.''

Remarks by Founder

The lobby, which was founded in 1955 by Willis A. Carto, says that it has 26,000
members and transmits radio programs to at least 500 stations in the country.
Its founder, Mr. Carto, has been quoted as discussing the feasibility of
deporting blacks to Africa and the ''mistake'' he said the United States had
made in going to war against Hitler.

Robert M. Bartell, chairman of the board of policy for the Washington-based
lobby group, denied in a telephone interview that the organization was
anti-Semitic. ''If it's not permitted to criticize a political movement, such as
Zionism, or a foreign nation, such as Israel, than free speech doesn't exist,''
he said. He added that the lobby supported a policy of ''neutrality'' in the
Middle East.

Mr. Bartell described Mr. Richardson as ''a gentleman, an intelligent and
concerned American and a patriot.'' The American Jewish Committee and the
Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith strongly criticized Mr. Richardson's
nomination to the ranking post in the department. Mr. Richardson was chief
lobbyist and general counsel to Liberty Lobby from 1969 to 1973.

A 'Bigoted Philosophy'

''There is nothing on the record to suggest that Mr. Richardson has repudiated
the bigoted philosophy of the Liberty Lobby,'' said Nathan Perlmutter, national
director of the Anti-Defamation League.

Bertram H. Gold, executive vice president of the American Jewish Committee, said
that although the organization ''rarely gets involved in Presidential
appointments,'' it had written to Thaddeus Garrett, an aide to Vice President
Bush, on April 9 to protest the nomination. Mr. Gold said that Liberty Lobby
''carries with it more than an anti-Semitic tinge.''

In criticizing the nomination, the two Jewish groups cited Mr.  Richardson's
article on The Times's Op-Ed page on May 18, 1971. The article deplored United
States involvement abroad, including in Vietnam, and said that ''powerful forces
are now working day and night to involve us in an additional war theater - the
Mideast - whose potential for disaster dwarfs Vietnam.''

''Liberty Lobby will not tag along with the cowards who would rather countenance
another national disaster than brave the screams of the pro-Zionist 'free press'
in America,'' the article said.

Not Author's Words

Laura Genero, a spokesman for the Health and Human Services Department, said
that Mr. Richardson had told Mr. Schweiker that the part of the article dealing
with the ''pro-Zionist'' press had been ''added by Liberty Lobby people''
without the author's knowledge.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 18, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

FAMILIES MOURN 15 MEN FOUND DEAD IN COLORADO MINE

BYLINE: By WAYNE KING, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 746 words

DATELINE: REDSTONE, Colo., April 17


Throughout the two long nights and the intervening day that he kept his vigil
beside the gravel road leading to the Dutch Creek No. 1 coal mine, 51-year-old
Vince Ayala held to the hope that his ''baby brother'' John had somehow eluded
the deadly explosion that ripped through the mine last Wednesday.

''I'm not really a giver-upper,'' he said. ''The guy had a lot of gumption. The
guy had a lot of quick moves. If there had been a hole he would have made it.''

But toward the end, ''after the hours waned on and on,'' he said, ''after 33
hours, I started to give up. Then I started psyching myself up for the rest of
it.''

''The rest of it'' came at about midnight, when a rescue team that had inched
its way slowly through more than a mile of the shattered tunnel came at last to
nine of the 15 men who were working the high grade coal at two spaces at the end
of the mine. All were dead, and one of them was John Ayala.

''It didn't work out,'' Vince Ayala said, sweeping his gaze across the western
slope of the Colorado Rockies, their peaks filigreed with winter snow beneath
the pale stands of budding aspens and the first hints of blooming forsythia and
flowering quince. ''That big mountain ate my brother.''

Throughout the night, the crews labored on, finding other bodies until there
were 15, the last discovered just as the sun rose over the dun and greening
mountains this morning. They were placed in plastic body bags and taken to a
mortuary.

Later in the morning, officials of Mid-Continent Resources Inc., which owns the
mine, said the condition of the bodies suggested that the men all died instantly
from the force of the blast, believed to have been generated by a sudden
''outburst'' of methane gas at one of the two mine faces where the men were
working. After the last body was removed this morning, the mine was closed by
the Federal Mine Safety and Health Administration pending an inquiry into the
causes of the explosion, an inquiry that could last for months.

At midmorning, the families of the dead men met privately with mine officials at
a religious center in nearby Glenwood Springs to hear details of the dead men's
fate and to plan their funerals.

Robert Delaney, vice president and general counsel of the mine company, said an
ecumenical memorial service would be held Sunday afternoon and the bodies, now
in the custody of the Pitkin County coroner, would be released to the families
on Monday or Tuesday for private burial.

The families went to the meeting quietly and left the same way, some sobbing
audibly, others holding onto each other for support as they entered the building
beneath the flag held at half-staff.

Mr. Delaney said that the mine tunnel itself was not badly damaged, although its
ventilation system was shattered and other equipment damaged by the force of the
blast, which one miner who survived it said grew ''stronger and stronger, like a
hurricane,'' continuing for about 20 minutes.

Private Memorial Service

Mr. Delaney said that the memorial service would be private and that it had been
suggested that each family designate only one person to view the body of the
family member.

Some of the victims reportedly were burned and otherwise injured by the force of
the blast, which apparently scattered the bodies over the mine floor.

Vince Ayala said that his brother, John, who was 40, would be buried in the town
of Brush, Colo., where he had spent his childhood on the family farm, one of
nine children.

Mr. Ayala spoke of his brother, a former marine, a Vietnam veteran, husband and
father of three, with affection and resigned regret, using the present tense at
first, then adopting the past as if in grudging acknowledgement.

''He's a poet,'' he said. ''He likes to make poems, write songs, play the
guitar. He'd make a poem out of a blade of grass.'' Mr. Ayala said his brother
became a miner six years ago for the money, but grew to love the life, which he
likened in a recent letter, almost a memoir, to the camaraderie of the Marine
Corps days he had enjoyed.

''He was a tough ol' marine,'' he said. ''He related mining to that. He liked
the men, he liked working with them.'' ''He was the best, the guy who made us
laugh and the one who made us cry. He was the best.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of attendant moving body of miner to funeral home
(page 6) photo of Ramona Luna and her sister,Eleanor

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 18, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

PORTRAIT OF PERSONAL PHOTOGRAPHERS TO THE PRESIDENT

BYLINE: By A.O. SULZBERGER Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1398 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


If he is lucky, he becomes part of the furniture, an overlooked, almost
invisible artist quietly freezing history in the making.

If he is not so fortunate, he spends years recording the President's ''grips and
grins,'' his vision limited to quick shots of the President shaking hands with
the latest visitor to the Oval Office.

In the 16 years since the post of personal photographer to the President was
established by Lyndon B. Johnson, both types have held the job. President Carter
never filled the post. But now a former actor is President, a man who
understands perhaps better than anyone since Mr. Johnson the power of the
camera.

And Ronald Reagan's newly appointed personal photographer, Michael A.W. Evans,
hopes to gain the unlimited access to the President that is needed to turn a
political photographer into a historian.

In the Line of Fire

So far, history and photography have certainly mixed.  When President Reagan was
shot March 30, Mr. Evans was directly in the line of fire, he was to find out
later.  ''I hope I never have to take pictures like that again,'' he said later.
His camera was in the crook of his arm and he was ready to dash for the
limousine when the shots burst like firecrackers, wounding Mr. Reagan, his press
secretary, a Secret Service agent and a policeman.

In the flurry Mr. Evans stayed behind, photographing the scene.  Later he went
to the hospital, arriving in time to see the President being wheeled into
surgery.

''I didn't take any pictures,'' he said. ''Probably I'm too close now. If I had
been an outsider I would have attempted to take pictures.''

Mr. Evans has also been taking many pictures of quieter Presidential moments.
Hallways in various sections of the White Office now sparkle with large glossy
color photographs of Mr. Reagan relaxing, of Mr. Reagan campaigning, of Mr.
Reagan signing bills and of Mr. Reagan otherwise being Presidential.

Many of these same photographs appear in dozens of newspapers, magazines and
television newscasts around the country. Lately, in fact, Mr. Reagan, in his
recuperation, has been seen by the public almost exclusively by way of still
photographs taken by Mr. Evans or his staff of four. They make up the White
House Photographic Office, an operation that will cost about $300,000 this year.


Making the President Look Good

Unlike the photographs taken by the independent news photographers who cover the
White House, the White House Press Office, of which the Photographic Office is a
part, usually releases only those photographs that make the President look good.
It is another means by which the White House can try to affect public opinion.

''Portraying the President,'' a recent book on how the President is described
and depicted in the news media, includes the results of a study of photographs
from 1953 to 1978 that were taken by the White House office and published in The
New York Times and Time magazine.  The authors, Michael B. Grossman and Martha
J. Kumar, who are political science professors at Towson State University in
Baltimore, concluded that the overwhelming majority of the photographs, about
two-thirds in each publication, favored the President.

George E. Reedy, who was press secretary to President Johnson and is now dean of
the Marquette University School of Journalism, said of the photographic office:
''I think the President does take advantage of it. But I'm skeptical it does
much molding of opinion.''

A Visual Record of Events

Historians acknowledge that many of the White House pictures represent a subtle
form of public persuasion.  But ''these photographs are of historical
significance of a unique kind,'' Will Stapp, curator for photography at the
National Portrait Gallery, said, adding, ''They are a visual record of events or
circumstances that carry a message words cannot convey. They personalize
history.''

For the personal photographer to the President, that is the lure.  ''I am here
primarily because they respect my work and they want an historical document of
Ronald Reagan's Presidency,'' said Mr.  Evans, whose $50,112 salary is about
one-third what he expected to make as a freelance photographer had he not taken
the job.

There seems to be little question that the portfolios created by Yoichi R.
Okamoto, President Johnson's photographer, and David Hume Kennerly, who held the
position when Gerald R. Ford was President, are of lasting historical value. The
same cannot be said of the pictures taken by Oliver Atkins, photographer for
Richard M. Nixon.

The difference was access.

Imagine Machiavelli

James K. Polk was the first President to have his photographic portrait made.
John F. Kennedy was the first to have a quasiofficial photographer who was
allowed at intimate look at the Presidency. Then Mr. Johnson made the position
official. And now, with the Reagan Administration, the job of personal
photographer to the Vice President has been created.

Mr. Okamoto, a native of Yonkers, was originally summoned by President Johnson
and asked to take some ''publicity stills.'' ''I said I'd rather hang around and
take pictures of history in the making,'' recalled Mr. Okamoto. ''From that
moment on I had permission to walk in on him without knocking.''

At the suggestion of Pierre Salinger, the press secretary, Mr.  Okamoto was made
part of the staff, and the position of personal photographer to the President
was created.

''The man really trusted me,'' Mr. Okamoto said of Mr. Johnson, ''and those
around him really trusted me and that's the whole ball game. The pictures I took
were for the history books. Can you imagine what it would be like if we had
those pictures at the time of Machiavelli?''

Kennerly and Mayaguez

If there is anyone who can be said to have put the position of personal
photographer to the President in the public eye, it was David Hume Kennerly, who
became known as much for his brashness as for his talent.

His access to President Ford was such that in the Mayaguez crisis, when American
seamen were being held by the Cambodian authorities, Mr. Kennerly, who had won a
Pultizer Prize for his work in Vietnam and had visited Cambodia two weeks
earlier, put down his camera and raised his voice.

He suggested to those gathered in the Cabinet Room that the ship's seizure may
have been the act of a local military commander and not authorized by the
national government, which was in disarray.  Therefore, he argued, a full air
strike on Phnom Penh would be overreacting. In fact, no air strike was ordered.

Mr. Evans, who says he has good access, does not look for that kind of
relationship with Mr. Reagan.  ''You have to establish a relationship whereby
you're ignored,'' Mr. Evans said. ''I'm looking forward to the day when the
President looks up from his desk and says, 'Get me Mike Evans,' and I'm already
there.''

A Call That Never Came

Oliver Atkins, the second man to hold the job, had almost no access, and with
the exception of some surprisingly candid photographs taken the day President
Nixon told his family of his plans to resign, he was relegated to the ''grips
and grins.''

Mr. Atkins, who died in 1977 at the age of 60, recalled in his book, ''Triumph
and Tragedy: The White House Years,'' his thoughts on Inauguration Day, 1969.
The Nixon family had retired to the White House after the inaugural parade. ''I
remained outside, within immediate summons in case President Nixon wanted me,''
Mr. Atkins wrote. ''He didn't.''

President Carter seemed to have a similar antipathy toward photographers.  ''I
didn't feel he wanted an intimate, personal photographer around him,'' said
Stanley Tretick, a freelance photographer for Time, who rebuffed an approach to
be Mr. Carter's personal photographer.

Is the job the pinnacle of the profession? Even those who have held it do not
agree. Perhaps Mr. Okamoto said it best when he called it ''the pinnacle of
opportunity.''

''After Martin Luther King was killed, I was in the Oval Office with L.B.J.,
Hoover, McNamara, Fortas and others,'' Mr. Okamoto recalled. ''The phone would
ring for Hoover and he'd say: 'Mr.  President, Detroit is blowing now. Boston
may go in four hours. In Washington, they're up to so-and-so street.'

''These men didn't know if the country was falling apart. It was the most
incredible evening. Only my pictures exist to show what the mood was like.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Michael Evans with the President

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

U.S. NAVAL BUILDUP IS CHALLENGING SOVIET ADVANCES IN ASIA AND AFRICA SUPREMACY
AT SEA

BYLINE: By MICHAEL T. KAUFMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2197 words

DATELINE: NAIROBI, Kenya


As a result of the most ambitious naval deployment since the Vietnam War, the
United States has become a major naval power in the Indian Ocean, challenging
the advances of Soviet sea and ground forces in Africa and Asia.

The buildup has continued steadily and dramatically over the last 16 months,
countering the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan and earlier Soviet involvement
in Angola and Ethiopia.

32 U.S. Ships in Area

According to the Navy in Washington, the United States had 32 combat and support
vessels in the area recently. In the 1970's, when the Persian Gulf squadron was
the only permanent American presence in the area, there were only three
destroyers. Now France, a North Atlantic Treaty Organization ally, has 12 ships
in the Indian Ocean.

The Soviet Union recently had 21 ships there, most of them noncombatants and not
comparable to the two aircraft carrier groups the United States stations
permanently in the area.

While the Soviet Union has reduced its presence in the Indian Ocean slightly in
the last few months, United States power is dramatically in evidence throughout
the area.

In Singapore, Sri Lanka, Mauritius and Kenya, thousands of United States sailors
and marines swarm ashore on visits almost every month. In Mauritius, Vice Adm.
Carlisle Trost, commander of the Naples-based Sixth Fleet, was the main guest at
National Day celebrations in April. In Singapore, Capt. William Carlson,
commander of the aircraft carrier Midway, told visitors who were aboard the ship
then that in contrast with two years ago the Indian Ocean has become the
''primary strategic concern for the United States.''

On Diego Garcia, the V-shaped coral island in the Indian Ocean that is the hub
of United States strategy in the area, construction is under way on runways for
B-52 bombers and port installations for ships carrying up to 12,000 sailors at a
time.

In Perth, Australia, 900 marines who spent long months monitoring the Iranian
hostage crisis from the decks of vessels in the Arabian Sea were granted
extended liberty. They were among the 1,800 marines who have been deployed in
the ocean as a sort of advance guard of a worldwide rapid deployment force set
into motion by President Carter after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. While
most of the 60,000-member force is still somewhat nebulous, the Marine
contingents in the Indian Ocean are real. Some Western diplomats say the marine
units are turning into American versions of the mobile 3,000-member French
detachments that have quelled a number of African disorders.

In addition to this highly visible United States presence, designed to project
America's resoluteness in countering the Soviet Union, there are less obvious
signs of Washington's interest in the region.

For instance, it has been learned that United States marines have taken part in
exercises in northeastern Kenya for the first time, though no Kenyan or American
official would comment on this for the record. Furthermore, within the last four
months, assistance and cooperation agreements involving American use of bases
have been signed with Australia, Kenya, Somalia and Oman.

B-52's Fly Over Ocean

United States B-52's have begun regular flights over the Indian Ocean from bases
in Guam and Australia. A new surveillance satellite monitoring the ocean was
launched late in March. Discussions are continuing on a new military assistance
package for Pakistan, a key state in any defense plan for the Persian Gulf.
South Africa, which commands the southwestern approach to the ocean, has
expressed its hopes of renewing military links to the United States, but it is
still unclear how the United States regards the signals.

The Sudan and Israel, which have access to the Red Sea, have declared their
readiness to let American forces use bases under certain circumstances.

The Soviet Union has suggested that it is reducing forces in the region, though
United States sources dispute this. ''We are pulling back some of our ships,''
said Yuri Velikanov, a senior Soviet diplomat in the Seychelles, as close as any
Russian can get to Diego Garcia. ''We want the lowest possible profile and we do
not want to be provocative in view of the American buildup.''

Naval supremacy is only part of the story. A United States Ambassador to an
Indian Ocean country pointed out that the strategic balance sheet must take
account of the 85,000 air and ground forces that the Soviet Union has in
Afghanistan. It is a short flight by jet from Kandahar in Afghanistan to the
Strait of Hormuz. Western strategists say the Soviet forces in Afghanistan are
capable of spearheading a strike at Iran and the Persian Gulf.

There are also some 13,000 Cuban troops as well as a much smaller number of
Russians and East Germans in Ethiopia.

British Withdrew a Decade Ago

As the United States has moved ahead in the naval competition, the Soviet Union
has in the last few months mounted a propaganda campaign portraying America as a
militaristic intruder into the Indian Ocean vacuum left by Britain's withdrawal
from bases east of Suez a decade ago. In daily broadcasts and streams of press
releases, the Russians condemn the United States for spurning invitations to
international conferences on force reduction and demilitarization of the ocean.

A 45-member United Nations committee on the Indian Ocean was to have held a
conference this summer in Colombo, Sri Lanka, to discuss the creation of a zone
of peace in the area. At a meeting in New York in March, the Western members of
the committee, represented by Australia, made it clear that ''the present
atmosphere is not conducive'' to convening a conference this year.

Nadarajah Balasubramaniam, the Sri Lankan chairman of the group, said in an
interview that such a conference would merely be a forum for propaganda while
Soviet forces remain in Afghanistan and revolutionary uncertainty holds sway in
Iran. The United States has also ignored an appeal by Madagascar for a meeting
of world leaders about the Indian Ocean.

The Soviet Union has endorsed both the United Nations conference and the
Madagascar proposal. But the Russians show no signs of abandoning the footholds
that they have gained in the last four years. All are in the northwest of the
region near the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf outlets through which most Middle
Eastern oil flows on its way to Western Europe, Japan and the United States.

In addition to an installation at Socotra, a Southern Yemen island in the
Arabian Sea, the Russians are building bases on Perim and the Dahlak
Archipelago, islands belonging to Ethiopia. Perim is at the mouth of the Red
Sea, southeast of Dahlak. They also have the use of the old British port of Aden
in Southern Yemen.

Soviet Builds Submarine Pens

The most advanced construction, according to Western intelligence experts, is
being carried out in the Dahlak islands off the Eritrean port of Massawa. The
Soviet Union has reportedly built submarine pens as well as missile repair and
storage silos similar to the ones in Berbera before the Russians were expelled
by Somalia in 1977.  Electronic communications and surveillance equipment is
also reportedly being set up in Dahlak.

The large floating dock that the Soviet Union had in Berbera has been towed to
Socotra. Western intelligence sources report that Soviet vessels spend long
periods tied up there in apparant efforts to save fuel while showing the flag.
The voyage of Soviet warships to the Indian Ocean from either Vladivostok in the
Pacific or from ports on the Black Sea through the Dardanelles and the Suez
Canal is very long and costly. As an Australian diplomat put it, ''For the
Russians, the Persian Gulf is about as far away as you can get from home.''

In the last 20 years, as the Russians expanded their navy and gained worldwide
capability, they relied heavily on resupplying their vessels at sea since few
friendly ports were available. As with their fishing fleets, their warships were
attended by shuttling tenders and supply ships. In the Indian Ocean, such
procedures are still necessary. Except for the base facilities in Southern Yemen
and Ethiopia, there are few hospitable ports available to Soviet warships in the
area

On the long trip from Vladivostok, the Soviet Navy has only one large port - at
Cam Ranh Bay in Vietnam - available for major repairs or storage of strategic
equipment. In the Indian Ocean itself, Soviet warships call at times at ports in
India, Sri Lanka and Mauritius, but services there are limited. In addition, Sri
Lanka and India bar ships carrying nuclear weapons.

Soviet Seeks More Bases

In the past, the Russians have tried hard to obtain bases in Madagascar and the
Maldives. Three years ago, it approached the Maldives about leasing the former
British port on the southernmost island of Gan, 500 miles north of Diego Garcia.
According to South Asian diplomats, the Russians said they wanted to rent the
island for their fishing fleet.

The line between Soviet commercial and naval activities is blurred. In an
interview in the Soviet newspaper Pravda in 1977, Adm. Sergei G. Gorshkov, head
of the Soviet Navy, declared that ''maritime transport, fishing and scientific
vessels are part of the Soviet Union's naval might.''

The Islamic Government in the Maldives rejected the Soviet offer, saying they
were seeking entry into the nonaligned movement and wanted to use Gan as a
tourist complex.

Meanwhile, French officials on the Indian Ocean island of Reunion say they
believe that the Russians still have hopes of acquiring Diego Suarez, a base
that France evacuated in northern Madagascar after the island became
independent. The fortification commands a strategic channel through which
supertankers pass while carrying oil to Europe. Diego-Suarez would also be very
valuable to the Soviet Union in advancing what their diplomats say is a leading
Russian objective in the Indian Ocean - support of liberation struggles in
Africa, specifically those challenging South Africa's majority white Government.


Madagascar Needs Aid

Until now, the Government of Madagascar, while relying heavily on Soviet
military advisers, has refused to turn over Diego-Suarez to any foreign power.
France, which remains Madagascar's major benefactor, reports that this resolve
may evaporate in light of the desperate problems confronting the Government of
President Didier Ratsiraka.

French officials say there are severe food shortages, tribal conflicts and
hunger in many parts of the island, threatening a change in policy. The French
have been urging the United States to contribute food and funds to Madagascar to
bolster what they regard as a leftist but pragmatic Government.

In addition to Yemen and Ethiopia, the Soviet Union maintains close relations
with Mozambique. After a recent South African raid into Mozambique, three Soviet
waships arrived in Maputo to show the flag.  Mozambique, however, has very
little to offer the Russians. A report that the Soviet Union might build a deep
water naval base in Nocala in northern Mozambique appears to be one of the many
bits of ''disinformation'' that blow over the ocean in gusts.

In contrast with the few sanctuaries that the Soviet Union has assembled, the
United States has put together a chain of support bases in the last 16 months.
The American strategy, formulated by Zbigniew Brzezinski, President Carter's
national security adviser, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff in November 1979,
provides for the modernization of Diego Garcia as well as for the acquisition of
rear and forward staging and storage installations along the African and Asian
coasts. Before the buildup, the only permanent American presence in the Indian
Ocean aside from on Diego Garcia was at Bahrain. But the United States was
permitted only to maintain three small vessels outside Bahrain's port, and then
only when there was no Israeli war.

U.S. Upgrades Bases

Since then, several hundred million dollars have been earmarked to improve
installations at Diego Garcia, the Kenyan port of Mombasa, Berbera in Somalia,
Ras Banas in Egypt and two areas in Oman.

The Reagan Administration, which wants to increase allocations for Indian Ocean
bases, has called for spending $106.4 million to improve the Egyptian Red Sea
base of Ras Banas, which lies opposite a major Saudi oil terminal. About $75
million more would be used to building fuel tanks and other storage areas at
Masira, a British base on an island off Oman.

In an age of nuclear ships, when vessels can remain at sea for long periods,
bases serve different functions than they did when Djibouti and Aden were
coaling stations for French and British warships.

According to an American diplomat, friendly harbors are still needed for storing
fuel, weapons and spare parts. Equally important, however, are ports to provide
recreation and shore leave for volunteer sailors, he said.

In the final analysis, the major purpose of gaining port privileges is to extend
national power and influence. In this regard, the Indian Ocean, which was a
British region for more than 100 years, seems on its way to becoming an American
responsibility.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: The Race in the Indian Ocean First of three articles

CORRECTION-DATE: April 26, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
In an article last Sunday about the American naval buildup in the Indian Ocean,
Nadarajah Balasubramaniam, chairman of a United Nations committee on the Indian
Ocean, was misquoted in his description of a planned conference of the group.
The view that such a meeting would be a forum for propaganda is the United
States position.

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of Indian Ocean area showing U.S. Naval bases (page
12) table on number of U.S. and Soviet ships in Indian Ocean (page 12)

TYPE: series

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
SUNDAY, APRIL 19, 1981

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 738 words


International
Saudi Arabia insists that an arms deal be carried out by the Administration,
allowing it to purchase five Awacs electronic surveillance planes, in addition
to the previously ordered F-15 fighters. It also wants seven aerial tankers. The
Saudis rejected Administration suggestions that it postpone buying the Awacs and
avoid a fight in Congress, which would influenced by Israel's opposition to the
plane deal. (Page 1, Column 3.)
American naval power predominates in the Indian Ocean following the most
ambitious mobilization of naval forces since the Vietnam War to challenge Soviet
advances in Africa and Asia. Singapore, Sri Lanka, Mauritius and Kenya, among
other places, are visited monthly by thousands of American sailors on shore
leave, emphasizing a naval commander's view that the Indian Ocean has become
''the primary strategic concern for the United States.'' (1:4-5.)
National
Strategy for a long conventional war with the Soviet Union on a worldwide scale
is being completed by the Administration, and the armed forces will be ordered
to shape their 1983 budgets for it, according to Pentagon officials. The new
strategy, intended to protect American interests in the Middle East and
elsewhere, reflects the views of Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger and his
top aides. (1:6.)
Rising opposition of conservationists to the Reagan Administration's
environmental policies and appointments is leading them to take a strong
political stand on environmental issues in Washington and across the nation. The
National Audubon Society, the Wilderness Society and the National Wildlife
Federation report that their memberships and contributions are increasing
sharply as a result of the Administration's views, especially those of Interior
Secretary James G. Watt, on environmental issues. (1:1-2.)
President Reagan's working hours have increased to four or five hours a day and
he doing about the same amount of paperwork that he did before he was shot March
30, White House officials said. He has resumed lobbying by telephone in Congress
for his economic program, an effort that took up much of his time before the
assassination attempt. However, he is still working out of his family's quarters
in the White House. (1:5-6.)
Proof of intentional discrimination will be required of blacks, Hispanic
Americans and women in lawsuits alleging violations of civil rights under a
subtle but important policy change in Congress and the courts. Prosecuting
attorneys in discrimination cases generally prefer to use a test based on the
effect of bias rather than proof of its intent. The new emphasis on evidence of
intent is strongly backed by Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah. ''I
don't see how you can brand the Government or anybody else racist without some
degree of proof of intent,'' he said in an interview. (18:1-2.)
The only survivors of a midair collision over Colorado Friday afternoon were
four incredulous parachutists. Fifteen persons died when the sky divers' plane
and a commuter craft crashed in clear weather about 45 miles north of Denver.
The chutes of all six men in the smaller plane opened, but two of the men were
killed. (18:2-5.)
Metropolitan
Chaos disrupted the Easter egg hunt held annually in Central Park. An
unexpectedly large crowd touched off a stampede when prizes were tossed up for
grabs. No serious injuries were reported, but police reinforcements were called
to restore order. (1:1.)
Yonkers firefighters were back at work following a walkout last week that ended
when they and other municipal employees agreed to submit their contract dispute
to arbitration. Some of them dug with probing poles through the ruins of a
building a firemen on strike reportedly set ablaze. There were reports that
derelicts who slept in the building had not been seen since the fire, but no
bodies were found.  (23:1.)
A sick sperm whale will lay over at Robert Moses State Park, east of Jones Beach
on Long Island, for treatment by marine scientists who asked the National Marine
Fisheries Service not to send the rare mammal out to sea. The 23-foot,
10,000-pound whale, is believed to have pneumonia. (25:1-4.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. ROLE IN EL SALVADOR PROTESTED

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY M. PHELPS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 26, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 424 words


Chanting, placard-carrying protesters converged on the United Nations yesterday
to demonstrate against United States involvement in El Salvador.

The police estimated that 3,500 people, most of them from the New York area,
walked to Hammarskjold Plaza, across from the United Nations, in separate
marches from different areas of the city.

Organizers of the marches, however, put the crowd at 20,000.  The peaceful
protest had many trappings of the Vietnam War era.

Justifying Budget Cuts

Pete Seeger, a familiar figure from those days, sang protest songs. The speakers
included the Rev. Daniel Berrigan and such politicians as former Representative
Bella S. Abzug and Representative Theodore S. Weiss, Democrat of Manhattan, who
challenged the Administration's support of the El Salvador junta.

''The same bunch of crazies that brought us the war in Vietnam is now trying to
get us involved in El Salvador,'' Miss Abzug told the cheering crowd.

''Some of us believe the problems in El Salvador have been orchestrated by the
Reagan Administration to justify its budget cuts and military spending,''
Representative Weiss said.

The crowd itself was older than the marchers of the 1960's, and many of its
members said they were veterans of anti-Vietnam War marches.

''It's the first important activity since Vietnam,'' said 66-yearold Evelyn Datz
of Roosevelt, N.J.

Harmonious Afternoon

The marchers started in the morning from the Upper West Side, East Harlem,
Greenwich Village, the Lower East Side and Westchester County, converging in
Bryant Park behind the New York Public Library at 1 P.M.

Led by costumed figures on stilts from the Bread and Puppet Theater, they walked
east on 42d Street, north on Third Avenue and east again at 47th Street, briefly
tieing up traffic along the way.

They chanted slogans such as, ''No draft, no war, U.S. out of El Salvador'' and
carried banners reading, ''U.S. guns killed U.S.  nuns.'' The banner was an
allusion to the murders of three American nuns in El Salvador last year.

The general harmony of the afternoon was broken for a moment when two singers,
Matt Jones and the Rev. F. D. Kirkpatrick, sang two songs about the plight of
the Palestinians in the Middle East.

Representative Weiss, who was the chairman of the event, objected, saying that
he did not think the Palestinians could be equated with the people of El
Salvador, drawing scattered boos from the crowd.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Carol Williamson Affianced to John Dizard

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 40, Column 5; Society Desk

LENGTH: 279 words


Mr. and Mrs. Warren Jackson Williamson of Greenville, Ala., have anounced the
engagement of their daughter, Carol Williamson, to John William Dizard, son of
Mr. and Mrs. Wilson Paul Dizard of Cambridge, Mass.

A May 30 wedding is planned in Greenville. Miss Willliamson, whose father is
senior partner of the Greenville law firm of Williamson & Taber, graduated from
Chatham Hall in Virginia, attended the University of Aberdeen in Scotland and
graduated from Sweet Briar College.

Mr. Dizard attended Lawrence Academy in Groton, Mass.; Tufts University and the
School of Foreign Service of Georgetown University and graduated from the
University of Saskatchewan in Regina. He is bureau chief in London for the
Institutional Investor magazine in New York.

His father, vice president of Kalba Bowen Associates Inc., information and
communications consultants in Cambridge, Mass., served in the Foreign Service as
First Secretary in Warsaw and in Saigon. He was also vice chairman of the United
States delegation to the World Administrative Radio Conference in 1978 and 1979
in Geneva.

Mr. Dizard is a grandson of Mrs. Wilson Paul Dizard of Westerly, S. I. and the
late Mr. Dizard, retired corporate secretary of the American Car & Foundry
Company in New York, and of Mrs. William Wallace Wood of Gettysburg, Pa., a
clinical psychologist who was formerly an associate professor of psychology at
Wagner College in Grymes Hill, S. I., and the late Rev. Wood, a Presbyerian
minister and retired chaplain of the Sailors Snug Harbor in New Britain, S. I.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Music View;
AND NOW, THE WORLD'S FIRST COMPOSING MACHINE

BYLINE: By Donal Henahan

SECTION: Section 2; Page 19, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1404 words


The other day as I was hard at work opening my mail while attempting to put a
pin in my shirt cuff, I found myself musing about the undeniable supremacy of
American technology. Talk all you like about Japanese cameras and cars, but can
any nation match the efficiency of the button crusher that all New York
laundries have on line? Hardly. So my eyes were naturally caught by this line,
which leaped out of an announcement by the Composers' Forum of its spring
concert series starting on Tuesday at Cooper Union: ''According to Composers'
Forum President Joel Chadabe, 'The Sal-Mar Construction is an historically
important musical event and a stunning and classical display of individual
American invention. It must be seen and heard!' ''

Sal-Mar, it seems, is short for Salvatore Martirano, the University of Illinois
composer whose music will be featured on the third program of the series,
Thursday evening. If mere mention of his name does not double you up with an
attack of 60's nostalgia, you are younger than anyone ought to be. His most
famous piece, regarded by many at the time as a key work in the multimedia
explosion, was ''L's G.A.,'' in which a narrator wearing an amplified gas mask
declaimed an antiwar tirade (Vietnam was the issue of the day) based on
Lincoln's Gettysburg Address to the accompaniment of taped sounds and film
projections. The piece never made it to Carnegie Hall or Lincoln Center, but was
big for a while at such venues as the Electric Circus and the Pratt Institute.

But what has Mr. Martirano been up to lately? Perhaps reading Mrs.  Shelley. The
Sal-Mar Construction, described in the announcement as ''the world's first
composing machine,'' was built by Mr. Martirano ''over a period of years
beginning in the early 1960's.'' This will be the machine's Manhattan debut,
although a version of it apparently had a sneak preview at Stony Brook in 1976.
The device, which is described as standing about eight feet tall, sounds
unusually talented, even for a machine: ''The composer, in performance,
interacts with the machine as it composes, creating spontaneously four melodic
lines which move throughout the concert space via a network of 24 overhead
speakers.''

The technical geniuses behind ''Fantasia,'' including Leopold Stokowski, first
tickled a mass audience with the phenomenon of sound moving about the theater,
and such composers as Mozart, Gabrieli, Stockhausen and Boulez have played with
the concept in more sophisticated ways. But Mr. Martirano evidently has taken
another step by allowing the 24-mouthed machine to assume or at least share, in
some unspecified manner, the role of ''composer'' while he merely ''interacts''
with it. Look out, Mr, Martirano, that's what Dr.  Frankenstein thought, too.

Though the debut of the Sal-Mar Construction, which appears to be some sort of
supersynthesizer, will be the program's chief attraction, other Martirano works
will be presented. The Contemporary Chamber Ensemble will perform his Octet and
Lisa Moore, an Australian pianist, will give the New York premiere of his
''Stuck on Stella.''

If the Martirano program does not summon up remembrances of flings past for you,
what about the fourth concert of the series, which dusts off the ondes martenot,
one of the pioneering instruments of electronic music? Maurice Martenot invented
this keyboard device in 1922 and for a while it was the last word in acoustical
technology.  You may have encountered one ondes martenot in your time -
Messiaen's extravagantly orchestrated ''Turangalila-Symphonie'' calls for one,
for instance - but an ondes martenot quintet is beyond most people's
imagination, let alone experience. This concert, on April 28, includes the
United States premiere of Walter Boudreau's ''Amon-Ra,'' for five of these
strange devices. (It is important not to make the vulgar mistake of confusing M.
Martenot's instrument with the Theremin, that other electronic pioneer whose
tremulous moans so thoroughly spooked Ingrid Bergman in ''Spellbound.'') The
performing group will be L'Ensemble d'Ondes de Montreal. Music by Bruce
MacCombie, not for the ondes martenot, also will be played.

The Composers' Forum series, short but unusually diverse, begins on Tuesday with
an Elliott Carter program that includes the New York premiere of a film on the
composer, ''Elliott Carter at Buffalo,'' by the eminent documentarian Donn
Pennebaker. There also will be live Carter music - the Double Concerto, the
Cello Sonata and Four Pieces for Timpani - and commentary by the composer. The
second concert, on Wednesday, imports jazz avant-gardists from the Creative
Music Studio in Woodstock, N.Y.

All this sounds promising enough. At least no one can accuse the Composers'
Forum of setting out the same old meal of academic sawdust. And what memories
will be stirred by the return of Salvatore Martirano. Suddenly it all rushes
back, the dizziness of the 60's.  I'm sure you remember the profound concerts
that the electronic percussionist Max Neuhaus gave at the bottom of a swimming
pool.  Members of the audience had to put on bathing suits and immerse
themselves if they wanted to hear Mr. Neuhaus's compositions. This was the
period when Lejaren Hiller, the scientist-turned-composer who programmed a
computer to write a piece for string quartet called ''Illiac Suite,'' went on to
concoct such things as his ''Triptych for Hieronymus Bosch,'' in which one of
the tamer effects was having the ''William Tell'' Overture played in 12 keys
simultaneously, forward and backward. At one performance, when the piece became
even more chaotic than that, a woman spectator (the wife of a piano teacher)
leaped onstage and began throwing chairs. Police were called to restore order.
Jacob Druckman wrote a piece in which a man had to wrestle a double-bass to the
floor. John Cage and Mr. Hiller collaborated on an extravaganza called
''HPSCHD,'' a four-and-a-halfhour piece that called for 52 tape recorders and 64
slide projectors as well as half a dozen harpsichords and noises such as you
will not hear again until the Apocalypse. This about the time when Ned Rorem
came right out with it and revealed in the New York Review of Books that neither
he nor his friends were going to ''serious'' concerts anymore because they
wanted to sit home and play their Beatles records. Music's foremost
mathematician, Milton Babbitt, delighted his friends and confounded his critics
by writing an unequivocally beautiful piece called ''Philomel,'' to a John
Hollander text. Leonard Bernstein and the Swingle Singers were getting down to
the tune of Berio's ''Sinfonia'' - at the New York Philharmonic. Walter
(subsequently to be known as Wendy) Carlos was switching-on J.S. Bach.

Oh, my, yes. It was the time of composing with brain-wave feedback, fiber-optic
systems, strobe lights, Day-Glo, 16-channel tape, shuffling feet, toy pianos,
analog computers, the earth's magnetic field, astrological charts. Silence, in
the Cage acceptation of the word, came into vogue. A naked cellist gave a
concert and every critic rushed to cover her, so to speak. Musical connoisseurs
who had once snickered at popular gods such as Hammond and Wurlitzer prostrated
themselves before the new altars: Moog, Arp, Buchla. The world's most
influential composers argued endlessly and angrily about whether music had to be
rigorously serialized or allowed to just happen, according to the laws or
nonlaws of chance. Composers who heard only musical nonsense in both these
viewpoints were considered intellectual idiots and dealt out of the game.

All that happened, of course, long ago in a far country to which we would never
want to return. However, it is always pleasant to take out the old post cards
and travel folders, just to see where we have been and how we got where we are.
Salvatore Martirano was one of the quirkier and more invigorating guides back in
the befuddling 60's; maybe he and his composing machine can steer us to
someplace worth a trip in the tame 80's.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILMMAKERS;
CECIL B. IN A WEST SIDE WALK UP

BYLINE: By N.R. KLEINFIELD

SECTION: Section 3; Page 6, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1256 words


In Hollywood these days, making movies means big money: Big production costs,
big advertising budgets, big stars. And, all too often, big losses to match.

On the West Side of New York, making movies means small money: Small budgets,
small ads, small stars - but no losses.  Troma Inc. is a tiny Manhattan movie
company with large aspirations. Its total annual revenues hardly rival what Burt
Reynolds or Clint Eastwood collects for a single film. Troma's two founders were
once fittingly dubbed ''Poverty Row Producers.'' Where the average movie now
costs a tidy $10 million, Troma brings them in for well under $1 million. While
Hollywood goes first-class all the way, Troma travels in something worse than
coach. As Lloyd Kaufman, Troma's jocund president, puts it, ''Our films are made
on absolute breadcrumbs.''

Friends and relatives pop up as extras. Stars are still aspiring.  Mr. Kaufman
and Michael Herz, Troma's co-founder, pitch in more than most movie moguls. They
conceive scripts. They direct. They produce.  Mr. Kaufman handles the camera
work. Everyone fetches coffee.

Troma and its nine employees are quartered in what Mr. Kaufman freely admits is
a ''slum building'' situated at 733 Ninth Avenue in Manhattan's
less-than-fashionable Hell's Kitchen district. Troma owns the building and
occupies the second floor. Several residential tenants occupy upstairs
apartments. A thrift shop recently displaced a liquor store on the ground floor.

Small as it may be - Troma grossed about $1 million last year - for seven years
now, the company has cranked out about a film a year and distributed a couple of
others, all while turning a profit of some sort for its investors.

It has a movie scheduled to open in New York next month called ''Squeeze Play.''
It is a bawdy comedy (Troma specializes in bawdy comedies) dealing with suburban
softball. The denouement comes when the women form a team and take on the men.
The movie was shot, for the most part, in downtown Leonia, N.J.

''Squeeze Play'' has already played around the country, attracting mixed reviews
but gross billings of about $8 million. Out of that, roughly $1 million has
filtered into Troma, which is a decent sum given that a mere $300,000 covered
production costs, and distribution expenses ran about the same.

How does Troma make films so cheaply? ''We're sort of known for exploiting
people,'' Mr. Kaufman says. ''We don't have the dough to pay much. People look
at working for us as a prestige thing. They talk about surviving Camp Troma.''

Films are shot in and around New York. There is relentless rehearsing, since
Troma cannot afford to film scenes repeatedly. To round up extras, Troma has
several times set up recruitment stands in Central Park. In Leonia, it sent
emissaries to Kiwanis Club affairs. The prestige is unlimited. The pay is
nothing.

Stanley Kaufman, a prospering lawyer lucky enough to be Lloyd Kaufman's father,
has now shown up in some eight Troma films. ''He's getting pretty decent by
now,'' the younger Kaufman observes. ''The majors are going to be coming after
him.''

A foot doctor who is a good friend of Mr. Kaufman's landed a role as a ''drunken
lout'' in ''Squeeze Play.'' Mr. Kaufman's mother can be spotted as an
off-off-Broadway producer in Troma's upcoming ''Waitress.'' Mr. Kaufman was bold
enough to ax her scene from ''Squeeze Play'' and still live to regret it.

What does a starring role in a Troma film pay? ''I'll give you an idea,'' Mr.
Kaufman says. ''The star of 'Waitress' received $400 for the job. That meant
about two months of rehearsals and five weeks of filming, and those were 18-hour
days.''

What, then, does a nonstarring role pay? ''Fifty bucks,'' Mr.  Kaufman shrugs.
''Ten bucks. Nothing.'' Still, finding talent - or at least, actors - is no
great problem.  Troma's offices are flooded with resumes from graduates of
Harvard and Yale and Princeton. A part in a nationally distributed movie,
whatever the pay, unlocks bigger doors.

Both Mr. Kaufman, 34, and Mr. Herz, 31 incidentally, draw a salary somewhere in
the mid-five figures, which is a notch above Poverty Row but many notches below
Stanley Kubrick. All of Troma's profits, after the return to investors, are
plowed back into development costs.

In the movie business, success is precarious, of course. ''I think every day
we're in danger of going under,'' Mr. Kaufman says. ''The key is we live very
modestly. You don't see too many limos parked outside. When we entertain people
up here, we order some sandwiches, and we usually go Dutch. The thing is, in
this business, if you just survive you're doing well. And we keep making
movies...''

Lloyd Kaufman and Michael Herz met at Yale in the late 1960's. Mr.  Kaufman
majored in Chinese studies; Mr. Herz in political science.  Mr. Kaufman
graduated in 1969, and got into film work. Mr. Herz earned a law degree at New
York University, while working with Mr.  Kaufman on the side. They formed Troma
in 1974. (Troma is not in fact a word, although Mr. Kaufman tells people it
means ''excellence on celluloid in the ancient Latin.'')

The pair have stuck it out as independents in part because they are mightily
unimpressed with the ways of the major studios. ''It's all done by committee,''
Mr. Herz sneers, ''and it's all go the least offensive, safest way. And the
movies bore people. I've seen bar mitzvah pictures, pictures of my trip to
Greece, that are more entertaining than many films from the majors.''

Decidedly a minor studio, Troma has trouble earning prime playing times (or any
playing times) at good theaters. It gets a much lower split of the box office
revenues than its bigger competitors. To play first-run theaters in major
markets, its films have to spend months appearing in smaller cities to build a
box-office record. ''Squeeze Play,'' for instance, was on the road about 18
months and is only now hitting New York and Chicago.

Critics have not universally rushed to proclaim Troma's excellence. ''We've had
some dreadful reviews,'' Mr. Kaufman admits. ''The thing is, our movies are not
the sort of thing that critics can go out and discover. They're not about people
discussing Vietnam.''

What low-budget projects are kicking around the Troma offices?  There's a comedy
entitled ''Split,'' about relationships between men and women over a 6,000-year
period. Then there's ''Carpool,'' a black comedy about the impact that an
automobile has on four suburbanites who share a carpool. Then there's ''Welcome
Home,'' in which inhabitants of an old-age home rebel and take charge of the
place.

At present, Troma is working on striking a deal with an established studio for
some development money. It is talking with some Wall Street venture capitalists.
There are cable companies in need of product to air. If things pan out, Troma
hopes to start making movies that cost as much as $1 million or $2 million. It
would like to corral a few ''names'' as stars, turn out two or three movies a
year, and maybe strike it big.

''We figure that if we keep on going on in our slow, careful manner, the
roulette wheel will stop on our number,'' Mr. Kaufman says.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Lloyd Kaufman and Michael Herz

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WILL REAGAN'S PLANS BOOST THE ECONOMY? GOOD QUESTION

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 3887 words


WITH most members of Congress home for recess until April 27, hearing their
constituents' views on the Administration's proposed spending and tax cuts, the
White House spent the week gearing up to give them an earful, too.

It started off on House Budget Committee chairman James R. Jones's intimations
last weekend that President Reagan might accept a oneyear tax cut instead of the
three-year cut he wants. Though pressure for a one-year cut has been building on
Capitol Hill, a ''concerned, agitated - irritated'' Mr. Reagan ordered
repudiation.  Then, Vice President Bush and Donald T. Regan, Secretary of the
Treasury, issued nearly identically worded threats of veto. And on Friday, for
the first time since he was wounded in an assassination attempt March 30, Mr.
Reagan himself took the field, calling Congressional leaders to enlist their
support and meeting with his speech writers to begin drafting messages to
Congress.

Last week, The Week in Review asked Leonard Silk, economic columnist for The New
York Times, to talk with Murray L. Weidenbaum, chairman of the President's
Council of Economic Advisers, and George L. Perry, of the Brookings Institution,
about the economy and the Adminstration's program to fix it. Excerpts of their
discussion follow.
The Economy's Strengths

Mr. Silk. Mr. Weidenbaum, is the economy doing better, worse or about what you
expected?  Mr. Weidenbaum. About what we would expect, in terms of working off
the economic legacy we inherited -the soft economy, the doubledigit inflation,
slow growth, the high unemployment.

Mr. Silk. Is the pattern going to continue?

Mr. Weidenbaum. If public policy stays unchanged, the short answer is yes.

Mr. Silk. Mr. Perry, do you think there will be a pickup by the end of the year?
Or maybe you don't need much of one. The economy in some ways looks as if it's
been stronger than expected.

Mr. Perry. The first quarter looks stronger. But to be fair about it, this
Administration really deserves neither blame nor credit for anything in the
first quarter.

One thing that's interesting is that so far the financial markets have not been
terribly enthusiastic.  Mr. Weidenbaum. I think that's basically right. The
markets are waiting for a strong signal, not brilliant eloquence on our part but
action on the part of Congress ratifying those budget cuts.

Mr. Silk. Wouldn't you score that as a bit of a disappointment? In the Economic
Dunkirk paper there was an urging of a program that would immediately impress
the country as spelling the beginning of the end of inflation. Do you see any
such expectational effect?

Mr. Weidenbaum. We've said from our first week in office that 1981 is going to
be a year of a soggy economy. If the markets respond to that, I think they are
very sensible. We've talked about positive results, assuming the enactment of
our program, in 1982 and beyond.

Mr. Perry. The bond market ought to be taking a long view. (It) hasn't bought
the idea that anything on the horizon is going to make inflation go away.

Mr. Weidenbaum. How do you explain the strength of the dollar overseas since
Nov. 20?Mr. Perry. Well, I think you owe that one to your predecessor.  Interest
rates are very high in this country.  Mr. Silk. Isn't one factor in the markets'
thinking the Administration's program on defense? Very large and very rapid
increases - isn't that inflationary?

Mr. Weidenbaum. Not necessarily. We've also budgeted a far greater reduction in
nondefense spending, which will more than offset the defense buildup.

Mr. Silk. The President did campaign against waste. Shouldn't waste be searched
out in defense?  Mr. Weidenbaum. Exactly. Which is why we have large and growing
targeted reductions in the base of the defense budget; we issued a long
tabulation of defense activities which are being phased down or phased out.

Mr. Perry. I don't know what the housekeeping is going to look like. But
whatever we feel our strategic needs are, pouring it on has almost got to be
wasteful, even if you ran a tight ship. We're talking about increases of 150
percent in procurement. You just can't do that much without expecting to drive
up prices.

Mr. Weidenbaum. Look at the growth rates of the defense sector in the early part
of the Vietnam War. That was much more of a frontloaded expansion. You'll see
the major expansion coming a few years out here, which specifically will provide
opportunities for the defense industrial base to expand to meet the increased
demand.

Mr. Silk. You said these military expenditures were more than offset by cuts in
social programs.  Mr. Weidenbaum. Civilian programs.

Mr. Silk. Civilian programs. How do you respond to the charge that some of these
things were done so fast as to even be perverse? Take the cuts in welfare to the
so-called working poor: There will be virtually no advantage to some of them to
work. And will that not increase welfare outpayments, run counter to the
Administration policy of providing incentives to work?

Mr. Weidenbaum. Invariably, there are some incentive effects, and there's a
tradeoff. But in good measure we think our proposal would promote equity. I
found, very frankly to my surprise as an afficionado of budget detail, that many
of us of not only middle- but perhaps upper-middle income - at least prior to
joining the Administration - were enjoying a lot of these subsidies.

We're not set in concrete. If someone has some better suggestions we'll
seriously consider them.  Mr. Perry. I thought that the excuse for the budget
changes was that equity should not be a consideration, not that equity was being
served.

Nonetheless, you didn't really speak to the question of incentives. A University
of Chicago study did show that the difference between working and not working
had been reduced to a very small number.

Mr. Weidenbaum. Not having seen the Chicago study, I would be concerned, having
participated in earlier exercises on welfare program changes, whether the
existing inequities are ignored in any alleged shortcomings in our alternatives.

Mr. Perry. You've got to believe that it makes it worse, when the difference
between working and not working for the very low-income individual shrinks from
a few hundred dollars to $20 or $30 a month.

Mr. Weidenbaum. I'll tell you our philosophy. We really saw the budget cuts as
part of an overall program designed to do two things the American public says
are the highest priority: bring down inflation and bring down unemployment.
Certainly bringing down unemployment will directly benefit low-income unemployed
people.

Mr. Perry. It's hard to see that these alterations in a nondefense budget have
very much to do with that.  What's surprising to outsiders is retirement
programs, where expenditures had risen much more than had been intended
originally by law and which were overindexed. That's where all the bucks were,
too. And yet the Administration avoided doing anything about them, for the
obvious reason there's a lot of votes out there.

Mr. Silk. What did the last Administration do?

Mr. Perry. Well, on its deathbed it did put out an important analysis of the
topic and proposed ways in which it could be straightened out. But I'm here to
defend truth, not the last Administration.

Mr. Weidenbaum. I'm glad you make the distinction.

Mr. Silk. On the other side of this fairness line: How come the President is so
assiduous in trying to get rid of milk price supports and not so assiduous on
tobacco?

Mr. Weidenbaum. Oh, very simple. We start with the biggest farm subsidy first.
Mr. Silk. You don't deny, though, that there is big money in Social Security?
Mr. Weidenbaum. Quite clearly. You've seen the first two installments of our
budget-restraint effort. I expect you will see over the years many additional
proposals to slow the growth of Government spending.

Mr. Silk. Another objective of the Administration is to spur savings and
investment. How did the tax cuts get transmogrified from a Keynesian demand cut
into a Lafferian supply-side cut? What is the logic behind expecting a huge
effect in increasing savings and investment, rather than in consumption?

Mr. Weidenbaum. Rather than addressing either of those alternatives, I'd rather
talk about the Reagan tax program, in context with the Reagan economic program.

We expect to see a major expansion in the savings rate, for a variety of
reasons. One, of course, is the expectation, borne out in the past, that cutting
individual and family income tax rates across the board will generate a more
than proportionate increase in savings. Technically, I'm referring to the
permanent income hypothesis.

What will make that shift more durable is a shift in inflationary expectations.
The major reason that the savings rate is so depressed is the average citizen's
belief, quite properly, that in recent years it hasn't paid to save because of
inflation. Our total program - looking at the monetary policy, the fiscal
policy, the regulatory policy - pushes toward a diminished rate of inflation.
Savings and Investment

Mr. Silk. The permanent income hypothesis, that won a Nobel Prize for Professor
Milton Friedman, is, in brief, that increases in permanent income increase
people's consumption, while a change in nonpermanent income tends to be largely
saved. It seems to me that the hypothesis argues more strongly in terms of the
same proportion of spending and savings as out of other permanent income. How
will you get the dramatic changes that have been talked about?

Mr. Weidenbaum. All we're talking about is restoring a savings rate to 7
percent. We've had savings rates of 8 percent for a number of recent years. I
cite the permanent income hypothesis (because) initially we'll get to kick to
savings from that. Temporary shifts to more savings will become more durable as
inflationary expecations shift.

Mr. Perry. Forecasting the saving rate a few years out is just hazardous. And I
think it's beside the point.  But if we can review the whole program, there are
inconsistencies.  One is between the gross national product that's being
projected, and on the basis of which the budget and deficit are being projected,
and the monetary policy, which (the Administration) endorses and which the
Federal Reserve is committed to. Those two don't hang together by any historical
relationship.

Problem two: If we got the G.N.P. increase, then no model predicts the sustained
reduction in inflation that's in the Administration's forecast. We would have a
normal expansion to high employment, and as we approach the out years we would
see inflationary pressures.

Third, the argument that this particular tax package is desirable because it's
going to do this thing for saving misses the fact that it's not going to do
particularly good things for total saving. If we need a lot of investment in
this country, the old-fashioned and I think still correct prescription is to
have a large total of national saving, which means a large surplus in the
budget.

This program even as advertised is not providing a large surplus.  If we make
some realistic adjustments, it is promising very large deficits for as far ahead
as you can see. That's not a program to stimulate investment. And that is
perhaps the main reason that there is now so much reluctance in the Congress -
and so much skepticism in financial markets - about committing to the full three
years of tax reduction that are called for here.

Mr. Weidenbaum. Let's take the growth in G.N.P. a step at a time.  In 1981,
you'll find that we are within a decimal point, a tenth or two, of the standard
forecast. If you look at 1982, you'll find the variation between our expected
increase in nominal G.N.P. and again, the standard private forecast is very
modest.

Mr. Silk. Nominal G.N.P. is G.N.P. not adjusted for inflation. The
Administration expects it to increase by 12.8 percent in 1982. But you are
projecting a 4.2 percent increase in real G.N.P., or G.N.P.  adjusted for
inflation, and an increase in inflation of 8.3 percent.

Mr. Weidenbaum. Yes. Which is the second question.

Now when you get to 1983 and beyond, quite clearly, we're expecting that this
program would begin to alter the structure of the economy.  That's the whole
idea. And I must admit that I do expect that factors such as velocity will alter
- as they have in the past.

Mr. Perry. The inconsistency is really much stronger than those remarks imply.
The ratio of M-2 (a comprehensive measure of something called money, including
checking accounts and currency, time and savings deposits and money market
funds) to nominal G.N.P. is what is called velocity. And the world's record for
increases in velocity over a four-year period has been 1.2 percent a year. (The
Administration) assumes 5.2 percent a year.

Furthermore, if you imagine that innovations in the financial area led to a
break in the record, so that you could get a lot more G.N.P. with less money
growth than history tells you you can get, then you have to ask: Will the Fed
permit that? Will it give up tight money in order to remain monetarist? I don't
think it would.
Money and Inflation

Mr. Weidenbaum. I find it fascinating that we've been getting some criticism
from - if you'll pardon me -the right as well as the left.  Some of our more
conservative critics say that we are too pessimistic on our expectation of
bringing down the inflation in the out years. They think once this program gets
going, by '83, '84, you'd see much more progress on bringing down the inflation,
and hence that the velocity would be lower than we show. Obviously that's a
consummation devoutly to be wished.

By the way, there's no unique measure in our projections. So your estimates, of
course, are just that - yours.  Mr. Perry. These are implied by stated
quantitative estimates of nominal G.N.P. that you've made, and stated nominal
targets for money that the Fed has made and that you've endorsed. It's true, I
did the subtraction.

Mr. Silk. It seems to me that the argument is about whether it is possible to
speed up the growth of the economy and at the same time reduce the rate of
inflation. Now the Administration feels that reducing the rate of growth of the
money supply will bring down the rate of inflation. But frequently, when the Fed
has reduced the rate of money growth a great deal, the economy has gone into
recession.  Now you say it's not going to go into recession, it's going to rise.
And what will then cover the difference will be an increase in velocity.

Mr. Perry defined velocity in technical terms, the relationship between M-2 and
G.N.P. In ordinary terms, it's the rate at which money turns over. If people
spend their money faster, or if institutions change so the same amount of money
will be used more frequently and turn over faster, then you can cover the
difference.

The heart of the question is really what makes inflation slow down. Is there
some mysterious relationship between the growth of the money supply, apart from
velocity, or is there something that most people are not getting about what
causes inflation to slow down when demand is growing quite rapidly?

Mr. Weidenbaum. You've put your finger on the essence of the supply-side
oriented strategy. If, putting it in the old colloquial expression, inflation is
too many dollars chasing too few goods, we want to increase the supply of goods
and services. Our objective is achieved not by pumping up demands but by
increasing supply, by reducing unemployment and inflation simultaneously.

Very frankly, I'm not prepared to stake serious, fundamental economic policy
dealing with inflation, unemployment, economic growth and so forth so squarely
on interpretations of monetary turnover.

Mr. Perry. That is quite reasonable. But that is not my reading of what the
Administration has done. The Under Secretary of the Treasury just got very
critical of the Federal Reserve for not being monetarist enough on a week by
week basis. I think he was complaining that they were not keeping the money
supply moving on schedule.

Mr. Weidenbaum. He said, in more detail, the same thing that I said in my Senate
Banking testimony, the same thing we said in the White Paper of Feb. 18., in
describing the entire Reagan economic program: That a major factor in the
success of our program is a monetary policy concentrating on the monetary
aggregates, and one in which that growth rate reduces steadily.

Incidentally, I've noticed over the years that the Federal Reserve - I think
very properly - has not been shy in providing fiscal policy advice to the
Congress, to the executive branch. I've said on a number of occasions that the
flow of advice should be a two-way street.

Mr. Perry. I really don't disagree with the Administration voicing an opinion
about monetary policy.  The question I was raising wasn't that it had no role,
but that it was intimately embracing a very monetarist strategy. That,
historically, is inconsistent.

Mr. Silk. In the last week, we've had a certain amount of confusion over whether
or not the Administration would accept compromises in its tax program. What if
Congress only passes a oneyear program?

Mr. Weidenbaum. First of all, the President has made clear it's his policy not
to say in advance of the time a bill reaches his desk whether he's going to sign
it. Surely I will follow the boss's wishes.

Now, we really believe that our program is far superior to the partial
substitutes that have been mentioned in Congress. We will continue to try to
convince - educate, if you will - members of Congress. It's my expectation that
what comes out of conference and goes to the President will bear a far closer
resemblance to the President's proposal than some of the alternative
suggestions.

Mr. Silk. Some of the opposition came not from the Democrats but from
conservative Republicans concerned about the implicit size of deficits in the
future. Is it your view that these fellows should get back in line?

Mr. Weidenbaum. It's mainly a question of updating what we used to call the
old-time religion - balancing the budget by solely focusing on expenditure
restraint.

Where so much of the increase in the budget comes from the entitlement programs,
the demand for which originates essentially in the economy - a soft economy
generates more demands for welfare, food stamps, Medicaid - an important part of
the balancing of the budget is not just to restrain controllable spending. It is
to reduce demands for those uncontrollable entitlements by an expansion in
economic activity. This is where those multi-year tax cuts serve a vital
function.

Mr. Perry. Well, it is a budget which would be a good budget for expansion back
to a prosperous high-employment economy - leaving aside questions of equity.

The trouble is that (the program) does not address the question that it claims
to, which is: How are we going get rid of inflation in the meantime? How are we
going to make room for a lot of investment in the meantime?

It is really not so much a terribly innovative program. Rather, it's too
conventional. If you're serious about inflation, there are two main avenues. One
is to get serious about an incomes policy: Try to do something to negotiate down
wage and price increases that are totally habituated into the economy. Or two,
to take the traditional conservative cure: Run a slack economy, put so much pain
in that you start disinflating. The Federal Reserve is pursuing the latter. No
one is pursuing the former, and it's certainly an open question whether it would
succeed. But at least it seems to address the question.

And if investment is part of your anti-inflation strategy, then you have to ask:
Have you designed a fiscal and monetary policy that will permit investment? The
ingredients in the economy are there. But I don't think that the budget really
is designed to accommodate that. You get bare balance where you maybe need a
large surplus by 1984 to make room for all that investment.
Regulatory Reform

Mr. Weidenbaum. I welcome the zeal of the newly converted no matter how late in
life.  Mr. Perry. I don't think I'm newly converted to that proposition.  Mr.
Weidenbaum. To a balanced budget?

Mr. Perry. To the idea that you need a big surplus if you're going to get a lot
of investment.

Mr. Weidenbaum. Essentially there are two departures. One that I would call an
opening to the left: incomes policy or, to put it more bluntly, the hair of the
dog that bit you - let's have some more Government intervention. We in the
Reagan Administration want to go the other way. That is, an opening to the
right, to reduce that whole array of Government programs that are obstacles to a
more efficient, more competitive, economy.

A real sleeper in the entire Administration's economic program is regulatory
reform. And the reason it's a sleeper is the progress to date has not depended
on Congressional action but by use of the existing administrative power of the
President.

Our estimates now show that in real terms for the first time in at least a
decade, in fiscal 1981 (which began Oct. 1) there would be no growth in the
total budgets of the regulatory agencies. In fiscal '82 there would be the first
real decline - a 4 percent reduction.

We really are determined to reduce the burden of government regulations -
mindful of the very real social concerns that motivated the establishment of
these programs in the first place.  Look at the automobile regulatory relief,
which is our largest regulatory reform to date. We've focused on such things as
changing the bumper standard, which doesn't involve a human life but fender
denting. We view regulatory compliance costs as a hidden sales tax on the
consumer. Here we're putting into effect right away a supply-side oriented tax
cut.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: graph on savings as portion of disposable income,
1972-1984 graph on Federal budget deficit forecasts photo of Murray L.
Weidenbaum photo of George L. Perry

TYPE: interview

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 6; Page 94, Column 5; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 73 words


As a Vietnam veteran, I found it particularly ironic that David Stockman, whose
interest in theology was in direct proportion to his eligibility for the draft,
who philosophically flimflammed his way through Harvard and baby-sat his way to
Capitol Hill, is now presiding over the cutting of long overdue and only
recently initiated programs to help some of the estimated 700,000 Vietnam
veterans.
IGOR BOBROWSKY, Upper Montclair, N.J.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of David Stockman

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 20, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

PORTS AND OIL SPUR NAVAL BUILDUP BU U.S. AND SOVIET;
Supremacy at Sea The Race in the Indian Ocean Second of three articles.

BYLINE: By MICHAEL T. KAUFMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1529 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI


The Soviet diplomat in the Seychelles was trying to show candor as he spoke with
a visitor in the garden of his embassy in the island group in the Indian Ocean.
''You cannot really believe that we would disrupt Western oil flows,'' he said.
''That is not in our interest.'' The United States military attache in India
struck an equally confidential tone. ''In this world, with missiles, you can't
worry too much about the other fellow's intentions,'' he said. ''You have to
concentrate on his capabilities, and right now, today, the Soviets have the
capability to mine the Straits of Hormuz and move troops and tanks from
Afghanistan to Iran.''

For more than a decade military analysts have written papers on the
vulnerability of oil routes from the Persian Gulf, and military historians have
speculated about who would fill the power vacuum left in the Indian Ocean after
the withdrawal of the British in the 1960's. Now there is an urgency to the
discussion.

What precisely is at stake in the Indian Ocean for the United States, its
Western allies, the Soviet Union and the 36 countries along its shores? In
general, the view of American diplomats and military men is that in light of
Soviet activities in the Horn of Africa and in Afghanistan it was necessary for
the United States to make a bold and obvious stand to counter what Adm. Robert
L.J. Long, the commander in chief of American forces in the Pacific, called
''the continued expansion throughout the area of Soviet military power and
assertiveness either directly or indirectly through the use of surrogates.''

Testifying before the House Armed Services Committee in February, Admiral Long
said: ''The Soviets maneuver for control over Persian Gulf oil and for access to
warm-water ports. With a large military force in Afghanistan, use of port and
air facilities in Ethiopia and South Yemen and ready access to other ports in
the region, the Soviets are developing a substantial presence around the Indian
Ocean.''

During a visit last winter to Pakistan, India and Sri Lanka, the admiral openly
supported renewed and close American military links with Pakistan. In February,
he said: ''We cannot predicate national defense policy on a strategy that may
concede the Indian Ocean and Western Pacific to the Soviets.''

Soviet Supports Ethiopia

Views such as Admiral Long's have gained support and momentum in Washington over
the last four years, particularly since the Soviet turnaround in ending support
for Somalia and backing instead the Ethiopian Government by supplying arms and
financing its use of Cuban troops in 1977.

Up to that time, despite warnings by such countries as India and Sri Lanka, both
the United States and the Soviet Union had shown restraint and neither had
rushed into the void left by the British withdrawal from bases east of Suez. The
United States had a Middle East fleet of three small ships based in Bahrain.
There were even discussions with the Russians about ways to limit naval activity
in the area. But after the Soviet move in the Horn of Africa, the United States
withdrew from the talks.

American alarm continued to grow as the Soviet Union gained the use of the port
at Cam Ranh Bay in Vietnam in 1979 and the United States lost its ally in Iran
that same year with the revolution led by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. The
Soviet intervention in Afghanistan at the end of 1979 was another heavy blow,
and a new American strategy was worked out.

Essentially it involved the rapid building or modernization of facilities on
Diego Garcia, an island in the Indian Ocean that the United States leases from
Britain. Only 15 miles long and at its maximum a mile wide, Diego Garcia was
envisioned as a rear base and depot for a Marine brigade trained for amphibious
landings.

Access Gained on Periphery

In addition, access to potential facilities on the periphery of the region was
obtained in Kenya, Somalia and Oman. The exact nature of these facilities is
hazy. In some cases they are said to be little more than rest and recreation
areas for sailors and marines. In all three countries money has been allocated
for improving harbors and airfields, with arms sales to the governments on
concessional terms.

Discussions on possible military cooperation have also been held with Egypt and
the Sudan. While some Western diplomats wondered in private conversation how the
United States would fare in supporting the mutually suspicious Governments of
Kenya and Somalia and also expressed reservations about their stability, the
major controversy concerns what the United States may do in South Africa and
Pakistan.

Regarding Pakistan, an on-and-off ally of the United States through the old
SEATO and CENTO alliances, there are those such as Admiral Long who believe that
its strategic value to the United States, with its port of Karachi 300 miles
from the Gulf, is sufficient to warrant renewal and augmentation of military
links. There are others, including some diplomats with long experience in South
Asia, who caution that a military arrangement with Pakistan would saddle
Washington with the responsibility for having maintained an unpopular Government
should the now-disunited opposition overthrow the martiallaw regime.

Black Africans Worried

On South Africa, State Department spokesmen keep repeating that the Government's
policy is under review, but the recent embarrassing visit of South African
military men to the United States and the visits of Reagan supporters to South
Africa have alarmed black African leaders. They worry that Washington may be
tempted to end its embargo on naval visits and arms sales to South Africa.

For at least a decade South Africa has been soliciting Western support by
offering its base at Simonstown on the Cape to virtually any Western taker. Four
years ago South African authorities showed off their computerized,
bomb-resistent, oceanwide ship-monitoring facility at Simonstown like landlords
eager to rent their property.  The South Africans say geography makes the
country a vital factor in the defense of the West and of the Indian Ocean.

The need for a strategy to counter Soviet actions was, of course, dismissed as
needless by Yuri Velikanov, the Soviet diplomat in the strategic Seychelles.
Yes, he acknowledged, the Soviet Union has its own strategic objectives in the
Indian Ocean but a threat to the oil routes is not among them. No, he said, the
Soviet Union was not going to use Afghanistan or Ethiopia as a base from which
to either invade or subvert the countries of the Gulf or the Middle East.

'An Embarrassment'

''For us, Afghanistan is an embarrassment,'' he said. ''There were mistakes when
we went in, and we really are looking for ways to get out.''

There were three compelling reasons for having brought Soviet warships to the
Indian Ocean in large numbers, he asserted. The first reason he gave ''is to
secure our own maritime and fishing areas.'' As the Soviet Union has developed
its maritime and fishing fleets, traffic between Vladivostok and Black Sea ports
has increased and has formed one of the country's most important naval highways.

The second objective of Soviet naval policy, Mr. Velikanov said, is Moscow's
support for African ''liberation movements.'' He said a military presence was
important to bolster the position of these movements. But since such movements
have prevailed everywhere in Africa except in South Africa and South-West
Africa, it was obvious that the Soviet diplomat regarded South Africa as the
target of this strategy.

Soviet Ships Visit Mozambique

A week before he was interviewed, three Soviet ships had pulled into Maputo
harbor in Mozambique in response to a South African raid. French officials and
leftist politicians on the island of Reunion agreed that the prize sought by
Soviet actions in the region was not the oil supplies of the Gulf but the
mineral wealth of southern Africa.

A third point raised by Mr. Velikanov was not echoed by any Western source.
''Our presence in the Indian Ocean is also a matter of national defense,'' he
said. ''Your missiles from submarines in this ocean can reach any part of the
Soviet Union.''

In the now suspended talks on limiting strategic arms, the Russians were
particularly concerned about submarine-launched missiles. A high Sri Lankan
official even suggested that the Soviet entry into the Indian Ocean might be a
complicated move intended to get arms talks going again.

When the visitor chided the Soviet diplomat that the prospect of missiles
raining on Moscow from the Indian Ocean seemed farfetched, his answer strangely
echoed the response of the American military attache in India. ''In this world
you must deal with capabilities, not probabilities,'' Mr. Velikanov said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of The Kirov (Page A12)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 21, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

HAIG FAVORS STAND AGAINST VIOLATIONS OF RIGHTS ABROAD

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 971 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 20


Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. has said that the United States should
oppose human rights violations ''by ally or adversary.'' But, he said, it should
be more critical of ''totalitarian'' regimes than of ''authoritarian'' ones.

''The collapse of a bulwark against aggression, and the replacement of an au-

Excerpts from the speech, page A6.
thoritarian regime with a totalitarian one'' could produce ''the ultimate
failure,'' Mr. Haig warned.

He characterized totalitarian regimes as dominating all aspects of their
citizens' lives and resisting change. Authoritarian regimes, he said, dominate
only some areas of their citizens' lives and are more open to change.

Countries Not Named

Mr. Haig did not mention any specific countries, except to note that because of
''intolerance'' in their societies, there had been a huge number of refugees
recently from the Soviet Union, Cuba, Vietnam, Cambodia and Afghanistan.

His speech on ''Human Rights and American Interests'' was the most extensive
discussion yet of the Administration's approach to the subject. It was given
here on March 31 before the Trilateral Commission, a policy-discussion group of
more than 200 leading businessmen and intellectuals from Western Europe, North
America and Japan. The speech was ''off the record,'' meaning that it was not
meant for publication, but it was given to The New York Times today upon the
newspaper's request.

Mr. Haig's aides said the Administration's overall policy on human rights was
still being reviewed and that Mr. Haig's speech, while authoritative, was not
necessarily the final word on the subject.

View of the Primary Danger

The major thrust of his address was to assert that the Reagan Administration was
sensitive to human rights concerns, but he underscored his belief that the
primary danger was from ''totalitarian aggression,'' a danger he said came
primarily from the Soviet Union.

In the three months that it has been in office, the Reagan Administration has
shown more tolerance of rightist, ''authoritarian'' regimes than the Carter
Administration did. For instance, efforts have been made to improve relations
with South Korea, Argentina, Chile and the Philippines, countries that had been
at odds with the Carter Administration over their human rights records.

Under Mr. Haig, the State Department has also adopted a policy of not
criticizing friendly nations in public. In his speech, Mr. Haig provided what
amounted to a philosophic justification for these attitudes.

''We wish that every people could enjoy the blessings of liberty as we enjoy
them,'' he said. ''But there are limits to what we can or should do to transform
other cultures, customs and institutions.''

''At the same time, we confront another aspect of reality,'' he said. ''The
Soviet Union and its allies - countries that reject our concepts of human rights
- continue to enlarge their military power and seem increasingly inclined to use
their arms to advance their cause.''

Mr. Haig said the United States was not prepared ''to see the world remade by
others hostile to our deepest convictions.'' ''Our resistence to this aggression
and our assistance to its victims constitutes a defense of human rights that is
at the very basis of our foreign policy and our national interest,'' he said.

But he said: ''Let us be clear on one issue: the United States opposes the
violation of human rights by ally or adversary, friend or foe. We are not going
to pursue a policy of selective indignation.''

Differences Among Violators

He said, however, that the United States ''must be discriminating'' as to ''the
source of the violation'' and the possible impact of any protest by this
country. ''We should distinguish between the socalled totalitarian and
authoritarian regimes,'' Mr. Haig said.  ''The totalitarian model unfortunately
draws upon the resources of modern technology to impose its will on all aspects
of a citizen's behavior. The totalitarian regimes tend to be intolerant at home
and abroad, actively hostile to all we represent and ideologically resistant to
political change.''

''The authoritarian regime usually stems from a lack of political or economic
development and customarily reserves for itself absolute authority in only a few
politically sensitive areas,'' Mr. Haig said.

He said he was not praising authoritarian governments, but only saying that they
''are more likely to change'' than totalitarian regimes.

''It should be our objective to hold forth ourselves as a model worthy of
imitation as that change occurs and to help the evolution of authoritarian
government toward a more democratic form,'' Mr. Haig said.

Determining U.S. Policy

American policy toward countries committing violations should be determined, Mr.
Haig said, on the basis of whether the regime helps or hinders ''international
aggression'' and whether it is totalitarian or authoritarian. Mr. Haig said the
United States should also consider the record and program of those opposing the
regime in question.

''We have seen in recent years how a policy not informed by these principles can
contribute to the ultimate failure,'' he said: ''A collapse of a bulwark against
aggression and the replacement of an authoritarian regime with a totalitarian
one or one that distributes its oppression in random fashion.''

This was apparently an allusion to the fall of anti-Communist authoritarian
regimes in such places as Vietnam, Cambodia, Iran and Nicaragua.

''Surely we do not have all of the answers here,'' Mr. Haig said.  ''Still, we
must do better than we have done in the past. This means a more precise
calculation of how our action in treating human rights violators conforms to the
larger projects - resisting aggression and supporting the evolution of more
humane societies.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 21, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA'S AIM IN ASIA: TO 'CONTAIN' SOVIET

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1035 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, April 20


China's view of Southeast Asia is dominated by implacable hostility to Vietnam's
conquest of Cambodia and a conviction that the event was part of a Soviet quest
to encircle China and threaten the rest of the world.

A series of interviews and discussions with senior Chinese officials,
professional analysts and responsible journalists in Peking and Shanghai
disclosed an attitude that a ranking Southeast Asian diplomat in Peking
described as ''a 1950 psychology'' similar to John Foster Dulles's belief that
the whole world must unite to defeat a common foe, combined with a faith that
''right will win out'' even if the struggle takes a long time.

A senior Chinese Foreign Ministry official reinforced the comparison by reviving
the notion of ''containment,'' a word that had much currency in Mr. Dulles's
era. ''We think it is best now to contain the Soviet presence in Afghanistan and
Cambodia and not allow it to advance further,'' he declared.

The official made it clear that he considered containment only a short-term
goal. In the long run China believes that unity of the rest of the world will
force the Vietnamese out of Cambodia and bring down the pro-Soviet regime in
Hanoi. Remarkably uniform opinions were expressed in the discussions, suggesting
that the participants reflected official policy worked out in detailed terms and
communicated to those with a need to know.

Support for Pol Pot Urged

The policy excludes all consideration of national interests of Southeast Asian
countries and urges that they, with the support of China, Japan, the United
States and Western Europe, sustain indefinitely the forces led by former Prime
Minister Pol Pot. It calls on all Cambodians to fight the Vietnamese occupiers.

The Chinese analysts reject the possibility of a negotiated political
compromise. ''What you don't get on the battlefield, you can't get through a
political solution,'' the Foreign Ministry official said. The analysts saw no
possibility other than a protracted war by the Cambodian people against an enemy
that is numerically greatly superior and vastly better armed.

Wu Zengda, deputy director of the Shanghai Institute for International Studies,
estimated that the 200,000 Vietnamese soldiers in Cambodia were confronted by
40,000 guerrillas under Mr. Pol Pot and about 3,000 under the command of
non-Communist Cambodians.  Nonetheless, the foreign affairs official said, the
resistance fighters are carrying on war on two-thirds of Cambodia's territory.

The Chinese conceded that the Pol Pot regime, which enjoyed Peking's full
support during its rule from 1975 until 1979, had made what an official
described as ''a number of mistakes in domestic policy.''

Accusations 'Not Completely True'

''But saying that Pol Pot killed many people is not completely true,'' said
Jiang Yuanchun, deputy director of the international department of People's
Daily, the Communist Party's main newspaper.

The analysts compared Mr. Pol Pot's policies of revolutionary uprooting of
Cambodian society to what is called in Peking the ''ultraleftist'' policies of
the disgraced ''Gang of Four.'' But they asserted unanimously that the Cambodian
leaders had corrected their errors and would not repeat them and had now gained
the support and confidence of Cambodians.

''We must allow inexperienced people to make mistakes and correct them,'' a
Shanghai historian said in discussing the murder of countless Cambodians.

The Chinese asserted that the former chief of state, Prince Norodom Sihanouk,
and former Prime Minister Son Sann, leader of the principal non-Communist
resistance movement, were moving toward a coalition with the Pol Pot forces.
Both the Prince and Mr. Son Sann have denied this. The analysts declined to
comment on an observation that China had jailed the Gang of Four but was calling
on Cambodians to accept their Cambodian counterparts once again as their
leaders.

In the Chinese view, the war will be long. ''Things in Vietnam are bound to
change if it continues for three to five years,'' the foreign affairs official
said. The analysts interviewed smiled in apparent acknowledgment of China's arms
assistance to the Pol Pot forces but declined to comment. Peking's military
contribution to the Cambodian struggle was described as tying down 60 percent of
the Vietnamese army on the border with China as a result of the Chinese
incursion into Vietnam in 1979.

A 'Lesson' for Both Sides

Mr. Jiang said that that attack, which was called a Chinese ''lesson'' to
Vietnam, was also a lesson for China. ''Through this war we learned that there
are some problems in the equipment, weapons and strategy of our army,'' the
editor said. ''This can help us to improve militarily.''

The Chinese interviewed expressed hope that the non-Communist Southeast Asian
nations, the United States, Japan and the countries of Western Europe would
continue to vote to keep the Pol Pot representatives in the United Nations as
the best way of opposing what they unanimously termed ''Soviet global and
Vietnamese regional hegemonism.''

The analysts defended China's continued support of the Communist parties of
Thailand, Malaysia and Burma, which are engaged in armed insurrections against
the governments with which Peking has friendly relations. In the Chinese view, a
continued Chinese link to the guerrilla movements prevents their being dominated
by Moscow.

However, the officials and experts expressed hope that their political allies in
Southeast Asia would attempt to compose their differences with the governments
through consultations rather than war. Southeast Asian diplomats in Peking said
that their governments remained unhappy over Peking's unwillingness to
dissociate itself from the guerrilla movements despite its effort to improve
governmental relations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 21, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AS ARMADAS INTRUDE ON 'ZONE OF PEACE,' REGION WATCHES WITH MIXED FEELINGS;
Supremacy at Sea The Race in the Indian Ocean Last of three articles.

BYLINE: By MICHAEL T. KAUFMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1649 words

DATELINE: PORT LOUIS, Mauritius


The buildup of United States and Soviet naval forces in the Indian Ocean is
causing growing concern among the 36 countries in the region.

The new American base on the island of Diego Garcia and the rapid increase of
the Soviet and American armadas are becoming major factors in national politics,
and the militarily weak countries feel menaced from East and West.

Essentially, they are polarizing into two groups. One clings to the hope that
the ocean will be proclaimed a ''zone of peace,'' free of superpowers. The other
seems resigned to the idea that the best that can be achieved realistically is a
''balanced presence'' of foreign powers.

To a large extent, though with certain exceptions, these two positions largely
mask the pro-Western or pro-Soviet positions of the countries in the region.
India, for example, which at the meeting of the nations professing nonalignment
wanted to condemn the use of Diego Garcia without mentioning Soviet facilities,
is the strongest exponent of the zone of peace idea.

On the other hand, Singapore, which does not allow Soviet warships to dock for
repairs in its huge naval yards, supports the balanced presence, or, as an
Australian diplomat said recently, ''We talk of a balanced presence, but what
that really means is we want you guys to be there in force but we don't want
them.'' Similarly, he said, those who demand a fully demilitarized ocean often
seem to mean that they want the Americans out but have no great objection to the
Russians.

Sri Lanka Proposed Idea

The zone of peace idea was first raised by Sri Lanka - some say at India's
instigation - in the late 1960's, when it became apparent that Britain was
abandoning the ocean it had policed so well and so thoroughly for so long.

For nearly a century the East African shilling was maintained at par with the
Indian rupee. Under British protection migrations mixed the populations of
Malaysia, India, the islands and the African coast. The British bases at Aden,
Mombasa, Cape Town, Colombo, Perth and Singapore cornered the ocean. Even in
World War II, though Singapore, the Gibraltar of the East, was captured, the
Japanese were never really able to dislodge or challenge the British.

In the late 1960's it became evident to the statesmen in many of the countries
along the Indian Ocean that none of them could replace the British, nor could
they even reasonably expect to project a mare nostrum view.

The African countries in general looked inland toward the continent. Except for
India and Australia, none of the countries in the region had real navies.
Australia was largely concerned with the defense of its east, or Pacific, coast,
where most of its population is concentrated. India still has a coastal navy and
is largely incapable of repulsing ships of great powers except through the force
of rhetoric and moral suasion.

U.N. Committee Is Created

In this situation, the likelihood of great-power rivalry was regarded as high.
In 1971 Sri Lanka, which was then known as Ceylon, succeeded in having the
concept raised at the United Nations, and the Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian
Ocean was created. It now has 45 members, including most of the Indian Ocean
countries and the major maritime nations. The committee, headed by Nadarajah
Balasubramaniam of Sri Lanka, had planned to convene a special conference on the
zone of peace in July, but opposition by the West and by those favoring a
''balanced presence'' has delayed those plans.

The views of the balanced presence advocates, which include Malaysia, Somalia,
Mauritius and a number of the Persian Gulf nations, were reflected by Michael
Cheok, an official of Singapore's Foreign Office. ''Yes, of course we would like
to see the Indian Ocean declared a zone of peace,'' he said. ''But the reality
on the ground and on the water will not allow this. We are realistic enough and
pragmatic enough to realize this, so we would like to have a balanced situation
with many powers maintaining parity.''

The diplomat said that actions by the Soviet Union had overtaken the plans for a
peace zone. He cited Soviet intervention in the Horn of Africa and Afghanistan,
and instability in the Persian Gulf, as the key events that put theoretical
yearnings for a demilitarized ocean beyond reach. Mr. Cheok reflected the views
and concerns of his country's Deputy Prime Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Sinnathamby Rajaratnam, when he detailed Singapore's view of Soviet intentions.

''Our basic analysis is that Soviet expansionism has succeeded in fulfilling the
dreams of Ho Chi Minh and securing what had been French Indochina for Vietnam.
The next objective in the East could be Thailand, which could be taken in three
days. The idea is to detach Thailand and spread their influence down the Malay
Peninsula to eventually control the straits and the Indonesian passage into the
Indian Ocean from the South China Sea. Then Afghanistan. They have their toehold
in the western part of the ocean, Socotra, Ethiopia, Yemen. It is one end of the
pincer and Cam Ranh Bay is the other end.''

The Marxist Perspective

At the other end of the political spectrum are people like Paul Berenger, the
secretary general of the Marxist party of Mauritius, the major opposition group
here; Paul Verges, the head of the Communist Party of Reunion; Jacques Hodoul,
the Foreign Minister of the Seychelles, and virtually the entire Indian Foreign
Ministry.

Mr. Verges, for example, pointed out that the four main entry points into the
Indian Ocean - the Suez Canal, the Strait of Malacca, the Australian coast and
the South African Cape - are commanded by pro-Western powers. He offered the
Marxist view that Western military intervention in the ocean was motivated by
the desire of industrialized countries to maintain supplies of African raw
materials, thus perpetuating colonial patterns. Mr. Berenger was more skeptical
of Soviet interests in the area but still viewed the United States as the major
intruder.

''American imperialist, even your machine gun don't make us afraid,'' signs at a
hunger strike of refugees from Diego Garcia in Port Louis proclaimed last month.

Silvio Michel, who organized the refugees, said his primary interest was
humanitarian because the islanders, as they are called, have had great
difficulty being absorbed in Mauritius, which is overpopulated and where
unemployment is high. But Mr. Michel, a university-educated baker who is an
activist in the Marxist party here, makes the point that like the islanders, the
issue of Diego Garcia will not go away. ''It threatens the peace,'' Mr. Michel
said.

Mauritius Claims Diego Garcia

Mr. Berenger said his party holds the position that Diego Garcia is Mauritian
territory. If his party wins elections that should take place next year, Mr.
Berenger said, the new government would stop the practice of allowing warships
to visit here, and it would also step up the campaign to have the United States
vacate Diego Garcia, 1,200 miles away. In the last election, Mr. Berenger's
party won the largest number of seats, but it has not been able to outvote a
coalition of rightist and centrist parties.

Dr. Seewoosagur Ramgoolam, the Prime Minister, who has taken a strong
pro-Western position, has been forced by political reality to also demand the
return of Diego Garcia to Mauritian sovereignty, contending that it was ceded
under duress when Mauritius became independent. But he has also supported the
presence of the United States at the base, which Washington leased from Britain,
adding that in effect he would like his country to replace Britain, that it
should be Mauritius and not Britain that collects the rent.

Meanwhile, Dr. Ramgoolam's supporters hope that expected infusions of Western
aid and investment will substantially ease unemployment, which more than any
other factor is likely to influence the elections. The Government was gratified
by the visit last month of 28 American and British executives who explored the
possibility of using Mauritian labor to dredge the harbor and construct runways
at Diego Garcia, and of buying Mauritian building materials.

Mr. Michel, the protest organizer, said he did not think that the contractors
were likely to hire the unemployed islanders. ''They will not hire our people
because then they would see how their cemeteries were desecrated.''

India Criticizes Washington

India takes a more distant view, but the chief offender is viewed as the West.
Just before he left for talks in Washington recently on United States plans for
the region, Eric Gonsalves, the Indian Foreign Secretary, talked critically of
what he described as attempts by Washington to invoke a ''gunboat'' policy
without consultation with India. Mr. Gonsalves said it was clear to him that the
Indian Ocean was developing into an unstable front in a new cold war.

''Our assessment is that both are destabilizing the area,'' Mr.  Gonsalves said,
referring to the United States and the Soviet Union.  But he added that Moscow,
unlike Washington, had given India assurances that it favored a conference on
the creation of a zone of peace and force reduction talks with the United
States.

As for the Soviet troop presence in Afghanistan, Mr. Gonsalves wondered whether
United States policy planners were actually pleased by it, and using it to
create domestic support for intensified military spending and preparedness.

In addition to those who take vocal positions, there are quite a few diplomats
and politicians in the Indian Ocean region who hope that no one asks them about
their views. ''To tell you the truth,'' said a diplomat who asked that neither
his identity nor that of his country be used, ''we think it is silly to say
anything, since with so much superpower power we are powerless to do anything.
Truly, we hope the questions just go away and that we are spared dangerous
choices.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of Indian Ocean and surrounding area

TYPE: series

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 21, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

POLITICAL ALTERNATIVES IN LATIN AMERICA

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 394 words


To the Editor:

In his March 30 reply to my March 16 letter Carlos Fuentes, while breaking no
new ground, sets a dubious standard for civility by saying that perhaps I was
''ill'' the day I read his March 5 Op-Ed article. Ad hominem attacks serve no
useful purpose, and they cannot camouflage inconsistencies and questionable
logic.

Certainly I don't ''deny'' the Salvadorans and other Latin Americans the right
to revolution. But what kind of ''revolution,'' what kind of change of regime is
Mr. Fuentes talking about? The kind that has brought repression, systematic
denial of human rights and solidly entrenched dictatorships to millions in Cuba,
Vietnam, Cambodia and elsewhere? Is leftist tyranny more palatable than one of
the rightist variety? The stream of refugees from these ''socialist'' Edens is
answer enough.

I agree that the United States has no right or cause to help suppress genuinely
popular movements striving for justice and overdue change; status quo in some
countries is tantamount to institutionalized oppression. But does Mr. Fuentes
propose that self-proclaimed revolutionaries, financed by the very outside
interests whose interference in the internal affairs of states he so piously
deplores and opposes, be permitted to overthrow existing governments - just to
satisfy their thirst for power, for the greater glory of an obsolete,
discredited dogma? There is no ''hypothetical'' foreign involvement in El
Salvador. Surely he doesn't contend that the guerrillas get their weapons at
rummage sale.

Mr. Fuentes speaks of a ''new, polycentric world'' and a ''pluralistic
approach.'' Admirable. But does this new world order countenance the presence of
Cuban mercenaries in Africa and Vietnamese hegemony in Cambodia and Laos? Is
imperalism or military intervention an acceptable mode of conduct - provided the
practitioner is a leftist ''revolutionary'' regime?

I doubt that many Latin Americans want any part of this latest version of a
brave new world. They may have no use for U.S.  paternalism, and rightly so, but
neither do they wish to be ruled by ideological fanatics who are contemptuous of
anyone's rights except their own.

Fortunately Latin Americans have other alternatives. They need settle neither
for a Somoza nor a Castro.
MILAN B. SKACEL, President, Chamber of Commerce of Latin America, New York,
April 7, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 21, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

DIRECTION OF INTELLIGENCE DEBATE IN CONGRESS STILL UNCLEAR;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1401 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 20


In hearings beginning this week, the subcommittee on security and terrorism of
the Senate Judiciary Committee will seek to publicize theories that the Soviet
Union supports and directs an integrated network of terrorist organizations and
has shaped Western public opinion to its advantage through a large-scale
''disinformation'' campaign, according to a subcommittee official.

Joel S. Lisker, the chief counsel of the new subcommittee, said in a recent
interview that ''we will do everything we can to modify and eliminate'' the
guidelines imposed in 1975 to restrict infiltration and surveillance of domestic
groups of political dissidents.

Republican subcommittee members have also suggested that they will strongly urge
the Reagan Administration to remove many of the restraints on intelligence
agencies. In the view of some conservatives, this would permit a revitalized and
newly motivated corps of Government investigators to gather evidence on a
security problem that they believe has been unwisely discounted in recent years.

As a result, liberals in and out of Congress have begun to express fear that the
Republican-controlled subcommittee is a manifestation of a larger effort to
recreate an internal security mandate that was largely dropped in the middle and
late 1970's.

Concern on Committee's Goals

''We are increasingly concerned about the direction of the subcommittee,'' said
Jerry Berman, the legislative counsel of the American Civil Liberties Union.
''We are not sure that some of the subcommittee may not wish to brand those who
disagree with government policy as terrorists, foreign agents or Communist
dupes.  That is McCarthyism and we oppose it.''

Representative Don Edwards of California, a liberal Democrat who is chairman of
the House subcommittee on civil and constitutional rights, has expressed alarm
that ''momentum appears to be on the side of those who savor the bad old days.''

As yet, momentum of any kind is hard to detect. Instead, there seems to be
cautious circling by contending forces.  At the first meeting of the security
subcommittee, its chairman, Senator Jeremiah Denton, Republican of Alabama,
moved to reassure liberals alarmed by its creation. The retired admiral and
naval aviator, who was a prisoner of war in Vietnam for seven years, said that
it was his intention ''to ensure the protection of our basic constitutional
rights to all citizens.'' In an interview, he repeatedly stressed that he had no
intention of permitting the subcommittee to be used for political witch hunting.


Opposes Relaxing of Guidelines

He also said that his present inclination was to believe that the Federal Bureau
of Investigation needed more manpower rather than a ''relaxation of guidelines''
now restricting investigatory abuse.

Two Democratic Senators, Patrick J. Leahy of Vermont and Joseph R.  Biden Jr. of
Delaware, minority members of the subcommittee, said they doubted that Senator
Denton intended to employ investigative excesses.

''He has been exceedingly reasonable,'' said Senator Biden.  ''Nothing about the
guy makes me say, 'Here comes Joe McCarthy.' '' On the other hand, there is
strong evidence that three Republicans, Senator John P. East of South Carolina,
Senator Orrin G. Hatch of Utah and Senator Strom Thurmond of South Carolina, who
is chairman of the Judiciary Committee, all favor urging the executive branch to
relax administrative restrictions on the intelligence agencies.

Goals of the Committee

Mr. Lisker said he believed the mission of the subcommittee was ''basically to
alert, to apprise, to increase awareness by maximizing publicity so that when
substantive information comes along about disinformation and terrorism, the
public will understand it.''

Disinformation is defined by intelligence agency specialists as information
intended to mislead recipients to the advantage of the government or
intelligence agency that originates it, usually in a clandestine fashion.

One witness at a subcommittee hearing scheduled for Friday will be Arnaud
deBorchgrave, a former foreign correspondent for Newsweek and the co-author of
''The Spike,'' a best-selling novel that attributes many Western foreign policy
and intelligence failures of the last 20 years to a vast disinformation
campaign. Many conservatives regard the novel as veiled nonfiction.

Another witness will be Claire Sterling, a Rome-based journalist who wrote ''The
Terror Network,'' which argues that much terrorist activity has enjoyed Soviet
support and encouragement. Other witnesses will be William Colby, a former
Director of Central Intelligence, and Michael Ledeen, editor of the Washington
Quarterly.

'Not Necessarily Disloyalty'

Mr. Lisker said he believed Miss Sterling's thesis that the Soviet Union
covertly supports international terrorism and that disinformation has warped
viewpoints and policies in this country.

''It is not necessarily disloyalty,'' he said in discussing the possible effect
on journalists of disinformation, ''it may be expediency or laziness. But
sometimes it is ideological attraction and it does happen.''

Although President Reagan and his closest advisers have had little to say about
internal security since assuming office, Mr. Reagan's past ideology and the
expectations of his political supporters could have a bearing on the
Administration's policy. Moreover, the Administration has already proclaimed
combating international terrorism as one of its highest priorities.

Before Mr. Reagan's inauguration, the conservative Heritage Foundation prepared
a broad ''blueprint'' of suggested policies for a conservative government. The
intelligence and internal security sections of the Heritage report were edited
by Samuel T. Francis, who has since joined the staff of Senator East. Some other
staff assistants to Republican members of Congress assisted in writing the
report.

Strengthening Intelligence Effort

The Heritage report includes scores of recommendations aimed at building the
strongest internal security and counterintelligence apparatus the nation has
ever had, with the power to use currently illegal methods such as
''surrepititious entries'' and mail openings. The report said that current
executive orders and F.B.I.  ''guidelines'' imposed by former Attorney General
Edward H. Levi should be abolished, with investigations ''limited only by the
letter of applicable statutes.''

The report also called for the appointment of an Attorney General and an F.B.I.
director ''who understand the nature of the threat and the professional
tradecraft of internal security work.''

The Heritage paper also recommended that the President use his leadership to
develop public support for such a program, saying he should supply
''Presidential emphasis on the nature of the threat, repeated speeches on the
escalation of Soviet bloc intelligence activities, the nature of the terrorist
threat and in its international dimensions and the reality of subversion.''

These suggested tactics and policies have not been formally endorsed or
repudiated by the Administration. However, some of the proposals were embodied
in a draft of a new executive order for the intelligence community. The draft
was recently prepared by an interagency committee and disclosed by officials
opposed to increased Government surveillance on American citizens. The leak led
both senior Central Intelligence Agency and White House officials to discount
the draft order.

Senator East, who was described by Senator Biden as ''very bright, very
ideological, very determined and a man pursuing his destiny,'' said in an
interview that he was sensitive to the need to protect civil liberties but also
concerned about the subcommittee being too ''naive'' about internal security.

He said his ''general feeling'' was that present guidelines and executive orders
governing the F.B.I. and C.I.A. ''are too restrictive and limiting.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 21, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

10.36 RISE PUTS DOW AT 1,015.94

BYLINE: By VARTANIG G. VARTAN

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 774 words


Amid signs that inflation might be easing, the Dow Jones industrial average
climbed 10.36 points in a late rally yesterday, to finish at 1,015.94, the
highest this year.

With advances barely outnumbering declines, much of the market's strength showed
in brokerage-house, high-technology and blue-chip issues.

The Dow industrial average was a fraction above its 1,015.22 close on March 25.
Both closes were higher than any other in eight years.  ''One trigger for
today's rally was the expectation of reduced inflation rates that is being
fueled by the decline in energy costs,'' said Howard J. Abner, chairman of Abner
Herrman & Brock Inc.

Investor hopes for diminishing inflation got a lift from Sunday's statement by
Sheik Ahmed Zaki Yamani, Saudi Arabia's oil minister, that his country would
maintain its high production of crude oil to create an oversupply until other
petroleum-exporting nations lowered their prices significantly.

Meanwhile, the Commerce Department reported that inflation rose at a 7.8 percent
annual rate in the first quarter, as measured by the gross national product
deflator, compared with a 10.7 percent rate in 1980's final quarter. The
better-known Consumer Price Index has the cost of living above 11 percent
annually.

Yesterday's close on the Dow was the highest since Jan. 23, 1973, when it
finished at 1,018.66. The record closing stands at 1,051.70 on Jan. 11, 1973.
Both peaks reflected the enthusiasm following President Nixon's re-election and
the announcement of peace talks in Vietnam.

A key factor in the market's current resilience, Mr. Abner noted, is the hope
for passage of the economic program proposed by President Reagan.

The industrial average showed a gain of less than a point at 2:30 P.M. ''Then
the institutions came in with bundles of money, and we saw good buying in the
drug, aerospace and other sectors,'' said John A. Conlon Jr., who heads the
block trading desk at E.F. Hutton & Company. ''The last six or seven points up
on the Dow reflected the limited supply of stock available.''

Turnover actually declined to 51 million shares from Thursday's pre-Easter
turnover of 53 million shares. The number of blocks of 10,000 or more shares
contracted to 673 from 855.

Bond prices displayed moderate advances, although yields still hovered at
near-record levels. Slow sales were reported for new Bell System debentures
yielding a record 15 1/4 percent.

For traders and stockbrokers alike, the greatest excitement was in the
brokerage-house issues. Perrin H. Long Jr., who follows the group for Lipper
Analytical Services, said the group was gripped by takeover mania.

This followed yesterday's confirmation that Shearson Loeb Rhoades - a dynamic
performer in recent years -and the American Express Company were involved in
merger talks and expected to make an announcement before today's market opening.
Yesterday, neither stock traded.

Although Merrill Lynch, the world's largest broker, is not generally considered
as a takeover candidate because of its huge size, the stock, trading ex
dividend, rose 2 1/2, to 40 1/2. Dean Witter Reynolds, the best percentage
gainer, jumped 3 7/8 points, to 26 3/4. E.F. Hutton climbed 3 3/8, to 35 1/4,
while Paine Webber advanced 2 7/8, to 26. A.G. Edwards & Sons gained 2 1/4, to
27 1/2, and Donaldson, Lufkin rose a point, to 10 3/8.

Among high-technology standouts was Digital Equipment, the leading producer of
minicomputers. The stock, which does not pay a cash dividend, swept ahead 5 3/4
points, to 103 1/4, and traded at record prices.

Peter Labe of Smith Barney, Harris Upham & Company, who recommended purchase of
Digital Equipment on April 2 at 92, said he still considered the stock a buy
''because we think earnings will grow at better than 20 percent, compounded
annually, over the next three to five years.''

Tandy, which also does not pay cash dividends, surged 3 3/8, to 73, and hit a
peak. Its call options scored impressive gains on the American Stock Exchange.
Among the blue chips, Merck continued to climb, advancing 2 1/2, to 95 3/4, in
response to improved profits reported last week.

For the second straight session, the Nasdaq composite index, tracking 2,700
domestic common stocks, set a record. It rose 0.91, to 217.55.

The Amex market-value index gained 0.44, to 365.86. Its record closing of 370.75
was set last Nov. 28. Health-Chem plunged 3 points, to 15 7/8, on the Amex in
response to a negative article in Barron's.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 22, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET BROADENS ROLE IN CAMBODIA AND HANOI IS REPORTEDLY IRRITATED

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 597 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


The Soviet Union is broadening its military influence and technical presence in
Cambodia, and some Western analysts and unofficial Cambodian sources say the
Russians' moves are irritating their Vietnamese allies, who are here in large
numbers.

A year ago only a handful of Soviet diplomats were seen in Phnom Penh, the
capital. Today there are 200 to 300 advisers. They occupy a large apartment
complex, and several villas are being renovated to house more.

According to a Soviet official here, the Russians have begun an ambitious
program to rebuild Cambodia from the ravages of war and starvation that followed
the Communist takeover in 1975.

''Today we are beginning to think about the long term, when emergency aid is
over and the international agencies leave,'' a Soviet Embassy official, Vladimir
M. Golovkin, said, referring to a large food relief effort, undertaken mostly by
the West, that began two years ago. ''We are now preparing the base. It is the
beginning.''

James P. Grant, executive director of the United Nations Children's Fund, said
recently that it would take billions of dollars to renovate Cambodia's crippled
state services.

Between 1970 and 1979 Cambodia was devastated by war and by the excesses of the
Government of Prime Minister Pol Pot, who was ousted when the Vietnamese invaded
in late 1978. Vietnamese forces remain in the country.

The Soviet Union already wields considerable influence in Laos.Moscow is also
the main prop of Vietnam's ailing economy and the chief supplier for its
military.

The Soviet Embassy recently issued a press bulletin detailing plans for
rebuilding factories, power plants, hospitals, grain silos, roads, bridges,
colleges and vocational schools. The Soviet Union said it gave about $250
million in emergency aid to Cambodia in the last two years.

But while the Russians appear eager to publicize their economic aid, little
information has been issued on military aid.  Western diplomatic sources in
Bangkok say the Russians have shipped arms in through the port of Kompong Som
and by air via Vietnam to Siem Reap, in northwestern Cambodia. The Vietnamese
and Cambodian armies are concentrated in the northwest, where remnants of the
Chinese-backed Pol Pot regime are still fighting.

The Phnom Penh Government says that several Cambodians have been sent to the
Soviet Union for training as pilots. Other military personnel are believed to be
receiving training in the Soviet Union, but Vietnam plays a much larger role in
shaping the Cambodian armed forces.

The Cambodian Foreign Minister, Hun Sen, made it clear in an interview that
Cambodian-Soviet ties would be strengthened. He said that ''hundreds'' of
Cambodians had been sent to the Soviet Union and Eastern-bloc countries for
training and that ''thousands'' were scheduled to go this year.

Some Western analysts speculate that Hanoi does not favor a strong Soviet
presence in Cambodia and would instead prefer to have Soviet influence
''filtered'' through the Vietnamese.

The Soviet Embassy here denies there are any problems. But unofficial Cambodian
sources assert that the relationship is not comfortable. One story making the
rounds in Phnom Penh is that the Russians initially insisted on piloting seven
aircraft made available to the Cambodians and backed down only after a dispute
with the Vietnamese.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 22, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

TV: 'SHIVA,' WORSHIP OF A GOD

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 27, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 758 words


''MANIFESTATIONS of Shiva'' is the title of an art exhibition touring the United
States and of a related film produced for the Asian Society. The exhibition, at
the Philadelphia Museum of Art until June 7, shows how Indian artists have
conceived of the Hindu god over 2,000 years. The film, on WNET-TV, Channel 13,
tonight at 10:30 o'clock, attempts to convey the very experience of Shiva
worship.

At the outset, a narrator explains that Shiva, one of the supreme Hindu gods, is
both the lord of life and the destroyer of life. The complex duality is total,
encompassing male and female, birth and death, the sacred and the profane. The
whole is symbolized in an elaborate dance inspired by the four key stages of
life from youth to old age. This film, reflecting the cyclical view of another
reality, then sets out to ''explore all these ideas without any further
narration.''

Although occasionally verging on the pictorial slickness of some very expensive
magazines, the images are generally stunning.  Beginning with water rippling
onto a sun-burnished shore, they shift to scenes of a boy washing animals or a
young man emerging from his public bath to perform a careful ritual with salves,
paints and ornaments. As other young men begin an arduous process of putting on
makeup for a public performance, older men work on creating a dazzling
representation of Shiva on a large patch of ground.

Gradually, the emphasis shifts to older people, some teaching, some meditating,
some playing a sitar and capturing the rhythms of brooks and waterfalls.
Finally, with a young child squatting before a pyre, a body is cremated. The
film's more dominant images are briefly reviewed in reverse. The young man seen
at the beginning sits on a shore fingering his beads and scattering his
brilliantly colored flowers.

Written, directed and photographed by Malcolm Leigh, ''Manifestations of Shiva''
is itself something of a meditative exercise. Those knowing little or nothing
about Shiva are likely to remain unenlightened or be downright puzzled. A man
massaging a youth with his foot, a formal dance class, the linga, or erect
phallus, as a symbol of Shiva, the expressionless, totally absorbed faces of the
worshipers, the almost total absence of women - there is much here that begs for
helpful commentary.

And, needless to say, all of these beautiful images are nestled in a lulling
vacuum. There are no intrusions of some of the less seductive realities of India
- the poverty, for instance, or the caste system that even determines who will
play what parts in Shiva rituals. Mr. Leigh's exquisite film, in other words,
has its limitations. For those wanting more information, one partial solution
would be to obtain a copy of the Philadelphia Museum's ''Ways to Shiva: Life and
Ritual in Hindu India,'' written by Joseph M. Dye.

Earlier on WNET-TV, at 8 P.M., Boston station WGBH-TV's ''World'' offers ''No
More Mountains: The Story of the Hmong,'' described by Judith Vecchione as a
''story about a diaspora and about America.'' Wandering southward through China
for over 2,000 years, the Hmong ended up high in the mountains of Laos. They
were then blown out of their mountains and left homeless by the Vietnam War.

Complicating this sympathetic portrait of a once-free people reduced to the
status of wandering refugees is the fact that the Hmong's chief cash crop was
opium. They themselves are said to have used the drug only for the sick and
elderly. But opium figures prominently in some of the documentary's more
sensational allegations, including a charge that the Central Intelligence Agency
may have been ''moving'' opium for profit, and that one Hmong leader, now living
in the United States, was a kingpin in the opium trade.  Both charges are
vigorously denied.

Of more immediate import are the Hmong people, who fought with the Americans in
Vietnam and believed that they would be taken care of in the future. Some have
managed to come to this country, others have been shipped to South America, many
are still in refugee camps.  Their plight is recorded here with the observation
that there are ''no more mountains to protect them from the rest of the world.''
This program argues, persuasively, that the United States owes the Hmong a good
deal more than it has given so far.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 23, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN NAMES 2 OVER OPPOSITION OF CONSERVATIVES

BYLINE: By JUAN de ONIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 855 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 22


The White House nominated Thomas O. Enders today to be Assistant Secretary of
State for Inter-American Affairs over the opposition of Senator Jesse Helms.

Senator Helms, Republican of North Carolina, had told the White House he would
oppose Mr. Enders, who is an economic specialist with no Latin American
experience. Senator Helms, the Senate's foremost conservative, proposed Louis
Tambs for the job. Mr. Tambs is a professor at Arizona State University and has
worked as a contractor in Latin America.

Rostow Also Nominated

The White House today also announced the nomination of Eugene V.  Rostow, a
former diplomat who is a professor at Yale Law School, to be Director of the
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency.

Conservative Republican senators had wanted the post to go to Lieut. Gen. Edward
L. Rowny, who was the representative of the Joint Chiefs of Staff at
negotiations on the strategic arms treaty. After President Carter signed the
treaty, he resigned from the Army to protest the terms of the treaty, which has
not been approved by the Senate.

Mr. Rostow was Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs in President
Johnson's Administration, when he supported American involvement in Vietnam. His
appointment is subject to Senate confirmation.

The Senate Foreign Relations Committee began hearings yesterday on a group of
State Department nominees. Legislative aides said Mr.  Helms opposed some of the
key appointees, including Myer Rashish, who has been designated Under Secretary
of State for Economic Affairs; Chester Crocker, designated Assistant Secretary
for African Affairs, and John H. Holdridge, the nominee for Assistant Secretary
for East Asian and Pacific Affairs.

In an attempt to avoid a split in the Senate's Republican majority, the White
House and Senator Charles H. Percy of Illinois, the committee chairman, delayed
the start of confirmation hearings in the hope that Senator Helms would drop his
objections.

Little Support for Helms Seen

But committee sources said that Republican leaders, responding to White House
appeals, decided to move forward because they feared further delay would
undermine Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.'s conduct of foreign policy
in key areas.

The White House announcement of the appointment of Mr. Enders was considered a
signal by both Democratic and Republican members that Senator Percy would test
how much support Senator Helms has by putting the nominations to a vote in the
15-member committee.

Senate sources said there was no prospect that Senator Helms would win more than
two or three votes in the committee, where moderate Republicans and the
Democratic minority are counted on to back the White House appointments.

Senator Helms was so annoyed by the opening of the confirmation hearings for Mr.
Rashish yesterday, when he was in North Carolina speaking on behalf of President
Reagan's economic program, that he wrote Senator Percy asking that additional
hearing time be scheduled this week.

Campaign Backing Called the Issue

An aide to Senator Helms said his major objection to the appointments was that
the people named had not been politically committed to the election of Mr.
Reagan and, in the case of Mr.  Rashish, had worked for Democratic
administrations.

Mr. Rashish, a trade consultant and former economics professor, worked on
President Kennedy's White House staff as an adviser on international trade
policy.

Senator Helms's choice for Under Secretary for Economic Affairs was said to be
Adm. Thomas C. Moorer, a retired former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
who has been active in conservative groups that have campaigned for more
military spending and have opposed the Panama Canal Treaties and the nuclear
arms limitation agreement.

Senator Helms, who has worked to improve South Africa's access to Congress and
strongly opposes the Angolan Government, has not suggested a candidate for
Assistant Secretary for African Affairs, but he opposes confirmation of Mr.
Crocker, an academic specialist in Africa who is now in London conferring with
West European goverments after an 11-country tour of Africa.

For Assistan Secretary for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Senator Helms has
suggested Gaston Sigur, who is chairman of the Sino-Japanese Institute of George
Washington University.

Other appointments announced by the White House included Lawrence F. Davenport,
36 years old, to be Associate Director of Action, the domestic antipoverty
agency. Mr. Davenport has been provost of the San Diego Community College
District in California.

In addition, Mrs. Elise R.W. du Pont was nominated to beAssistant Administrator
of the Agency for International Development, which runs the overseas economic
development program. Mrs. du Pont, whose husband is Gov. Pierre S. du Pont of
Delaware, is a real estate developer in the capital.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 23, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

317 Vietnamese Refugees Saved By U.S. Navy Ships in 24 Hours

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 86 words

DATELINE: MANILA, April 22


An American destroyer today picked up 71 Vietnamese refugees from a boat
drifting in the South China Sea, bringing to 317 the number of refugees rescued
by United States Navy ships in the last 24 hours, a Navy spokesman said.

He said that the destroyer John Young had rescued the 25 men, 20 women and 26
children about 275 miles southwest of Ho Chi Minh City shortly after leaving
Singapore, where it had landed 177 refugees taken on board last Thursday.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 24, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Notes on People;
Oliver Stone Reflects on His Frightening Movie

BYLINE: By Laurie Johnston and Robert Thomas

SECTION: Section C; Page 28, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 286 words


It's a tossup, apparently, whether Oliver Stone is going to be more scared by
New York than New York will be scared by ''The Hand,'' the first Hollywood movie
he has ever directed - if, indeed, he arrives at all for its opening tonight in
Manhattan.

''I'm terrified of New York now, I feel like an ant.'' said Mr.  Stone, who grew
up in Manhattan. ''But then I don't see 'The Hand' as a horror movie, the way
they're selling it. I think it's psychological suspense,'' the 1979 Academy
Award-winning screenwriter of ''Midnight Express'' said yesterday from his home
in Santa Monica, Calif.

Mr. Stone, who said he ''didn't finish Yale because I couldn't stand it,'' took
off in 1965 to teach children in Saigon. Two years later, at age 21, he was back
in Vietnam, where he was wounded twice with the 25th Infantry Division and later
served with the First Cavalry, returning to study film with Martin Scorsese at
New York University.

His ''bitterest disappointment,'' he said, was in 1978 when ''the money deal
fell through'' for Al Pacino to star in Mr. Stone's screenplay of ''Born on the
Fourth of July'' by Ron Kovic, the paraplegic Vietnam veteran and active
opponent of the draft. He still has hopes for at least one of his own four
original (and unproduced) screenplays about the war.

''I'm split about the Vietnam thing -I don't want to be a crybaby 10 years
later, but it hurt me, it darkened my feelings about the world,'' the
34-year-old Mr. Stone said. '' 'The Hand' is a pretty dark movie. I'd like to
lighten up - in time, I hope I have reason to see things in a lighter way.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 25, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

KLAN INFLAMES GULF FISHING FIGHT BETWEEN WHITES AND VIETNAMESE

BYLINE: BY WILLIAM K. STEVENS Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1389 words

DATELINE: SEABROOK, Tex., April 23


For nearly two years, two tribes, one established and one new to this fishing
village on the grayish, sunflecked waters of Galveston Bay, have been locked in
a kind of territorial struggle as old as the species. Now the struggle is
approaching a critical point.

One tribe is made up of American shrimp fishermen. The other consists of
Vietnamese refugees who, having fled their country after the fall of Saigon in
1975, flocked to the Gulf Coast to make their living as shrimpers, too.
Operating from a stretch of docks that has been dubbed ''Saigon Harbor,'' they
now outnumber the Americans.

The problem, according to the white shrimpers, is that their livelihood is
jeopardized because the shrimp fishing hereabouts will simply not support
everybody. In the resulting dispute, two Vietnamese shrimp boats have been
burned, and hostility and suspicion are rife in the twin fishing towns of
Seabrook and Kemah.

Invitation to the Klan

Enter the Ku Klux Klan. Responding to an invitation from the American fishermen,
the Klan has made several shows of force here in the last two months. Now local
white fishermen and the Klan have been accused in a lawsuit of conspiring to
threaten and intimidate the Vietnamese into leaving.

The case pits two longtime courtroom enemies against each other - the Klan and
the Klanwatch organization, an arm of the Southern Poverty Law Center in
Birmingham, Ala., that filed the class-action lawsuit on behalf of the
Vietnamese fishermen.

The suit asks that Federal District Judge Gabrielle McDonald issue a preliminary
injunction against the activities of the Klan and the American fishermen, which,
according to the complaint, include the burning of crosses near some Vietnamese
shrimpers' homes and boat docks and threats against a white who had docked
Vietnamese boats. A hearing is expected early next month.

If the injunction is granted, it could be enforced, if necessary, by United
States marshals on the shrimp boats moving out of the harbor as shrimping season
opens in mid-May.

William Kerber, the Seabrook police chief, who has acted as a mediator, said the
basic question - whether there are enough shrimp to support all the fishermen -
had ''been lost in the sensationalism of the Klan rallies and the lawsuits.''

The American shrimpers, led by 36-year-old Eugene Fisher, a Vietnam veteran who
was wounded six times in combat, assert that the influx of Vietnamese is going
to destroy the fishery through overfishing. C.E. Bryan, the director of
shellfish programs for the Texas Bureau of Coastal Fisheries, said there was no
indication that this was so. But, Mr. Bryan acknowledged, ''Gulf-wide, the
problem has been, and is, that the number of boats continues to increase, while
the shrimp crop generally stays the same. More people are cutting the pie up
into smaller pieces.''

That, says Mr. Fisher, is what he and his friends are angry about.  They say
they are especially angry because of their belief that assistance from the
Federal Government has enabled the Vietnamese to do better than Americans who
fought in Vietnam.

'Feels He Can't Compete'

Some Vietnamese say that the Americans are upset because the Vietnamese outwork
and outfish them, putting in longer hours, living more frugally, and pooling
their resources to buy more boats. ''The American fisherman feels he can't
compete,'' Chief Kerber said.  ''They live off rice and fish. The American
fisherman can, too, but he's not going to.''

Some Americans who do business with the Vietnamese say they paid inflated prices
for their shrimping boats. Again, Chief Kerber acknowledges this. ''The
Americans saw someone to put it to, and they did,'' he said. ''What the
Americans saw was a lazy, stupid individual with a lot of money.''

As the Vietnamese fishing fleet grew the situation worsened. Both sides
organized. The leader of the Vietnamese group was, and is, Nguyen Van Nam, a
47-year-old former colonel in the South Vietnamese Army, who now runs a seafood
business in Seabrook.

Mr. Fisher's group appealed to a number of Government agencies, pleading that
since the Government resettled the Vietnamese in the United States it ought to
help the fishermen solve their problem.  Mostly, the agencies said there was
nothing that could be done because the Vietnamese were in the country legally
and could work where they wanted.

Enforcing Unwritten Rules

The Americans said that the Vietnamese were not obeying the unwritten rules of
the water. The Vietnamese acknowledged this.  Ground rules were drawn up and
signed by Mr. Fisher and Mr. Nam, and Mr. Fisher says that they are generally
being observed.

But the basic situation did not change. In the meantime, two Vietnamese were
acquitted in the slaying of a white fisherman, Billy Joe Aplin, in a fishing
dispute in the town of Seadrift, about 100 miles down the coast from Seabrook.
Mr. Aplin was a friend of some of the Seabrook fishermen, and they regard the
acquittal as a galling miscarriage of justice.

The Klan was invited, Mr. Fisher says, to attract attention to the fishermen's
complaints. It did that. Two months ago the Klan sponsored a rally, with a
cross-burning, to protest the Vietnamese presence. A boat was burned
symbolically.

On March 15, a shrimp boat carrying robed, hooded and armed Klansmen startled
Sunday afternoon diners as it moved past the windows of a waterfront restaurant,
patrolling the harbor. It also approached the home of Mr. Nam, and the Klanwatch
suit alleges that the Klansmen shouted threats at Mr. Nam's wife. The fishermen
deny that anyone aboard the boat threatened anyone.

Cites Klan Threat

Further, the suit charges, an American fisherman has declared that armed Klan
members will be on shrimp boats when the season opens on May 15, and the Klan
has threatened to ''take matters into its own hands.''

The suit alleges that the American fishermen and the Klan, through ''unlawful
coercion, intimidation and interference,'' are trying to ''monopolize the
fishing trade for themselves'' by forcing the Vietnamese to give up fishing and
leave.

Mr. Nam said last month that about 60 of the 100 Vietnamese fishermen here had
told him they would sell their boats and leave.  ''If you no like me to stay,''
an angry Mr. Nam told a group of American shrimpers, ''yes sir, I leave.''
Should 60 Vietnamese leave, says Mr. Fisher, the problem would be solved. But he
says he believes the Vietnamese actually have no intention of moving.

The filing of the Klanwatch lawsuit has reduced the potential for violence,
Chief Kerber believes, by putting pressure on the American fishermen to moderate
both their talk and their actions. In addition, there is at least one sign that
local opinion is not solidly behind the white shrimpers. Two weeks ago, the
Seabrook City Council, in a resolution, said that it would not tolerate
''merchants of hate'' bringing violence to the town.

Some Change in Stance

Since the suit was filed, some American fishermen have backed off from some of
their earlier statements. Mr. Fisher, for example, once said that white
shrimpers were being trained in paramilitary skills by the Klan. This week he
said that was not true, that although the training had been planned, it had not
taken place. Furthermore, he said, the Klan had not really intended to engage in
any violence.

This week, David Collins, a spokesman for Mr. Fisher's group who is a defendant
in the suit, stood at a dock in Seabrook and delivered a prepared rejoinder to
Klanwatch. He charged that the Vietnamese had criminally tried to ''intimidate,
harass and obstruct us from fishing in Galveston Bay.''

Furthermore, he said, ''we have reason to believe North Vietnamese Communists
are infiltrating the ranks of the Vietnamese'' to cause disruption. Pressed for
evidence and details, he said they would come out in court. He said that the
fishermen welcomed the lawsuit because it would provide a chance to explore the
basic problem.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Klansmen aboard shrimp boat (page 8)

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 25, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. TO CALL CAMBODIA CONFERENCE

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 488 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., April 24


Secretary General Kurt Waldheim has privately promised Southeast Asian nations
that he will call a longdelayed conference aimed at bringing peace to Cambodia,
officials disclosed here today.

But Mr. Waldheim has reportedly warned that the conference will probably fail
because the Soviet Union and its allies, Vietnam and Laos, have said they will
not attend.

It is now up to the members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
-Thailand, Singapore, Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines - to decide
whether they want Mr. Waldheim to go ahead. Diplomats from the five nations have
indicated that they do.

No date has been fixed for the conference, but some officials are talking of
holding it in Vienna in July.  Mr. Waldheim is scheduled to visit Moscow May
4-7, four days after he sees President Reagan in Washington. The Soviet leaders
are expected to warn the Secretary General that a Cambodian meeting run by the
United Nations will settle nothing.

Overwhelming Assembly Vote

Mr. Waldheim can reply that he is under heavy pressure from Thailand and
Singapore to proceed and that the General Assembly has given him little choice.
Last October, by a vote of 97 to 23 with 22 abstentions, the Assembly called for
the convening of a Cambodia conference ''early in 1981.'' It said that all
conflicting and interested parties should be invited, that all ''foreign
troops'' should be removed from Cambodia and that free elections should be held
under United Nations supervision.

Mr. Waldheim would have to invite representatives of the forces of former Prime
Minister Pol Pot, whom Vietnamese troops drove from the Cambodian capital in
1978. Those forces are waging guerrilla war in northwest Cambodia.

Mr. Waldheim would also have to invite China, which has clashed with Vietnam in
the region. The Association of Southeast Asian Nations wants the United States,
Britain and France to attend as well.

Hanoi Would Boycott Meeting

Hanoi has said that it would not take part in any United Nations conference
because the world body has demanded that Vietnamese troops pull out of Cambodia.
Vietnam strenuously opposes anything that would strengthen the legitimacy of the
Pol Pot group, which still holds Cambodia's seat in the United Nations.

The Vietnamese also do not want any Zettlement with China. Instead, Hanoi has
proposed that it simply meet with the members of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations to make peace.

Some diplomats from the nations in the association insist that there are grounds
for believing that Vietnam, the Soviet Union and Laos would attend a United
Nations conference. They note that the Laotion Foreign Minister, Phoun
Sipraseut, is negotiating with Indonesia to tour the five nations of the
association.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 25, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

HEARING ON TERROR OPENS WITH WARNING ON SOVIET

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1170 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 24


The new Senate Subcommittee on Security and Terrorism opened hearings today with
its chairman, Jeremiah A.  Denton, strongly endorsing contentions by a number of
witnesses that the Soviet Union was responsible for most international
terrorism.

The Alabama Republican said that if the United States ignored the threat of
terrorism ''the sand in which we bury our heads will eventually bury our
nation.''

Senator Denton, a former admiral and naval aviator who was shot down over North
Vietnam and imprisoned there for more than seven years, also said in a statement
that Soviet and other hostile intelligence agencies had enjoyed ''a measure of
success'' in socalled disinformation campaigns aimed partly at misleading ''a
story-hungry and sometimes gullible press.''

A number of left-wing and liberal political organizations issued statements
deploring the creation of the subcommittee, suggesting that it might signal a
return to ''McCarthyism'' and political interrogations in the pattern of the
internal security investigations in the 1950's.

There were fewer fireworks than the crowds of political activists and tourists
who lined up for scarce seats in a Senate hearing room had seemed to expect, but
the day was not without drama.

Witnesses See a Soviet Role

The subcommittee, an arm of the Senate Judiciary Committee, heard sworn
testimony from Claire Sterling, a Rome-based American foreign correspondent and
author of the recently published book, ''The Terror Network''; from Arnaud de
Borchgrave, a former correspondent for Newsweek magazine and co-author of a
political novel entitled ''The Spike''; from Dr. Michael Ledeen, a historian,
foreign-policy analyst and editor, and from William E. Colby, a former Director
of Central Intelligence.

All four witnesses testified that they believed that the Soviet Union had given
material support, training and encouragement to a wide network of terrorist
organizations.

Mr. de Borchgrave, Mr. Ledeen and Senator Denton also placed strong emphasis on
accusations that the K.G.B., the Soviet intelligence and internal-s@ecurity
agency, had enjoyed considerable success in deceiving Western opinion through
so-called disinformation.

Disinformation is an intelligence term, derived from a Russian word, meaning in
part the clandestine planting of information by one power to the disadvantage of
another power or group.

'Manipulation of Western Media'

Mr. de Borchgrave testified that a Soviet plan for defeating the West that he
said was initiated in 1968 called for a wide range of measures but ''above all,
the manipulation of the Western media'' and the ''sabotage of Western
intelligence services through press exposure.''

He also testified that there was ''irrefutable proof'' that the Soviet Union was
playing ''a covert role in promoting the antinuclear lobby.'' He asserted that
what he called a well-known Soviet front organization was ''affiliated'' with an
organization known as Mobilization for Survival.

This group is an umbrella organization of several antiwar and antinuclear power
groups that has demonstrated against nuclear power plants and against nuclear
weapons.

It was this kind of accusation that liberal groups had predicted would result
from the creation of the subcommittee. A statement issued this morning by
Americans for Democratic Action said that ''the hearings were inappropriate''
and charged that the subcommittee ''appears to be seeking only a platform to
make its inflammatory charges about the nature of terrorism in the world
today.''

'Repression and Intimidation'

Mobilization for Survival, which says it has 140 affiliated organizations
devoted to opposing the ''arms race'' and stopping nuclear power, issued a
statement in Philadelphia this evening, saying that the testimony was
''reminiscent of the repression and intimidation of the McCarthy era'' and
asking Senator Denton to ''disallow any further unsubstantiated and damaging
charges to be entered into the record of his committee.''

At several points today Senator Denton made long, extemporaneous remarks about
his imprisonment, his torture by the North Vietnamese and his resentment that
opinions similar to those of the North Vietnamese had been expressed by
journalists and members of Congress during the war.

At another point he said that a television station in Huntsville, Ala., had
telephoned to ask if he was ''wearing a bulletproof vest.'' Opening several
buttons of his shirt, he said, ''No, I am not.''

Although no bulletproof vests were evident, several plainclothes officers of the
Capitol police force guarded the hearing room, along with the usual uniformed
Capitol police guards. Joel S. Lisker, the subcommittee counsel, said that he
had requested the plainclothes officers, but added that no threats of violence
had been received by the panel.

Witness Charges 'Cover-Up'

Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, was present for the morning
session, but Senator Denton was the only subcommittee member on hand in the
afternoon.

Mrs. Sterling testified at some length on the main theses of her book. She and
Mr. Colby seemed to be in broad agreement that the Soviet Union might not have
originally been responsible for organizing all the urban guerrilla and left-wing
terrorist groups operating in Western nations and might not control them on a
day-today basis. But they argued that the Soviet Union was responsible for
having helped arm and train them.

In answer to a question from Senator Leahy, Mrs. Sterling said that there had
been ''a cover-up'' by some Western intelligence agencies of Soviet complicity
in terrorism and that ''my book proves it.'' She said that such alleged
suppression of evidence had probably been motivated in large part by diplomatic
considerations and by desires to preserve detente.

Senator Denton began the hearings by reading what he said was a new Central
Intelligence Agency definition of terrorism. There have been reports that the
definition was being broadened by the Reagan Administration.

New Definition of Terrorism

Senator Denton said, in part, that the new definition was that ''terrorism is
the threat or use of violence for political symbolic effect that is aimed at
achieving a psychological impact on a target group wider than its immediate
victims.'' The new definition also includes operations with ''military,
paramilitary or insurrectionary goals'' if ''they involve terrorist acts,'' the
Senator said. This would seem to include some wars of national liberation. The
older definition, as contained in a Presidential executive order, is complex but
apparently narrower.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA REPORTS OPIUM IS BEING SMUGGLED TO HONG KONG AND TAIWAN (Reuters) -

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 490 words


Raw opium grown for medical purposes in China is being stolen and smuggled out
of the country to dealers in Hong Kong and Taiwan, according to a senior Chinese
judicial official.

Xin Deli, deputy head of the judicial office of the Shanghai municipality, said
the traffic had been discovered after the capture of some Hong Kong smugglers in
possession of the drug, which is the base for morphine and heroin.

''They confessed the raw opium came from China,'' he said.  Mr. Xin said the
opium poppy was planted in some parts of China for medical use. ''Some people
get it and sell it to people from Zhejiang and Guangdong for high prices and
then it is resold outside China,'' Mr. Xin said.

'Limited Quantities' of Opium

He added that ''limited quantities'' appeared to be involved and that the stolen
opium was believed to come from the southern province of Yunnan, a traditional
opium-growing area bordering Vietnam, Laos and Burma that has illegally exported
it in past years.

Zhejiang lies just south of Shanghai and is reported to have a flourishing
smuggling trade with Taiwan, while Guangdong borders the British colony of Hong
Kong.

Hong Kong's Narcotics Commissioner, Peter Lee, recently expressed fear that a
bumper opium harvest in the area where Burma, Laos and Thailand meet, known as
the Golden Triangle, would result in more drugs in the colony.

Although the authorities virtually eliminated drug use in China after the
Communist victory in 1949, visitors to Yunnan report that opium smoking is still
practiced to a limited extent among hill tribes in isolated parts of the rugged
province but that it does not appear to be a serious problem.

No Reports in Press

The Shanghai official said there was no drug problem in his city, China's
largest, although some unofficial sources have spoken of drug use by young
people in some urban areas.

The unofficial sources added that there were heavy penalties for drug use. The
fact that there have been no reports of a drug problem in the Chinese press,
which usually publicizes antisocial activites as a warning, indicates that there
is not a serious problem.

Mr. Xin said the main smuggling trade along the South China coast was in
commodities such as tape recorders, watches and other consumer goods that are
scarce on the mainland.

The Chinese usually exchange gold and precious objects for the goods, with
fishermen from Taiwan and the mainland the main intermediaries along the coast.

Smugglers using high-speed boats have also been reported in waters around Hong
Kong and the mainland.  The People's Daily reported in January that Chinese
customs officials along the south and southeast coastlines seized goods worth
$16 million last year, a threefold increase over 1979.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

300 Vietnamese Arrive in Macao

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 7, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 43 words

DATELINE: MACAO, April 25


About 300 Vietnamese refugees arrived during the night aboard 10 boats in this
Portuguese territory some 40 miles west of Hong Kong, according to the marine
police. Some 800 refugees have come to Macao in the past 15 days.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONGRESSMEN HEAR VOTERS, BUT MESSAGE IS NOT CLEAR

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 19, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1111 words

DATELINE: RANDOLPH, MASS., April 24


Representative Brian J. Donnelly's district starts in the working-class
neighborhoods of Boston and stretches south to suburbs like Randolph,
tree-shaded sanctuaries for the children of the city's ethnic immigrants. When
this new generation moved out here, many of them found their taxes rising, their
outlooks changing and their votes shifting.

Take Patricia Griffin, a real estate manager, who backed a Republican
Presidential candidate for the first time last fall.  Earlier this week she
attended a Chamber of Commerce breakfast with Representative Donnelly, and her
message to the lawmaker was clear: Support President Reagan's economic plan.

''People were fed up with the poor management of the Democrats,'' said Miss
Griffin, who considered herself a liberal a decade ago.  ''Reagan said he would
do something, get something passed and nothing had been done for so long.
Whatever he's able to accomplish, we'll feel some satisfaction with that.''

The nation's legislators have been home in their districts for the Easter recess
the last two weeks and, according to interviews in a half-dozen cities, many of
them have heard from constituents like Miss Griffin. However, Mr. Donnelly has
heard many opinions that conflict with Miss Griffin's, and many other lawmakers
found voters in growing numbers criticizing some of Mr. Reagan's specific budget
cuts as unreasonable and unfeeling.

The Contrasting Viewpoints

''Nobody knows the difference between Reagan's budget and the Democrats'
budget,'' said Mr. Donnelly, a second-termer who is on the House Budget
Committee. ''People are just committed to doing something different, because
they feel past policies haven't worked.''

But Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro, Democrat of Queens, who reported two
months ago that her district heavily backed the President, said: ''My mail has
totally turned around. I don't think my people have changed their minds. I just
think they didn't realize what was happening. In many instances we're getting,
'Yes, we have to balance the budget, we have to cut the deficit, but please
don't touch this program.' ''

Next week the House of Representatives will take up the budget for the 1982
fiscal year. The House Budget Committee, dominated by Democrats, has reported
out a plan that would allocate more money for social programs and less for
defense than President Reagan's budget.  By advocating a lower tax cut, the
Democratic budget also projects a lower deficit than the President.

El Salvador and Haig

The budget was not the only subject on voters' minds this week, and several
legislators discerned a rising uneasiness over American support for the
Government of El Salvador. ''People here recognize,'' said Representative Dante
B. Fascell, Democrat of Florida, ''that a country so close by as El Salvador
cannot be allowed to be taken over by Communists, but even the very conservative
Miamians don't want El Salvador to be turned into another Vietnam.''

Representative John L. Burton, Democrat of California, reported strong
objections to Mr. Reagan's plan to lease oil drilling rights off the Pacific
Coast and growing doubts about Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. ''A lot
of serious people out here think he is a little bonkers,'' Mr. Burton said.

But the focus was clearly on the economy, and much of the sentiment around the
country boiled down to the remark of Paul Connolly, a businessman here, who said
of Representative Donnelly: ''I think he should go all the way with the
President's program. What we've been doing for the last 20 years hasn't
worked.''

Appeal to 'Worst Instincts'

To many Democrats, this antitax, antigovernment mood has been fostered by
conservative politicians like President Reagan. ''In this state,'' asserted
Representative W.G. Hefner, Democrat of North Carolina, ''peoples' worst
instincts have been appealed to. They think all the causes of all our problems
are government giveaway programs.''

While the President seems highly popular in most districts, lawmakers have been
besieged by constituents who are increasingly alarmed at the potential impact of
Mr. Reagan's proposed budget cuts.

''The tide has turned,'' declared Representative Dennis E. Eckart, Democrat of
Ohio. Representative Gerry E. Studds, Democrat of Massachusetts, added: ''This
meat ax approach is not what people voted for. I really think people are saying,
'Hey, wait a minute.' ''

In the Florida district of Representative William Lehman, a Democrat from North
Miami Beach, some voters expressed a concern that cuts in job programs would
lead to riots in Miami. In Queens, Representative Ferraro heard about reduced
Social Security benefits.  In San Francisco, Representative Burton met with city
officials who say that reduced funds from Washington will mean higher local
taxes.

In a long day of meetings, Representative Donnelly of Massachusetts listened to
endless expressions of pain and concern. Ilene Seidman, a public interest
lawyer, told him that proposed welfare cuts would have a ''disastrous effect''
on many families where members are working or attending college.

Mr. Donnelly supports the Democratic budget, a compromise bill that accepts many
cuts in social programs but restores money for some key services. But to his
immense irritation, many voters seem totally polarized: The conservatives want
all of the Reagan budget cuts, while the liberals want none of them.

Late in the afternoon, Mr. Donnelly finally blew up at a group of city workers
representing the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees.
When they argued for increased spending for domestic social programs, the
lawmaker accused them of living in a ''never never land'' of liberal dogma.

When Mr. Donnelly advised the union members to back a ''strategic withdrawal''
from the liberal bastions, a worker named Frank Mercier shouted back, ''Your
strategic withdrawal means a lot of heartache and tragedy out there. It means
lost jobs and families torn apart.''

By the end of the day Mr. Donnelly was torn by the conflicting demands of Miss
Griffin and Mr. Mercier, and angry at his inability to sell the Democrats'
attempt at compromise. ''Are you sensing that we Democrats have no great sense
of direction?'' he told one group wearily. ''You're right.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOCIALIST WORKERS, AT TRIAL, ALLEGE U.S. HARASSMENT

BYLINE: By ARNOLD H. LUBASCH

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 29, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 636 words


Two leaders of the Socialist Workers Party have testified that Federal agents
used false charges, anonymous letters and undercover provocateurs to disrupt
their political activities.

The testimony came from Fred Halstead and Andrew Pulley, two former Presidential
candidates of the party, who took the stand last week in the Manhattan trial of
the party's $40 million lawsuit against several Government agencies accused of
harassing the Socialist Workers.

In earlier testimony, David Prince, the party's national financial director,
acknowledged that he and others had routinely destroyed financial records of the
Socialist Workers for many years.

Judge Thomas P. Griesa, who is conducting the nonjury trial in Federal District
Court, sharply criticized the destruction of the financial records. He said, ''I
don't understand why that was allowed to occur.''

Disruptions Linked to F.B.I.

Mr. Halstead and Mr. Pulley, both members of the party's national committee,
testified that the Federal Bureau of Investigation disrupted their party
activities in the past, including their advocacy of civil rights and their
opposition to the war in Vietnam.

According to Mr. Halstead, who said he received 41,000 votes as the party's 1968
Presidential candidate, the Government made false charges to discredit the
Socialist Workers, sent anonymous letters to create dissension and employed
agitators to foment violence at peaceful demonstrations.

The Government ''put a stigma'' on the party by calling it subversive, he said,
adding that the stigma had seriously hurt the party's ability to obtain funds
and supporters.

Mr. Pulley, who said he received about 60,000 votes as the party's Presidential
candidate last year, testified that F.B.I. reports had falsely accused him of
telling soldiers to disobey military orders during previous campaigns to end the
war in Vietnam.

''That idea is totally untrue,'' Mr. Pulley said. He added that he had merely
''urged military personnel to demonstrate against the war.''

Members Given Subsistence Aid

Earlier testimony by the party's financial director, Mr. Prince, focused on
statements that the Socialist Workers had paid cash to various members for
subsistence or expenses and had destroyed financial records at the party's
national office.

Edward G. Williams, the Government's chief lawyer in the case, stressed that he
had asked for the financial records of the party's income and expenditures,
including funds involving ''the Fourth International and other foreign
Trostkyite groups.''

''Isn't it true,'' Mr. Williams asked, ''that you were destroying those records
right up until September 1980, at which time you were first deposed in this
lawsuit?''

''Yes,'' Mr. Prince answered, adding that ''it was part of the general routine
of the financial office.'' Another party leader, Jack Barnes, had also testified
that the party would routinely destroy financial records ''after we no longer
need them for any tax or other purposes.''

Continuation of Old Policy

Judge Griesa asked him, ''How did it happen, with a substantial damage claim
being presented to the court, that the books and records of the S.W.P. have not
been kept?''

''Well, I don't know, your honor,'' Mr. Barnes replied. ''We just never changed
the policy and no one ever advised us to. That's the way it has always been.''

In addition to party leaders, other witnesses testified last week that they had
also been subjected to F.B.I. harassment. A party lawyer, Shelley Davis,
presented numerous documents of the bureau to support the testimony.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DO THE ARTS INSPIRE VIOLENCE IN REAL LIFE?

BYLINE: By LESLIE BENNETTS

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 3037 words


In film as in other media, violence has long since become commonplace, with
people dismembered, impaled, incinerated, blown up, machine-gunned or otherwise
annihilated with numbing regularity.  Social scientists have long debated the
effects of such depictions of violence upon viewers, and recently the
controversy flared anew with reports that Federal investigators believe John
Hinckley, who has been charged with the attempted assassination of President
Reagan, was influenced by the 1976 movie ''Taxi Driver.''

That film explored the pathological progress of Travis Bickle, a human time bomb
who plans to murder a political candidate but ends up slaughtering a group of
pimps and pushers in an orgiastic massacre.  He is then hailed by the news media
as a hero.

Such bloody scenes are far from unique in contemporary movies andtelevision
programs. But although psychologists have published reams of research on the
impact of such violence, opinion remains sharply divided on the conclusions that
can be drawn. However, the assassination attempt was not the first to raise the
issue in a public forum; it had been foreshadowed in the growing number of
trials that have focused on the effect of media violence, with defense lawyers
contending that exposure to such stimuli prompted specific crimes.

In 1977, attorneys for a 15-year-old Florida youth argued that six to eight
hours' worth of daily television viewing had so inured him to violence that he
had lost the ability to distinguish right from wrong, and therefore should not
be convicted of fatally shooting his next-door neighbor, an 82-year-old woman,
during a robbery attempt.  Elements of one episode of the boy's favorite
television show, ''Kojak,'' were said to resemble the actual slaying. The boy's
attorney, Ellis Rubin, told the jury, ''If you judge Ronny Zamora guilty,
television will be an accessory ... Ronny is a victim of shows that are on
television, depicting violence and breaking the law.'' The prosecution called
that defense ''hogwash,'' and the boy was found guilty.

The following year, NBC broadcast a television movie in which a girl was
sexually assaulted by a group of reform-school classmates who raped her with a
mop handle. Four days later a gang of teen-agers similarly molested a 9-year-old
girl on a San Francisco beach, and lawyers for the girl sued NBC for
''negligence,'' claiming that the network should have known that such a scene
might be imitated. One judge ruled that the plaintiff had to prove the network
intended to ''incite'' violence in order to collect damages; the case is still
pending before the California Court of Appeals.

And when a 9-year-old boy robbed a midtown Manhattan bank last month, his lawyer
said that the child had been influenced by television crime programs and that he
had only been ''playing'' when he pointed a toy gun at a bank teller and
demanded money. The boy is scheduled for a Family Court trial on Wednesday.

Whatever the merits of such individual defenses, the issue continues to
preoccupy many social scientists. But despite innumerable experiments,
psychologists still argue among themselves almost as fiercely as some of their
findings are disputed by civil libertarians, First Amendment experts, film
industry people and television network officials, to name only a few of the
interested parties.

The one thing almost everyone seems to agree upon is that the question is a
complicated one. ''I think there are lots of different processes that determine
the consequences of observed violence,'' says Leonard Berkowitz, a psychology
professor at the University of Wisconsin who has done considerable research on
aggression. ''There is no one factor at work, but one of the things that happens
is that people get ideas as well as inclinations, and if their inhibitions
happen to be weak at the time, these ideas or inclinations can be translated
into open behavior.''

Dr. Berkowitz's studies have focused on the immediate influence of movie
violence upon adults, because, he says, ''I think adults are more dangerous than
kids, and that adults can be stimulated by what they see for a short time. I
also think that the effect is by no means confined to movies or television;
anything in the mass media can give people ideas. News reports of widely
publicized crimes can have many of the same effects. For instance, we
investigated the after-effects of President Kennedy's assassination and of the
Richard Speck killings of the Chicago nurses, and found there was a rise in
violent crimes in the month following each of those events, among others.''

Like a number of other researchers, Dr. Berkowitz has also found that when
college students view a violent film and are then given an opportunity to
administer electric shocks to other students, they inflict more severe
punishment than do students who have not witnessed such violence.

Other inquiries have addressed the long-term effects of observed violence on
children. Dr. Leonard Eron, a psychologist at the University of Illinois at
Chicago Circle, conducted a study which first examined a group of 8-year-olds
and then followed up their development ten years later. ''We found that the best
single predictor we had on how aggressive these people were at 18 was the
violence in the programs they viewed at age 8,'' Dr. Eron reports.

''Now, it could have been said that aggressive youngsters like violent programs
to begin with,'' he says. ''But because of the methodology we used to control
the experiment, we were fairly certain this was a cause and effect relationship,
with television viewing preceding the aggressive behavior. The highly aggressive
youngsters who were watching non-violent programs were significantly less
aggressive by age 18 than the youngsters who were not aggressive at 8 but who
had watched violent programs; they turned out to be more aggressive in the end.
We later repeated the study, and found the same thing. Furthermore, the more
violent the programs, the more aggressive the children became.''

Dr. Eron believes that such exposure conditions children to be casual about
violence. ''They grow up seeing this stuff, and they think it's socially
acceptable to do these things,'' he says. ''They think this is the way life is,
that this is the norm.''

Others question such conclusions. ''I don't share the prevailing view among
behavioral psychologists that violence in media plays a significant role in
violence and criminal behavior in the United States, and has been an important
factor in the increasing violence we see in our society,'' says Seymour
Feshbach, chairman of the psychology department at the University of California
at Los Angeles.

''I think that violence in the media can be a contributing factor, but that it
depends on a lot of other factors, including the age of the viewer,'' Dr.
Feshbach adds. ''The younger the viewer, the more vulnerable they are. The more
realistic the violence, the more it approaches an instructional, how-to-do-it
kind of experience. And the more the violence is the central and only theme, the
more likely it is to stimulate aggressive behavior. Many dramatic experiences
are clearly fantasies and do not meet these criteria.''

However, Dr. Feshbach believes that the combination of erotic and violent
elements is particularly potent, stimulating aggression far more readily than
violence alone. He finds the possible social consequences of such fare extremely
worrisome: ''If you vicariously identify with the characters, you can get a very
strong conditioned effect, and the violent act becomes attached to sexual
arousal,'' he explains. ''The cognitive message is, this is okay, people do
this.  And obviously rape is the more severe form of sex mixed with violence.''

In considering violence and its portrayal, some analysts pose a chicken-and-egg
question about which came first. ''In a violent society, there may be an
appetite for violence, in which case the media wouldn't be the cause -they'd be
the effect, simply reflecting back on us who we are and what we do,'' suggests
Robert Liebert, a professor of psychology at the State University of New York at
Stonybrook. ''Unquestionably, if we did not have a bent toward being a somewhat
violent people, the kind of entertainment you see on television wouldn't be
there.''

Many critics point out that the malignant has exerted a powerful lure since
ancient times. ''Violence partakes of evil and evil has always been more
interesting than good, unfortunately,'' says Richard Gilman, a professor at the
Yale School of Drama and drama critic of The Nation. ''Great sinners are
generally more interesting than great saints. It's useless and silly to protest
against the prevalence of violence in art; what's legitimate is to protest
against gratuitous violence that has no esthetic or literary point, that's done
just for effect.''

Others note that although dramatic conventions have varied from civilization to
civilization, violence has always constituted a major element of art. ''There
was a time, particularly with the Greeks, when violence was always kept off the
stage; it was reported onstage by messengers,'' notes Robert Brustein, artistic
director of the American Repertory Theater and director of the Loeb Drama Center
at Harvard University.

''But the Greeks were the last time, outside of French neoclassical imitations,
that violence was absent from the stage,'' Dr. Brustein says. ''Roman drama was
extremely bloody and violent, Elizabethan drama was bloody and violent, Jacobean
drama was bloody and violent, and 19th-century Romantic drama was also bloody
and violent. So is 20th-century drama, not to mention movies, reflecting a world
that is bloody and violent. An honest artist is compelled to represent what is
happening. I don't believe that outside of pathological people, violent movies
or plays cause violence in society; they simply reflect it. The violence is
there already.''

Moviemakers echo such assertions. ''Film is about life, and violence is a part
of life,'' says Martin Poll, a producer whose most recent film is a police
thriller about international terrorism called ''Nighthawks.'' ''Unless you're
going to do totally escapist entertainment, you can't ignore the subject of
violence today, because it's prevalent in our lives.''

Paul Schrader, who wrote the screenplays for ''Taxi Driver'' and for ''Raging
Bull,'' adds: ''Every artist since pre-history has thought that violence and
conflict were within the proper realm of art, from cave artists to the Greeks to
the present.'' But he disputes suggestions that the bloody climax of ''Taxi
Driver'' might have precipitated the recent assassination attempt upon President
Reagan.

''It isn't the violence that's the problem, it's the depth of the psychological
portrait,'' contends Mr. Schrader, who has also directed such films as
''Hardcore'' and a work currently in production, ''Cat People.'' ''The only
reason that man connected with that film is that the pathology of the character
was so accurate that he identified with it. If you want to stop someone from
connecting with violence, either you can't portray criminals on screen at all,
so sick people won't identify with them, or you can only do it twodimensionally,
so no one can really get inside the character's head.''

Since Aristotle, some scholars have maintained that identification with tragic
drama can be cathartic. ''There are those who theorize that violent
representations in art exteriorize the latent cruelty and blood lust that seem
to be indigenous to human beings, and thereby purge it and get rid of it for a
while,'' explains Dr.  Brustein.

Whether or not it is cathartic, however, there is little question that many
people find violence exciting, a fact which some attribute to a jaded society
whose ability to appreciate more complex art has been wrecked by the fast-paced
superficiality of television. ''The extent to which we're seeing violence in the
arts reflects the think that everyone's very bored; they're so used to being
able to switch the dial that the people who cater to the hunger for sensation
resort to more and more violent devices in order to satisfy the desire.''

In trying to defend such practices, television executives often claim that they
are just giving the audience what it wants. ''People in jeopardy and people
being saved are inherently dramatically interesting,'' says Ronald Milavsky,
vice president for news and social research at NBC television. ''The more
vulnerable the person is - say a child being in danger - the more dramatic the
situation would be. It's good television material. People like to see victims
get saved. That's never going to change; why should it? I don't see that it does
any harm.''

Among those who strongly disagree is George Gerbner, dean of the Annenberg
School of Communications at the University of Pennsylvania. Dr. Gerbner holds
that while violent dramas may influence a small number of people to identify
with the perpetrators, they influence a far larger number who identify with the
victims.

''Those who are exposed to this kind of violence develop an exaggerated sense of
fear, anxiety, insecurity, dependence, paranoia and mistrust,'' says Dr.
Gerbner, who has found that the great majority of those victimized in television
drama are women and minorities. ''Therefore general exposure to a high level of
violence cultivates a 'mean world' syndrome, a sense that the world is a very
dangerous place in which to live and that you're going to be hurt.''

Debate over such findings will doubtless continue, but even those most convinced
that media violence is harmful hesitate to suggest what to do about it. ''I saw
more violence on network news programs during the Vietnam War than I have seen
in a lifetime,'' says Jack Valenti, president of the Motion Picture Association
of America, which assigns ratings to films based on their levels of violence and
obscenity.

''What are you going to do, shut the news off?'' Mr. Valenti asks.  ''Where do
you draw the line? A movie might jolt a psychotic into action - or somebody
might jostle him on the subway, or be rude to him, and that might also
precipitate an action by someone teetering on the precipice. Anything could set
him off. We lose tens of thousands of people a year to automobile accidents:
should we ban the automobile? We don't even ban handguns, and look at all the
people who are killed every year by handguns.''

Many legal experts say that whatever the conclusions of researchers, any attempt
to translate experimental data into regulatory curbs will run afoul of the
Constitution. ''Any kind of government regulation which tried either to shift
the time at which programs were aired, or which banned them altogether because
of the fear that they would encourage aggressive action on the part of children,
would be unconstitutional under the First Amendment,'' declares Thomas
Krattenmaker, a constitutional scholar and professor of law at Georgetown
University. ''That's because the government is required to demonstrate the
presence of a clear and present danger that violence will immediately and
irreparably ensue from the viewing of such programs by children, and because the
government has no right to deny to adults the right to receive information,
expression, entertainment or other similar speech protected by the First
Amendment on the theory that it may harm children.''

Others add that one such regulatory step would lead to others in a succession
profoundly antithetical to democratic ideals. ''The threat to freedom of
expression in the imposition of sanctions in such cases is a clear and direct
one,'' says Floyd Abrams, an attorney who has specialized in cases involving the
First Amendment. ''Every artist, filmmaker or author would have to consider
before putting pen to paper what someone could say later on what the social
effect of his expression was. Once they start importing into their creative
efforts that kind of guesswork about how people might react to what they do, we
would inevitably have a diminution of the vigor of public expression. That's not
a price that's worth paying - nor is it one, as a purely legal matter, which the
First Amendment allows to be paid.''

Mr. Valenti, the official spokesman for the Hollywood film industry, concludes,
''You pay a price for a democratic society. But I wonder whether those people
who clamor for the banning of violent shows might find the Russian model
attractive, where the state tells you what you can put on television. You pay
another price for the absence of what some people find offensive, and that price
is that you give over to the state or another authority the right to make
judgments about what should be banned.''

Dr. Gerbner disagrees that official censorship represents the only possible
remedy for the current levels of media violence. ''The question is not one of
more censorship or less,'' he says. ''The networks are 100 percent self-censored
as it is. The question is, on whose behalf is this process operating? Right now
it's on behalf of the advertisers who pay the bill to get the maximum audience
at the minumum cost, and cater to every existing prejudice. The networks should
be censoring themselves according to a different value system.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Robert De Niro in 'Taxi Driver'

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THERE MAY BE MORE TP FOREIGN POLICY THAN STOPPING THE SOVIET;
WASHINGTON

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1495 words


IN its first three months, the Reagan Administration has sounded an almost daily
alarm about the Soviet threat. Preoccupation with the Russians has dominated
foreign policy and has also produced some of the Administration's first
discernible difficulties. ''Moscow is the greatest source of international
insecurity today,'' Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. said last week.
''Let us be plain about it. Soviet promotion of violence as the instrument of
change constitutes the greatest danger to the world.''

Not since the early days of the Kennedy Administration has the United States
sounded an anti-Soviet theme so loudly and clearly.  Detente has virtually
disappeared from Washington usage. Arms control, a principal agenda item for 20
years, is now clearly secondary. The main focus is on overcoming the perceived
Soviet thrust by rebuilding America's arsenal, increasing military aid to
friendly countries and expanding clandestine and psychological warfare.

The Administration has found, however, that it is often difficult to translate
overarching anti-Soviet policy into concrete programs.  The European allies have
pointed to growing doubts about the sincerity of Washington's commitment to arms
control, doubts that could jeopardize the stationing of new nuclear missiles in
Europe.

Against the background of harsh anti-Moscow rhetoric, the White House decision
to lift curbs on grain sales to the Soviet Union also raised serious questions.
''The United States, along with the vast majority of nations, has condemned and
remains opposed to the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan,'' President Reagan said
in announcing the action. He added, ''We will react strongly to acts of
aggression wherever they take place.'' But withdrawing the United States curbs
was seen by some as an act of domestic political expediency. The day before they
were lifted, a State Department official had remarked, ''You don't think anyone
with any knowledge of foreign affairs would support the end to the embargo, do
you?'' (The Government of Valery Giscard d'Estaing also asserted that its
Afghanistan policy remained ''unchanged'' as it announced plans, on the eve of
French presidential elections today, to sell the Russians an additional 600,000
tons of grain.)
Disputing the Vicar

The Administration has also talked a great deal about building cooperation with
Moslem states, to persuade them that their regional concerns were secondary to
the Soviet threat. But as the furor in Israel over the proposed sale of Awacs
electronic command planes to Saudi Arabia has shown, Jerusalem sees arming the
Arabs as an anti-Israeli move. And the Saudis blame Soviet inroads on Israel's
occupation of the West Bank and East Jersualem, which, they argue, fosters Arab
radicalism.

For these reasons, among others, the first three months have been far from easy
for Mr. Haig, who had assumed he would be the Administration's ''vicar'' for
foreign policy. Mr. Haig is still the chief spokesman and adviser on foreign
affairs to a President who has had limited experience in such matters. But after
his recent political difficulties, the Secretary's future seemed to some to be
less than secure.

Like most new administrations, the Reagan team was busy trying to devise
long-range, thoughtful policies, while trying to cope with almost daily crises.
Mr. Haig, faced with incendiary possibilities in Poland and El Salvador, seized
on the Central American country to dramatize his concerns about Soviet and Cuban
subversion. But his campaign to focus world attention on El Salvador, while it
may have succeeded in curbing the arms flow to the insurgents, also produced
talk of ''another Vietnam.'' Thereupon White House aides had second thoughts
about El Salvador and consequently about Mr. Haig's judgment. Concerned
primarily with gaining approval of the Reagan economic priorities, the White
House was not pleased when foreign policy crises, real or imaginary, dominated
the news.

Delays in obtaining Senate confirmation for senior State Department aides
(several were blocked by conservative Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North
Carolina), Administration infighting and the complexities of international
issues have tended to slow the formulation of policies. But some have begun to
emerge. On China, for instance, despite Reagan campaign support for more
''official'' contact with Taiwan, the Administration has assured Peking that
Washington's policy is unchanged. In the Middle East, the Camp David framework
has been affirmed, but the Administration is looking for a new way to allow
Jordan to participate.

Other broad policies were taking shape:

* Human rights. Mr. Haig said that the United States opposed all violations,
anywhere. But he also said the United States would be more tolerant of
violations by friendly ''authoritarian'' regimes.  This means that right-wing,
anti-Communist dictatorships will not be criticized in public; the Soviet bloc's
violations will be publicized.

* Foreign aid. The Administration will be generous with military and economic
assistance for friendly nations perceived to be threatened by the Soviet Union
or its ''proxies.'' Their human rights records will no longer be a litmus test
for aid. Thus, Pakistan, despite its work toward producing a nuclear bomb and
its undistinguished human rights record, is being actively courted with a
five-year, $2 billion aid package - because the Soviet Union has 85,000 troops
in neighboring Afghanistan. Conversely, countries friendly to the Russians will
get the back of Washington's hand.

* The allies. Particularly in Europe and Japan, public disputes with allies will
be shunned. Disagreements are to be funneled into diplomatic channels. This
policy, however, was already feeling strain from Britain's desire to move into
Israeli-Arab negotiations and deal directly with the Palestinians. It was
severely tested again last week when Israel went public with its opposition to
the Awacs deal.

The Reagan Administration's apparent slowness in starting arms negotiations with
the Russians has produced comparisons with the Carter Administration, which
acted rapidly in the first months only to give the impression of disarray later
as crises developed and differences became aggravated among key players. The
Carter people moved swiftly toward negotiating the Panama Canal treaty, the
Middle East peace agreement, the SALT II nuclear arms treaty with Moscow and the
Rhodesian settlement, and toward normalizing relations with Cuba and Vietnam.
A 'Dove' by Comparison

But foreign policy is not a road race. And in retrospect, some Carter era
officials acknowledge that they overloaded the early agenda. President Carter
may have moved too fast, and probably did his foreign policy more harm than
good, by public statements calling for troop withdrawals from South Korea and
outlining in advance his positions on Middle East peace and SALT. There may be a
middle ground between Mr. Carter's habit of speaking freely on details of
foreign policy and Mr. Reagan's near-silence on the subject. Partly because of
Mr. Reagan's reticence, Mr. Haig's every word and action have received
considerable attention. Despite his tough talk about the Russians, Mr. Haig has
given the impression of being cautious and pragmatic, highly sensitive to allied
concerns and a ''dove'' by comparison with Richard V. Allen, the national
security adviser, and Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger.

To the astonishment of most of Washington, Mr. Haig, instead of becoming another
John Foster Dulles or Henry A. Kissinger, has had to spend much of his time in
highly publicized battles over ''turf'' and policy issues. His standing was not
enhanced by two decisions last week. On the Awacs sale, he advised going slow to
avoid unnerving the Israelis. But the White House listened to Mr.  Weinberger,
who was more concerned about the Saudis. And Mr. Haig opposed lifting the grain
embargo, fearing it would give a hollow ring to the Administration's anti-Soviet
warnings, the ideological backbone for the defense buildup. But the White House
apparently gave priority to domestic political concerns - in Congress and the
farm belt - although the situation around Poland had scarcely returned to
normal. Trying to making the best of it, Mr. Haig told an interviewer yesterday
that if the Russians invaded Poland, the United States would without question
impose a trade embargo ''across-theboard.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Graph of grain embargo Cartoon

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IS GUNG-HO THE WAY TO GO?

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1124 words


As Congress prepares to debate the largest defense budget ever, a group of
civilian and military planners are challenging the basic thinking on strategy
and tactics underlying some of the enormously expensive new weapons.

Civilian critics such as Dr. Edward Luttwak of Georgetown University's Center
for Strategic and International Studies and Senator Gary Hart, Democrat of
Colorado, are joined, less publicly, by many active officers in questioning
fundamental doctrines. The Army, possibly because it suffered most in Vietnam,
appears to be more open to new ideas and more ready for self-criticism than
other services.

The Army has changed more since 1970, some observers believe, than in the
preceding 25 years since World War II. Consequently, it listens when Senator
Hart argues that, ''Unless we re-examine our entire concept of land warfare, it
won't do much good merely to spend more money to buy more hardware.''

The revisionists are raising questions for every service. Why, they ask, can't
the Navy build smaller, less expensive carriers that could be equipped with
planes that land or take off vertically or from short flight decks? Should the
Air Force be calling for new manned penetration bombers at a time when
surface-to-air missiles are reaching new heights and accuracy? Why build heavy
battle tanks that may have to be transported, one per plane, to third-world
battlefields where maintenance would be difficult?

The services, critics say, are locked into strategies that are now largely
irrelevant. For example, contends Dr. Littwak, they assume a nonexistent ''net
advantage in resources over the Soviet Union.'' The Army's new manual on tactics
for a big war in Europe, he asserts, ''is a doctrine of pure attrition.'' It
assumes that advancing Soviet tank columns would be ''defeated by sheer
firepower.'' It omits, he says, any attempt to ''seek out and exploit'' such
Soviet weaknesses as maintaining the thousands of trucks required to support
armored spearheads.

And Steven L. Canby, a reserve Army officer and military consultant, advocates
''a style of war'' that would emphasize ''intangibles - deception and surprise
and the ability to outthink and outpace'' an adversary. He criticizes the
tendency to put infantry forces on wheels and tracks, arguing that ''in the
classic theater of armored warfare, the NATO Central Front (in Europe),
nonmechanized infantry remains essential.'' On that, the Army is in step with
him. The Ninth Infantry Division at Fort Lewis, Wash., has been converted to
light infantry to be capable of taking villages, fighting in cities and marching
through forests.

The new stress on preparing to fight in Southwest Asia or Southern Africa rules
out the huge ''tail'' of supporting units considered necessary in Central
Europe. Consequently, the services are rethinking the systems analysis methods
introduced by President Kennedy's Defense Secretary, Robert S. McNamara. His
formulas, say the critics, treat warfare merely as a cumulative exchange of
firepower that attempts to wear down the enemy by attrition.

Pour on Iron, Then Disengage

Battalion commanders and officers are increasing their emphasis on agility in
battle, on sudden thrusts ''to pour on iron,'' to be followed by disengagement
and redeployment. For example, in the artillery ''raid,'' howitzers would be
lifted by helicopters to continue firing from miles away. Such tactics presume
that Central Europe is no longer the most likely battlefield. An Army or Marine
Corps brigade airlifted into Southwest Asia would be forced to rely on agility
and support from relatively light antitank and antiaircraft weapons.

This emphasis, however, raises serious tactical questions: Should a divison
dispatched to the third world be equipped with only enough weapons and equipment
to hold out until reinforcments arrive? The reply of commanders of light
infantry divisions like the Ninth might be ''yes.'' But for how long? Planners
reckon that Americans fighting in Southwest Asia would be met by forces equipped
with Soviet tanks, armored personnel carriers and artillery supported by
Soviet-made fighter-bombers. Should such a division therefore be heavily armed?

The trend in the Army and Marine Corps is toward deploying light divisions in
areas where the Air Force could provide cover, including helicopters and
fighter-bombers capable of knocking out tanks.

Navy doctrine and shipbuilding plans are other prime targets for re-examination.
The new jump jet aircraft ''would permit us to build smaller, less expensive
carriers,'' Senator Hart believes. Hydrofoils and giant hovercraft suitable for
amphibious assault and supply, with speeds up to 80 knots, could provide
antisubmarine protection, he adds, freeing dollars for other military purposes.

The Navy is resuming work on hovercraft suspended during budget cutbacks. But it
insists that the carrier battle group is still the most effective to project
power in the third world as well as for supporting allied forces in Europe.
Although in unbuttoned moments admirals concede that carriers are vulnerable,
they argue that new Aegis air protection cruisers will make them less so, noting
that in an era of precision-guided missiles and shells all ships are vulnerable.
Small is no longer safe.

The Air Force, which claims to be the most flexible of the services, encounters
the revisionists on the issue of military airlifts. The Army and Marines want
more giant transports to move units to distant battlefields. But Frederick C.
Thayer, a retired Air Force officer, contends that airborne divisions ''never
have been militarily significant.'' Tactical suprise is possible only when 1,500
or so troops are airlifted, he argues, and ''strategic surprise (if large
numbers were lifted) is out of the question.''

As for Air Force demands for a penetration bomber to replace the B-52's still in
service, the skeptics do not argue the merits of proposals for a modified B-1 or
FB-111 plane. Development of precision guided surface-to-air missiles and of
long-range cruise missiles, they insist, is ending the era of the strategic
bomber.  The civilian revisionists and like-minded young officers believe such
questions are essential to the effective use of limited resources. ''The book''
of accepted doctrine, they contend, must be read skeptically, with eyes open to
innovation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
THE REAL BUDGET DANGER

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section 4; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 883 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


In the five years between 1965 and 1970, as Lyndon Johnson poured men and money
into Vietnam, the level of annual American military spending rose by just over
$24 billion.  In today's money that is $53 billion.

In the five years between 1981 and 1986, Ronald Reagan proposes to increase
annual military expenditure by $181 billion.  In other words, he wants to put
more than three times as much new money into the defense budget as during the
Vietnam buildup.

The figures are astonishing.  And they point to an astonishing fact about the
debate over President Reagan's budge proposals.

So far almost all the economic and political argument about the Reagan budget
has centered on his proposed cuts in taxes and domestic programs.  Practically
nothing has been said about the economic consequences - very likely the far
deeper consequences - of Reagan's plans for huge increases in military spending.

But this strange silence about the economics of the defense budget proposals has
now been shattered.  Professor Lester Thurow of M.I.T.  has published in The New
York Review of Books an analysis so challenging that I think it will force
discussion of what such military spending levels may do to this country's
economy - and to our real security.

As in his recent book, "The Zero-Sum Society," Prof. Thurow writes with a
clarity that cuts through illusion.  He begins by reminding us of a crucial bit
of history: how Lyndon Johnson tried to conceal the cost of the Vietnam War, to
wage it without paying for it, and thus started the inflation that still
afflicts us.

"He wanted both the Great Society and the war," Thurow says.  "But if he was to
have both and not wreck the economy, his only option was to raise taxes sharply.
He chose not to do so, and he wrecked the economy."

Regan similarly wants two things at once: "dramatic tax cuts to encourage
investment and an even more extensive military buildup.  But he cannot have both
without wrecking the economy further unless he is willing to raise taxes
dramatically on private consumption.  He has chosen not to do so.  If his
current program is carried out, he too will wreck the economy."

The logic is straightforward.  A society has only so much in real resources to
spend.  If it spends money on a new bomber, it has that much less to build
houses - or it pays high inflation.

Sudden increases in military spending have a particular sharp inflationary
impact.  The manufacturers of new and additional weapons can only get the
workers they need, and the plant and materials, by competing with civilian
companies.  The political urgency behind defense spending tends to remove the
usual economic constraints.  The arms producers simply pay what they must to
outbid the civilian side.

The scenario is so familiar and obvious that in wartime governments almost
always take immediate, drastic measures against inflation: controls ahd sharp
tax increases on civilian consumption.  Those measures worked during World War
II and the Korean War; inflation was limited.  They were not used during the
Vietnam War, and the result was disaster.

What is not generally recognized now is that the climb in military spending
proposed by Reagan would be almost as steep as in wartime.  The fiscal-year
figures are:

1981 $162 billion 1982 $189 billion 1983 $226 billion 1984 $256 billion 1985
$304 billion 1986 $343 billion

In the Vietnam buildup, military spending took an extra 1.7 percent of the gross
national product.  Reagan said his doubling of the defense budget will require
only an extra 1.5 percent - but that assumes an extraordinary increase in growth
and the G.N.P.  If there is no such spurt, the military will take an extra 2.4
percent of G.N.P.

For a simple reason pointed out by Thurow, the inflationary effect of such a new
demand on the economy would probably be far worse that it was in Vietnam.  Then,
the stress was added to an economy with an inflation rate of 2 percent.Now the
rate is 11 percent.

Massive, quick increases in military spending may have a damanging long-term
effect apart from inflation.  In those conditions engineers and technicians are
drawn to military work, not only by the pay but by the lure of work at the
scientific frontier.  The civilian computer firm, unable to hold its best
people, falls behind the Japanese competitor whose employees do not move to
missile manufacturers.

Prof. Thurow does not examine the military necessity of such sharp defense
spending increases.  He limits himself to discussing their economic consequences
and pointing out that the Reagan Administration has offered to plan to deal with
them except wishful thinking.  But the likely consequences are so forbidding
that more and more people must surely start to wonder about the premises of the
Reagan defense program.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN'S FIRST 100 DAYS

SECTION: Section 6; Page 51, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6138 words


Steven R. Weisman is a White House correspondent for The New York Times. By
Steven R. Weisman
n a mild winter morning nearly 100 days ago, Ronald Reagan took his oath of
office as the

American hostages in Iran took an Algerian jet to freedom. Mr.  Reagan's smooth,
insistent voice, summoning Americans to a ''new beginning,'' has since had to
compete with such intrusions as the crackling barrage of a would-be assassin's
bullets, the disturbing staccato of terrorism in El Salvador, the rumble of
Soviet troops maneuvering near Poland and the lesser static of quarreling among
his Cabinet and staff. But none of these distractions has weakened the new
President's resolve to propel the Government into the greatest change of
direction in half a century.

With a gift for political theater, Mr. Reagan has established his goals faster,
communicated a greater
sense of economic urgency and come forward with more comprehensive proposals
than any new President since the first 100 days of Franklin D. Roosevelt, the
hero of his youth and the man whose record of achieving social change Mr. Reagan
seeks to emulate - albeit at the opposite end of the political spectrum.

In Rooseveltian fashion, Mr. Reagan has commanded the attention of the public,
the Congress and America's allies and adversaries. He has skillfully courted new
and old friends, kept Democrats and liberals on the defensive and maintained a
friendly posture even to those who, like labor leaders and blacks, regard his
program as anathema.

And, perhaps by luck, he has managed to avoid the serious blunders of many
predecessors. Before the end of their first 100 days, after all, John F. Kennedy
had the Bay of Pigs, and Jimmy Carter had already alienated his Congressional
allies and had been dramatically rebuffed by the Russians on his early
arms-control initiative, setting negotiations back as much as a year for the
ill-fated nuclear arms treaty.

Mr. Reagan's accomplishments seem all the more remarkable for having come from
one of the most improbable figures ever to assume the Presidency -
a one-time baseball announcer, B-movie actor and television pitchman who has had
to force the Establishment to take him seriously. Having become President in the
face of such skepticism, he seeks nothing less than the biggest military buildup
since the Vietnam War and the adoption of a conservative Republican program that
would all but repeal the Great Society, bringing about a seismic shift of
resources from Government to private hands. In the process, he has proclaimed an
elusive goal essential to the success of his Presidency: restoring the
confidence of Americans in themselves and in the future.

Every modern President plagued by an economic crisis has defined it in terms of
confidence, from Roosevelt's appeal - ''The only thing we have to fear is fear
itself'' - to Gerald Ford's WIN buttons and Mr.  Carter's 1979 speech about
America's malaise. With Mr. Reagan comes a new resolve, contemptuous of a decade
of talk about the need to accept limits on American growth, eager to embark on
great new deeds worthy of his version of a simpler past. ''And after all,'' he
declared on Inauguration Day, ''why shouldn't we believe that? We are
Americans.''

But if Mr. Reagan's goals are awesome, so are the obstacles that impede him, and
they have come into sharper focus as well in his first 100 days. The
similarities between Roosevelt and Mr. Reagan are many, but one major difference
is that Mr. Reagan has begun by outlining a program, not enacting one.

Before the end of Roosevelt's first 100 days, he had taken the nation off the
gold standard, rescued the banking system and won passage of 15 major pieces of
legislation, from Federal welfare programs to revisions in securities laws and
enactment of the Civilian Conservation Corps, the Agricultural Adjustment Act
and the Tennessee Valley Authority.

Mr. Reagan's achievements so far are contained in a package of proposals
including 83 major program changes, 834 amendments to the budget this year and
next, 151 lesser budgetary actions and 60 additional pieces of legislation. Not
until March 31 did he sign his first bill - cutting back dairy price supports -
on a breakfast tray at George Washington University Hospital the morning after
he was shot. If the bulk of his program is enacted, it won't be until much later
in the year, and it is far from certain what form it will be in by then.

''Reagan's people may be right in wanting a fast-paced 'first 100 days,' '' says
Richard E. Neustadt, professor of political science at Harvard University. ''But
the situation now is altogether different from the collapse of the banking
system that faced Roosevelt in 1933. I think Reagan has done an effective job
getting started, and I'm impressed with how he has spent his time. But that
doesn't tell us how his policies will fare against the shock of events.''

''The real pushing and shoving has yet to happen,'' adds another
President-watcher, James David Barber, professor of political science at Duke
University. ''Reagan's moved quickly, but our expectations should be lower than
they were for Roosevelt. So far, we've seen a lot of smiling at meetings with
Congress. That's the oil, but it's not the machinery of Government.''

On President Herbert Hoover's last day in office, he curtly told his successor:
''Mr. Roosevelt, when you have been in Washington as long as I have, you will
learn that the President of the United States calls on nobody.'' Roosevelt
ignored the advice, and here Mr.  Reagan has done exactly the same. He has gone
horseback riding in Virginia; visited backstage at concerts, ballet and theater
in Washington and New York City; dined and lunched at hotels and private homes;
donned black tie and white tie for parties at the most elegant clubs in town,
and made a point of himself traveling to Capitol Hill to visit Congressional
leaders.

In the process, Mr. Reagan has defined his objectives with such amiable
geniality that even an assassination attempt became an occasion for humor and
self-confidence. That, too, marked an eerie parallel with Roosevelt, who barely
escaped a would-be assassin's gunfire that left one man dead and four others
wounded in Miami three weeks before he was to take office. The ghastly incident
brought ''a new rush of faith'' in Roosevelt at a time when that quality was
needed most, according to the historian Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.  Those
sentiments find their echo today.

For after jolt upon jolt to American pride from setbacks overseas and at home,
the yearning for an old-fashioned can-do spirit is surely what Mr. Reagan rode
to victory when he defeated Mr. Carter in 44 states and won 51 percent of the
popular vote. Now he seeks to harness the same spirit in a highly unusual way.

The unorthodox economists who have devised the Reagan program acknowledge that
Americans will only change their patterns of behavior - that is, save enough and
be willing enough to accept lower
wage increases - if they come to believe that Government can be curbed and that
inflation can be brought down. If, instead, Americans react to a tax cut by
spending today rather than saving for tomorrow, and by clamoring as they have in
the past for wage increases, Mr.  Reagan's program will be one of the most
calamitous, inflationary failures of all time.

The theory behind Mr. Reagan's proposals is untested, and he conceded as much in
a speech to Congress. Turning to his critics, he asked: ''Have they any
alternative which offers a greater chance of balancing the budget, reducing and
eliminating inflation, stimulating the creation of jobs and reducing the tax
burden? And if they haven't, are they suggesting we can continue on the present
course without coming to a day of reckoning in the very near future?''

At every chance, Mr. Reagan recognizes the need to rebuild expectations by
sounding the theme of self-confidence, that ''we are in control'' and that ''we
can and will resolve the problems which confront us.'' But what he seeks most of
all is a duplication of Roosevelt's political success altered to conservative
needs - a creation of the conditions leading to a new era of Republican primacy
in America.

This may be Mr. Reagan's most difficult task of all, for it is in his political
approach that Mr. Reagan most differs from Roosevelt.  Roosevelt ran on a pledge
to cut Government spending by 25 percent, and then showed himself to be a
pragmatist and an improviser capable of abandoning campaign promises. ''Take a
method and try it,'' he said. ''If it fails, try another. But above all, try
something.''

By contrast, Mr. Reagan may be pragmatic about his tactics, but he ran for
office intent on implementing an agenda he had advocated for decades. To the
astonishment of many, he is seeking now to carry it out.
s an actor and after-dinner speaker and as Governor of California, for example,
Mr. Reagan had made it clear that he didn't like the antipoverty programs of the
Great Society, even when most voters did. And at the height of the popularity of
President Richard Nixon's policy of detente with the Soviet Union, Mr. Reagan
remained a hawkish skeptic. He was against Government regulation even when the
consumer, environmental and worker-safety movements were at their peak. He
scoffed as well at energy conservation just as that idea took hold. As a
politician, he had been nothing if not consistent.  Now the question is: Has he
a mandate to dismantle what he opposed and alter the American landscape? Or did
he win last year simply because he vaguely but skillfully tapped the
frustrations of Americans with a campaign theme summed up brilliantly at the
debate with President Carter, when Mr. Reagan asked voters: ''Are you better off
now than you were four years ago?''

The answers to these questions are so unclear, and American public opinion is so
changeable in any case, that the political risks Mr.  Reagan faces are probably
even more serious than the economic risks.

The Reagan proposals promise a political struggle whose outcome will affect
American society for a generation. Confident of his electoral mandate, the
President told an applauding conservative audience a few weeks ago: ''We're not
cutting the budget simply for the sake of sounder financial management. Those of
us who call ourselves conservative have pointed out what's wrong with Government
policy for more than a quarter of a century. Now we have an opportunity ... to
change our national directions ... Fellow citizens, fellow conservatives, our
time is now. Our moment has arrived.''

In the strategy of Mr. Reagan's Presidential campaign lies the foundation of his
first 100 days. Last
fall, the candidate's aides realized that voters perceived Mr. Reagan to be more
conservative than they - perhaps too much so. ''We must minimize the perception
that he is dangerous and uncaring,'' said an internal campaign memorandum in
October.

Campaign pollsters tested different future ''scenarios'' with voters and found
that they vastly preferred to believe ''America can do'' rather than ''less is
better.'' The ''can do'' theme thus formed the vehicle for easing voters' fears
about Mr. Reagan's conservatism and instilling their faith in his leadership
potential.

The themes and actions of Mr. Reagan's first 100 days have been as carefully
planned as the campaign itself, and by the same people.  ''Was the American
dream over?'' asked another internal memorandum of last December. ''The voters
said NO, the American Dream was not over, or at least they hoped it was not.''

Upon taking office, the memo went on, Mr. Reagan should gear his actions to his
call for renewed confidence in America and for passage of his economic program.
He was warned not to use ''grand rhetoric'' until his program was ready, and
then to seek to lower expectations so that the public would understand that his
goals coud not be achieved quickly. ''Finally, to provide real leadership,
President Reagan must engage in a perennial campaign,'' the memorandum said, and
then concluded: He should mount a daily barrage of speeches, directives and
meetings to support his legislation, and he should forget any notion of being an
''outsider'' in the nation's capital.  Mr. Carter had failed at that, alienating
the power centers needed for a President to govern effectively.

In his very first days, Mr. Reagan therefore issued a blizzard of executive
orders, lifting dozens of Government regulations, dismissing hundreds of Carter
holdovers, setting a Federal hiring freeze and cutting back on travel, office
redecoration, consultants and furniture procurement.

He met with everybody from the Congressional Black Caucus to the
anti-abortionists. He spoke to the nation on television, addressed a joint
session of Congress and let NBC film a day of his activities devoted to the
economy for an hour-long special. Indeed, in two months, he met face to face
with 400 Congressmen and ostentatiously courted the most powerful Democrat among
them, Speaker of the House Thomas P. (Tip) O'Neill Jr., who was invited for
dinner and to the President's surprise birthday
party for intimates. When Mr. O'Neill sent a souvenir tie to the White House,
Mr. Reagan showed up at their next meeting wearing it.  ''Now you're in the big
leagues,'' the Speaker had warned the new President. But Mr. Reagan had already
proved he knew it.

As part of his effort to keep the focus on the economy, Mr. Reagan deliberately
avoided speaking out on the controversial agreement that freed the hostages from
Iran. He has deferred such promises as those to dismantle the Departments of
Energy and Education, and he has tried to avoid embroilment in the abortion and
crime issues.

Not once, meanwhile, has Mr. Reagan called for sacrifice. ''Jimmy Carter talked
about accepting shortages, and look where it got him,'' said an aide to Mr.
Reagan, defending the President's description of his program as merely a
reduction in waste and extravagance.

The ''truly needy'' are protected, Mr. Reagan says, and anyone who thinks
otherwise has fallen captive to the rhetoric of bureaucrats bent on protecting
their jobs and their ''clientele.'' The ease with which Mr. Reagan dismisses
criticism obviously derives from the practice he got in California.

Following the election, however, Mr. Reagan's economic advisers had, in fact,
disagreed sharply behind the scenes about whether to attach a program of deep
spending cuts to the 30-percent cuts in income taxes that had been a cornerstone
of his campaign.

For example, Representative Jack F. Kemp, the Buffalo, N.Y., Republican who was
an original author of the tax cut, warned there would be ''blood on the floor''
of Congress if Mr. Reagan tried to cut Government programs as sharply as others
were urging. Mr. Kemp and others argued that tax cuts themselves would produce
enough economic growth to pay for existing Government services.

In a pivotal decision, Mr. Reagan rejected Mr. Kemp's advice, siding with the
orthodox Republican economists who held that tax cuts without budget cuts would
ignite a new round of inflation.

But not until the appointment of David A. Stockman, the fiercely conservative
director of the Office of Management and Budget, did Mr. Reagan begin to review
the specifics of the cuts. Seated at the center of a long table - first at a
transition office and then in the Cabinet room - Mr. Reagan listened as Mr.
Stockman presented cuts the budget director had been wanting to make for years
while studying the budget as a Republican Congressman from Michigan.

In 90 percent of the cases, the President gave a simple assent to what Mr.
Stockman had wrought. Occasionally he sided with a Cabinet Secretary who
objected, and sometimes he asked why a certain program couldn't be reduced even
more. ''Go ahead and cut it,'' he interjected at one point after a long debate.
''They're going to hang me in effigy anyway, and it doesn't matter how high.''

The most heated debates were over tax policy, with Treasury Secretary Donald T.
Regan arguing for greater benefits to persons with higher incomes, a move he
said would increase savings and investment. Mr. Reagan rejected his advice on
political grounds. ''We couldn't afford to have a package that looked like a
giveaway for the rich,'' an adviser said later.

As consultations proceeded, Mr. Reagan approved modifications to placate allies
on Capitol Hill. Subsidies for the Clinch River breeder reactor in Tennessee
were left untouched in deference to the majority leader, Senator Howard H. Baker
Jr., a Tennessee Republican. Cuts in food stamps were reduced to please
Republican Senator Robert Dole of Kansas.

The timetable of these actions tells the story of Mr. Reagan's rapid
Presidential pace. On Jan. 20, he gave an inaugural address devoted almost
exclusively to the economy. He spoke to the nation on television Feb. 5, and
addressed Congress in a joint session Feb. 18, presenting the bulk of his
economic package on that date. (Continued on Pgae 76)
Pgs 76 78 80

By March 10, he had com pleted details of the package.  In sum, the package
consists of a $695 billion budget for next year, the boldest attempt of modern
times to redirect the resources of government. It features nearly $50 billion in
spending cuts, more than $50 billion in tax cuts, and the start of a three-year,
27 percent rise in military spending - an increase so huge many experts question
whether the Pentagon can spend at that rate.

In Congress, the package met with initial predictions, even among Democrats,
that Mr. Reagan would get most of what he proposed.  Indeed, Democrats joined
with Republicans in supporting a set of Reagan-backed spending cuts on the
Senate floor in early April. But just before Congress broke for Easter recess
two weeks ago, some conservative Senate Republicans dealt the Administration a
setback by defecting on a key resolution in the Senate Budget Committee which
didn't cut spending as fast as they wanted. . Meanwhile, Democratic leaders in
the House were saying Mr. Reagan would have to awaken soon to the need to
compromise, at least on his tax cuts. The Democratic critics focused on both the
economic and political premises of Mr. Reagan's program.

For one thing, many economists dispute Mr. Reagan's opening contention that
radical surgery is needed because Government spending and deficits have left
Americans worse off than 20 years ago. In fact, they point out, the standard of
living for Americans is twice as high as it was in 1960, even after inflation,
although it is true that many Americans are worse off than they were four years
ago, as Mr. Reagan suggested in the Presidential campaign.

Also, the rate of relief in Mr. Reagan's tax cut grows with one's income,
skewing its benefits toward the well-to-do. This reversal of the historic policy
of taxing the wealthy at higher rates is defended by Reagan aides on the ground
that the wealthy are more apt to save or invest, and an increase in savings and
investment is needed to improve productivity and dampen inflation. Thus, even
though the President had earlier ruled out increasing tax-cut benefits for the
very wealthy, the program still leaves Mr. Reagan open to the charge that he is
proffering traditional ''Republican economics,'' favoring the upper classes.

One is drawn, then, to the conclusion that Mr. Reagan's budget cuts have spared
the truly powerful more than the truly needy. To be sure, student loans,
business loans, dairy price supports and other programs for the middle class are
being trimmed. But the costliest programs for the poor - welfare, Medicaid, food
stamps, social services and rental assistance - are slated for the sharpest
cuts.  Programs that mostly help those in the middle class or above -Social
Security, Medicare and veterans benefits - are preserved. Also untouched are
tens of billions of dollars in tax benefits that, in effect, subsidize housing
and health care for the middle class.

One more controversial feature of Mr. Reagan's program is his proposal to
consolidate at least 75 different health, education and social service programs
into a few big block grants, leaving the states to spend the money with no
strings attached. This move toward a ''new federalism'' has been both a longtime
Republican dream and consistent with Mr. Reagan's talk of ''states' rights''
during the campaign.

The approach is controversial because nothing would remain to impel states to
spend the money on those deemed needy by Congress in the last 20 years. Indeed,
Congress would be deprived altogether of its historic role in deciding the
purposes for which Federal money should be spent. Small wonder that on
Inauguration Day, the governors in attendance applauded Mr. Reagan's appeal for
power to be returned to the states; the Democratic leaders of Congress greeted
the idea with stony silence.  The question of mandate hovers over all of Mr.
Reagan's doctrines.  Americans, no doubt, endorsed his pledge to curb the
intrusive role of Government. But did their votes for Mr. Reagan mean that they
wanted him to take all these steps?

Did the election results mean that voters will embrace his efforts to weaken the
Clean Air Act, or ease the regulation of wages, hours and conditions in the
working place? Do most Americans want weaker controls over strip mining,
offshore drilling, nuclear power plants and the labeling of food additives? Do
they want the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Federal Trade
Commission to back away from regulating businesses? Do they want Government to
de-emphasize energy conservation? Do they, indeed, want an end to Government
social service programs as we know them?

Democrats who argue ''no'' have had problems opposing Mr. Reagan because, until
recently, they failed to produce an alternative of their own. Moreover, they
have been leaderless, rudderless and divided on the ideological lines that split
the party even when Mr.  Carter was President.

The assassination attempt on Mr. Reagan also appears to have helped the
President's program, at least in the short run. ''I sense an awful lot of
sympathy and love for the President flowering around here now,'' said Senator
Paul Laxalt, the Nevada Republican who is Mr. Reagan's closest Congressional
ally. ''But if I know the Congressional beast, it'll be short-lived.''

Even if Mr. Reagan wins approval of his program, it is still far from clear that
he can achieve his desired results. Most outside economists say his assumptions
are overly optimistic. The Reagan program assumes inflation will drop to 7.2
percent by the end of next year, for example, and that overall economic growth
will soar to a rate of more than 5 percent. The last time the economy grew that
fast, in 1977, it also stoked the fires of inflation.

Reagan aides say their predictions will materialize because of an improvement in
''rational expectations'' so dramatic that Americans will change their economic
behavior out of confidence that inflation will go down. Edwin Meese 3d, Mr.
Reagan's senior policy adviser, agrees that, in this sense, the Reagan program
is as much as 80 percent psychological.

However, most recent Presidential efforts to instill confidence have foundered
for various reasons. Hoover thought balancing the budget would do it. Nixon
turned to wage and price controls to eliminate inflationary ''psychology.'' Such
efforts failed because confidence has proved itself consistently beyond the
reach of the manipulation of politi-cians, and too susceptible to outside
shocks, such as an Arab oil embargo. This stark lesson of the past throws the
darkest shadow of uncertainty across Mr. Reagan's path.  After the beginning of
the Great Depression, President Hoover considered cutting back on glitter at the
White House but opted instead for nightly banquets with trumpets announcing the
arrival of the President and his guests - even when Hoover, wearing black tie,
dined alone with his wife. It was good for American morale to know that things
had not slipped at the White House, he argued.

Mr. Reagan and his wife, Nancy, may not have had this rationale in mind as they
embarked on putting a sense of splash back into the White House after four years
of the studied simplicity of Mr.  Carter. But the Reagans have re-established an
exuberant style nonetheless since Inauguration Day, when the Californians,
Texans and their friends arrived and created a Republican gridlock in downtown
Washington, with limou-sines bearing men in formal attire and women in
full-length mink. Before the assassination attempt, Mr. Reagan was wearing black
tie himself, several nights a week. And after the Reagans spent $8 million in
privately raised funds on their inaugural festivities, another $800,000 was
contributed to refurbish their living quarters. Mrs. Reagan's staff had been
shocked to find mousetraps poking out from underneath threadbare sofas and
chairs at the White House.

The Reagans had some of the walls painted pale yellow, and in their residence
today there are palm trees, plants and freshly cut flowers, giving the place a
touch of the good life in Pacific Palisades.

Mr. Reagan has discovered a favorite hideaway in a small secondfloor study,
where he escapes when possible during the day. His biggest complaint to Helene
von Damm, his longtime secretary, is the absence of free time. ''I have no time
to be President,'' he'll say when glancing at his crowded calendar, meaning that
he misses the moments alone to think.

Unlike his immediate predecessor, this President likes guests and loves
ceremony. Recently, his schedule got backed up because he lingered and swapped
endless baseball stories with Duke Snider, Mickey Mantle and 35 other visiting
members of the Baseball Hall of Fame.

When Mr. Reagan enters the room, the Marine Band plays ''Hail to the Chief,''
which it used to do until Jimmy Carter. For the first time since Richard Nixon
departed, a marine in dress uniform salutes visitors to the main entrance of the
West Wing. In the Cabinet room, Mr. Reagan replaced the portraits of Truman and
Jefferson with Coolidge and Eisenhower, Presidents he admires because of their
record of ''prosperity, peace and no inflation.''

Official Washington, at least, has been captivated by Mr. Reagan's affability.
Having angrily labeled some Congressional budget figures as ''phony,'' Mr.
Reagan ducks his head later and allows with a grin that ''it probably wasn't the
proper word to use.'' Told by an aide that he'd be happy to hear that the
Government had functioned normally during his stay in the hospital, Mr. Reagan
replied: ''What makes you think I'd be happy about that?'' Mr. Reagan's quips
deflect criticism, the most nettlesome of which is that the Administration
remains riven by factionalism. ''Sometimes our right hand doesn't know what our
far right hand is doing,'' Mr.  Reagan observed in response.

The organizational problems have been serious. Despite the drive for
collegiality, a series of acrimonious disputes impedes the staff and the
agencies. Power at the White House indisputably rests with Edwin Meese 3d, James
A. Baker 3d and Michael K. Deaver, three men who have come to work better
together than they have worked with the Cabinet, especially
Pgs 82 84
Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.  By far the toughest organizational
decision Mr. Reagan faced was his installation of Vice President George Bush,
not Secretary Haig, as director of crisis management at the White House, in
charge of emergency situations that require interagency coordination. But the
crisis-management decision simply exposed the difficulties Mr. Haig was having
in getting along with colleagues.

First, the Secretary feuded with Budget Director Stockman over foreign aid; then
with Transportation Secretary Drew Lewis and with Bill Brock, the Special Trade
Representative, over Japanese auto imports, and also with Agriculture Secretary
John R. Block over the Soviet grain embargo.

His biggest disagreements have been with Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger
over statements about the neutron bomb, arms negotiations with the Russians and
- most embarrassingly - over who was in charge in the Situation Room at the
White House hours after Mr. Reagan had been shot.

To the dismay of the White House staff, the Cabinet disputes have been damaging
in two respects: they have blurred the desired coherence in foreign policy, and
they have undercut the President's drive to focus attention on the economy.

A major theme of Mr. Reagan's foreign policy is the notion of American moral
superiority - ''a shining city on a hill'' - and its central element has been a
return to the concept of containment of the Russians. This has meant, for
example, that other recent Carter priorities - curbing nuclear proliferation,
advocating human rights and defusing regional disputes in the Middle East and
Africa - have taken second place to the renewed tendency to see problems in
terms of East-West strategic considerations.

Surely the public supports a military buildup, and it may also approve of Mr.
Reagan's insistence that the Soviet Union reserves ''the right to commit any
crime, to lie, to cheat'' to advance its interests. Such language hasn't been
heard from an American President in years.

But, privately, the President's political advisers say they know that while the
American people favor a tougher stance toward the Russians, they simultaneously
worry about any increased prospects for a nuclear confrontation. Thus, some
aides concede that the Administration's bellicose talk was a significant factor
in dampening Mr. Reagan's approval ratings just before the assassination
attempt, and that it could become a factor again, hampering his ability to get
his economic legislation passed. The President's aides are also concerned that
the tough talk might raise unrealistic expectations for action. A Russian
invasion of Poland, for example, would force the Administration to face the fact
that it could do little to stop Moscow. Such a situation would be similar to Mr.
Reagan's early promise of ''swift retribution'' for terrorism, followed by an
embarrassed admission by aides that nothing would be done to pun-ish the
terrorists who jeopardized American lives in two recent airplane hijackings.

On the minds of Mr. Reagan's political advisers seems to be the memory that his
biggest obstacle in the election campaign was a fear among voters that he was
trigger-happy.

As a result, President Reagan and his senior aides decided very gingerly that
Secretary Haig would go public with a proposal for aid to the Government of El
Salvador, which has been fighting an insurrection that the United States claims
is supported by the Communist bloc. This opening shot in late February, the
carefully planned signal of a more assertive foreign policy, was timed to be
made between two key economic announcements. But the strategy backfired. The
mail against the American El Salvador intervention has been running ten-to-one
opposed. ''It was not something we expected,'' said a shaken Presidential aide.

The political risks are equally obvious in the Administration's decision to
place Israeli-Egyptian talks on a back burner, and to send weapons and aircraft
to Saudi Arabia and possibly other nations in the Persian Gulf, over Israeli
protests. The kind words Mr. Reagan has had recently for South Africa - and for
military regimes in Argentina, South Korea and elsewhere -may also create
problems, because Mr. Carter found that human rights were still a popular issue
last year.

Another key Presidential initiative has gone largely unnoticed: Mr. Reagan's
request for Congress to repeal its restrictions on the Administration's ability
to help the pro-Western rebels in Angola, and to channel aid to the Governments
of Argentina and Pakistan.  Congress placed these three bans at the height of
its post-Vietnam War eagerness to curb the President's power to support
activities Congress didn't like, such as human-rights violations in Argentina
and nuclear proliferation in Pakistan. But Mr. Reagan is trying to get the
pendulum to swing back to the Presidency, at least in the conduct of foreign
policy.

''The President needs to be able to act quickly in foreign affairs,'' asserted a
senior aide. ''And there is no better time to restore his ability to act
unilaterally than now, when he's at the height of his popularity.'' This
awareness that the President's popularity cannot possibly last suffuses the
White House as Mr.  Reagan approaches the end of his first 100 days.

''The occupational hazard of any Presidential staff is that they think they're
going to be here forever,'' a senior White House aide said. ''What an illusion
that is! Those shots at Reagan gave me a sense that we have to act before time
runs out.''

Already some of Mr. Reagan's own constituents are growing restive.  Right-wing
groups say they are upset at certain appointments. Mr.  Reagan has had to break
a major campaign promise and continue the Soviet grain embargo. The free-traders
are upset that he is seeking voluntary restraints on Japanese car imports.
Conservatives are uncomfortable with Mr. Reagan's agreement to try to head off
any attempts in Congress, even by his friends, to tie his economic package to
the explosive issues of abortion, the death penalty or busing. One thing to
watch, if Mr. Reagan's political fortunes turn sour, is whether the President
will jettison the hard-line Mr.  Stockman or the unpredictable Mr. Haig, if they
draw more criticism than they are worth.

There have really been only three periods in this century, however, when
American Presidents worked harmoniously with Congress to achieve far-reaching
changes in Government: the first terms of Woodrow Wilson and Franklin D.
Roosevelt, and the first two years of Lyndon B.  Johnson. But these were eras
when Government was expanding, not contracting, as Mr. Reagan wants it to.

America has in more recent years become familiar with the conditions making it
more difficult than ever for a President to bring about change. The factors
include the atrophying of political parties, the fragmentation of Congress, the
rise of Government bureaucracy and the problems posed by special interests,
lawyers, American cynicism - and the tendency of Presidential election campaigns
to produce effective candidates, but not effective Presidents.

Facing these difficulties, Mr. Reagan has displayed remarkable political
strengths and gifts. His first 100 days have shown that he is a President
determined to change the tides of history. The question remains whether his
popularity and his claim of a mandate have given him enough strength to do it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Reagan leaving Oval Office photo of Reagan
family photo of demonstrator photo of Reagan and Bush with the Cabinet photo of
American advisor in El Salvador photo of Polish troops on maneuvers photo of
Reagan with South Korean President Chun photo of inaugural button photo of
Reagan before horseback riding

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A Lament For Vietnam

SECTION: Section 6; Page 134, Column 5; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 73 words


I can understand Doan Van Toai's disillusionment very well, but I would not
conclude, as he suggests, that the failure is one of ideology (''A Lament for
Vietnam,'' March 29). He may not have been at all unwise in fighting against
French colonialism and for North Vietnam Communism. The failure seems to me in
large part one of interaction of ideology and culture and particular stress
conditions.
TAMAJI HARMIN, Edwardsville, Ill.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 6; Page 134, Column 5; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 114 words


To answer Doan Van Toai, Russian influence in Vietnam did not increase because
Hanoi ''sold out''; it increased because a massive war and reconstruction made
Vietnam economically and militarily dependent on the Soviet Union. United States
intervention turned a country with a native liberationist movement into an
impoverished ward of the Russians.

There is a lesson here: We should not force the Salvadoran revolution to seek
foreign aid by supporting the repressive junta there. Nor should we punish
revolutionary governments by ending aid and trade, thereby forcing them to turn
to the Soviet Union for support, as Cuba did after the trade embargo.
RICHARD HALPERN, New Haven

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SILENCE IS SHAMEFUL

SECTION: Section 7; Page 58, Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1055 words


-------------------------------------------------------------------- C.D.B.
Bryan is the author of ''Friendly Fire.''
THE UNITED STATES IN THE VIETNAM WAR By Don Lawson.  Illustrated with
photographs.  149 pp. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell.  The Young People's History
of America's Wars.  $8.95. (Ages 12 to 16)
THE VIETNAM WAR By E.B. Fincher.  Illustrated with photographs.  87 pp. New
York: Franklin Watts. An Impact Book.  $6.45. (Ages 12 to 16)

By C.D.B.BRYAN

I have before me Don Lawson's quite excellent ''The United States in the Vietnam
War'' and E.B. Fincher's quite awful ''The Vietnam War,'' two slim books written
for students in the seventh grade and up.

The Vietnam War is now history and it can and must be taught as such. Seventh
graders would have been between 4 and 6 years old when the last American
military forces left Vietnam, between 6 and 8 when Saigon was renamed Ho Chi
Minh City. During the official and unofficial postwar silence that has
characterized our past eight years of penned-up national sadness and anger and
guilt, these children have heard, seen and learned next to nothing of the trauma
Vietnam caused. I do not believe our unwillingness to discuss the war was
deliberate - or, at least, any more deliberate than the failure of the World War
II generation of Germans to share their experiences with their children. We may
have simply felt our children were too young to understand, and that the
emotions the war caused were still too raw and painful to allow us to discuss
Vietnam objectively.  Silence is no longer golden; it has become shameful.

What do we want our children to know about the Vietnam War? What should we,
their parents, remember? What were the lessons we all should have learned from
our nation's longest and costliest war?

I recently asked some children in my community ranging in age from 12 to 17
years what they knew about the Vietnam War. ''Not that much,'' I was told. Do
you have any idea when it began? ''No.'' When it ended? ''No.'' The older ones
knew ''Americans were drafted to help Vietnam.'' South, or North? ''I'm not
sure.'' They knew ''a lot of people were against it,'' but they didn't know why.
The 17-yearold thought ''we went there to help the French.''

When I asked them what they would want to find out if they had to read a history
of the Vietnam War, the 16-year-old said he'd want to know ''how many got
killed'' and the 17-year-old, ''why the U.S.  fought there.'' None of them
really knew where Vietnam was located - or, for that matter, where Afghanistan
or El Salvador is located. So it goes.

What children will learn from reading Don Lawson's book is how and why the
Vietnam War began and how and why it ended. They will learn who made the
decisions that committed an increasing number of America's young men to fight
and die or become wounded in a war Walter Lippmann said confronted the American
people with the ''choice of unattainable victory or unacceptable defeat.'' They
will learn how high Government officials from the President of the United States
on down continually lied - and that is the only appropriate word - to the
American people about both the extent and the aims of American involvement in
Southeast Asia. They will learn how the Congress elected to represent them
failed to exercise their Constitutional responsibilities.

They will learn about ''hawks'' and ''doves'' and student deferments and how not
all the young antiwar protesters were purely idealistic, that they simply didn't
want to be drafted. They will learn why people called Vietnam ''a rich man's war
and a poor man's fight,'' why Bernard Fall said that the battle of Dien Bien Phu
''may have done more to shape the fate of the world than the battles of
Agincourt, Waterloo, Stalingrad or Midway.'' They will learn why Vietnam was
more a political conflict than a military one and how our failure to understand
that caused us to lose. They will wonder why and how in 1967, despite the heavy
fighting, a South Vietnamese infantry division could lose more men to traffic
accidents than to combat. They will learn about the political climate that led
to our national paranoia during the war years. They will know that President
Johnson called Vietnam ''a raggedy-ass little fourth-rate country.'' They will
learn about ''Search and Destroy'' missions, ''Free-Fire Zones,'' ''Zippo
Brigades'' and the massacre and attempted cover-up of My Lai. The children will
get all this and more in Don Lawson's ''The United States in the Vietnam War.''

E.B. Fincher's ''The Vietnam War'' is almost totally lacking in the intellectual
and moral courage that marks Don Lawson's book.  Presidents, in Mr. Fincher's
book, don't lie; they ''resort to trickery.'' According to Mr. Fincher, the
C.I.A. had no role in the assassination of Ngo Dinh Diem. The circumstances of
the attack on the United States destroyers Maddox and C. Turner Joy are ''still
a matter of some dispute.'' My Lai does not appear in his book. Nor does Robert
McNamara or Daniel Ellsberg. Nor does Mr. Fincher mention the decision to
publish ''The Pentagon Papers'' and the impact that publication had.

If we are going to learn from our mistakes, if we are going to help our children
understand what happened in Vietnam and in this country, we have got to tell
them the truth - all the truth. It is our duty, nothing less and nothing more.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 27, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
New Parliament Elected, By Vietnamese Voters

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 217 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 26


Vietnamese voters elected a new Parliament today.  The 496-seat assembly will be
the seventh since Ho Chi Minh declared Vietnam an independent country in
September 1945, but it will be the first to be chosen in nationwide elections
since the unification of North and South Vietnam in 1976.

All the candidates were chosen by the Vietnam Fatherland Front, an umbrella
group directed by the Communist Party.  Running unopposed were Prime Minister
Pham Van Dong, Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach and the party secretary, Le
Duan.

Independent Arms Panel Asks U.S. and Soviet to Talk

GENEVA, April 26 (Reuters) - An independent disarmament panel today urged the
United States and the Soviet Union to open talks as soon as possible on curbing
such medium-range nuclear arms as the cruise and SS-20 missiles.

The group, the Vienna-based Independent Commission on Disarmament and Security
Issues, is headed by former Prime Minister Olof Palme of Sweden and includes
political leaders from 17 nations.

In a statement after a two-day meeting here, members from 13 countries said that
''failure to begin talks and make progress soon toward the control and reduction
of these weapons would result in aggravating the present dangerous situation in
Europe, with repercussions for the rest of the world.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 27, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

TUCSON PROTEST GROUP LINKS BIBLE TO EL SALVADOR

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 688 words

DATELINE: TUCSON, Ariz., April 26


As employees leave the Federal Building here each Thursday afternoon, they
encounter a group of some 50 people quietly demonstrating against United States
involvement in El Salvador.

The demonstrators, mainly middle-aged, march in a circle holding aloft signs
with messages such as ''U.S. Out Of El Salvador Now'' and ''U.S. Guns Kill U.S.
Nuns.'' The latter sign was a reference to the shooting deaths of three nuns and
a lay worker in San Salvador last year.

Unlike some of the more vocal and politically motivated organizations that are
protesting the American presence in El Salvador, the Tucson group bases its
weekly bilingual demonstration on Christian beliefs.

Readings From Bible

On a recent Thursday afternoon, individual demonstrators, both white and
Mexican-American, read aloud portions of a text that linked biblical passages
with contemporary events. After each reading the entire group would respond,
''Our God is a liberating God, therefore there is hope.''

After the readings, demonstrators and clergymen bring the group up to date on
the latest foreign policy announcements from Washington and discuss news of the
immigration status of Salvadoran refugees.  Several Salvadoran refugees living
in Tucson have attended the services. The group has met for eight consecutive
weeks, and the demonstrators have said that they will continue until United
States military support to El Salvador ends.

One weekly participant in the demonstration, Jerry Robinett, a 60-year-old
maintenance electrician at a nearby copper mine, said after a recent gathering:
''I'm familiar with the Salvadoran issue from reading 'In These Times' and 'Win'
and from people I used to work with on the farm workers' boycott. It's
imperative that we show our feelings about U.S. involvement in Central America.
I'll be here every week until it's no longer necessary.''

'Can't Help But Be Involved'

Nearby another maintenance man, Don Buchanan, 50 years old, nodded in agreement.
''As a Christian I can't help but be involved with all who suffer,'' he said.
''I know all Christian people will be held accountable by God for what they did
for justice in this life. I don't believe in fundamentalist-type religion. I
think the whole world is our concern.''

Another regular is Gary MacEoin, who has written more than 20 books on Latin
America, his native Ireland and the Roman Catholic Church.  ''The Roman Catholic
Church has come out so adamantly opposed to U.S. policy in El Salvador, for the
first time the church is actually on a collision course with Washington,'' Mr.
MacEoin said, ''And I don't believe Reagan is even conscious of it.''

Mr. MacEoin, 72, said he visited El Salvador twice last year, and in January he
met with Salvadoran refugees at the Honduras border. He and others at the weekly
services cited the assassination of Archbishop Oscar A. Romero of San Salvador
last year as the impetus for their intensified involvement. More than 1,000
people marched in a procession and attended a mass in Tucson last month to
commemorate the first anniversary of the Archbishop's death.

Leadership From Church

The Rev. John F. Fife of the Southside Presbyterian Church here, one of the
clergymen responsible for the weekly gathering, said: ''In this one the church
has provided some leadership. During Vietnam the church was at least two to
three years behind the times. It's a faith commitment that brings people here.
We really believe we are praying so that change may come about.''

The Rev. Ricardo Elford of the Redemptorist Order added: ''People are mistaken
when they think this is politics and not religion. This is religion of the most
urgent kind. We strive for a feeling of solidarity with Christians in El
Salvador. The miles between us don't count that much. Our goal is that there may
be social justice in El Salvador and an end to U.S. aid, and to offset the
propaganda mill of the State Department.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 1, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. Saves 22 'Boat People'

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 32 words

DATELINE: MANILA, April 30


The American frigate Hepburn rescued 22 Vietnamese ''boat people'' today,
bringing to 720 the number picked up this month in the South China Sea, Navy
officials said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 1, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
A SCHOLAR-GENERAL FOR ARMS POST: EDWARD LEON ROWNY

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 731 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 30


The Army today wants professional officers to be combat leaders, staff aides,
managers, diplomats and scholars.  Lieut. Gen. Edward Leon Rowny appears to fill
the bill. Says a fellow general: ''He's done it all.''

General Rowny, named by President Reagan to be the special representative for
arms control and disarmament negotiations, served as a battalion commander in
World War II and as a regimental commander in the Korean War. He was later
assistant division commander of the 82d Airborne, commander of the 24th Infantry
Division in West Germany and commander of I Corps in Korea.

As a staff officer, he helped plan the amphibious landing at Inchon in the
Korean War, served with the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and was the chief logistician
for the Army in Europe. He set up a team to evaluate counterinsurgency in
Vietnam and was deputy chief of research and development at the Pentagon.

A good part of General Rowny's career has been in quasi-diplomatic posts in
Europe, where he has been Deputy Chief of Staff of the European Command, deputy
chairman of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's Military Committee in
Brussels, and the representative of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the talks on
the limitation of strategic arms with the Soviet Union from 1973 to 1979.

'Big Picture Sort of Guy'

As a scholar, he earned bachelor's degrees from Johns Hopkins in Baltimore and
the Military Academy at West Point, two master's degrees from Yale, and a
doctorate in international relations at American University in Washington in
1977.

An officer who served with him in Vietnam said that General Rowny was ''someone
who looked beyond the end of his nose.'' ''He's a big picture sort of guy. He
challenged everything you said; he made you prove your point.'' In his new job,
General Rowny will report to the director of the Arms Control and Disarmament
Agency, Eugene V. Rostow. But with influential friends on Capitol Hill, such as
Senator Jesse Helms, the conservative Republican from North Carolina, and
Senator Henry M.  Jackson, the hard-line Democrat from Washington, General Rowny
may have room to handle the negotiations somewhat in his own manner.

His views are clear. General Rowny resigned in 1979 as the representative of the
Joint Chiefs to the arms control negotiations because he believed the United
States was negotiating a treaty that would relegate it to a strategic position
inferior to that of the Soviet Union.

In testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee later, General Rowny,
who speaks Russian, provided clues as to what sort of a negotiator he will be.
''Having dealt with the Soviets over a long period of time, and having studied
not only Soviet but Russian history, I think I know something about the Soviet
mentality and how they react,'' he said.

General Rowny asserted that the Russians would continue to negotiate even if the
United States turned down the treaty. ''They need it, in my opinion, more than
we do. Therefore, they will come back to the negotiating table.''

But he warned against permitting the Soviet Union to gain superiority over the
United States. ''If you present a Soviet leader with a situation where he sees
himself in a strategically superior position, that will embolden him at the
bargaining table or in some kind of crisis.''

A Lesson in Thrift

General Rowny was born in Baltimore on April 3, 1917. His father was a Polish
immigrant who had lived under Russian rule and been forced to speak Russian
instead of Polish. As a boy, Edward worked for his father on construction jobs,
chipping cement from bricks.That grind, said a friend, taught him thrift and
paience.

After his graduation from West Point in 1941, he married Mary Rita Leyko. They
have five grown children, Marcia, Peter, Paul, Michael and Grayson, who is
called John and is a rock-and-roll musician.

General Rowny plays golf but shoots in the high 90's. A friend says he plays the
harmonica better and has been known to call up senators and sergeants on their
birthdays to serenade them with ''Happy Birthday.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Edward Leon Rowny

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 1, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CALIFORNIAN APPOINTED V.A. HEAD

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 298 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 30


President Reagan announced today that he had selected Robert P. Nimmo, a former
California State Senator, to head the Veterans Administration.

Mr. Nimmo, a 59-year-old retired colonel who was a pilot in the Army Air Corps
in World War II, served from 1970 to 1973 as an aide to Mr. Reagan when he was
Governor of California, overseeing Federal funds for the Army and Air National
Guard in California. He was later elected to the State Assembly, and then to the
State Senate.

Mr. Nimmo, who lives in Atascadero, Calif., was graduated from the United States
Army Command and General Staff College and was employed by the California
Military Department from 1955 to 1970.

Budget Director Criticized

His nomination comes just three days after James H. Webb removed himself from
consideration for the job and criticized David A.  Stockman, the budget
director, for running the Veterans' Administration in the absence of a director.

Mr. Webb, a 35-year-old counsel for a Congressional committee and author of a
highly regarded book about the Vietnam War, also criticized Mr. Stockman for
going to divinity school instead of serving in the war, as Mr. Webb did.

Mr. Webb said he feared that he would be only a figurehead if he took the job to
head the agency, which has 220,000 employees, and asked the President to be
dropped from the list to head the agency.

John Behan, a Vietnam veteran and amputee who is a New York State Assemblyman,
was a recent contender for the post, as was William Ayres, a former Ohio
Congressmen who headed Veterans for Reagan in last year's Presidential campaign
and the Reagan transition team at the Veterans' Administration.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 1, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 27, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 897 words


By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt
A LIFE IN OUR TIMES. Memoirs. By John Kenneth Galbraith. 563 pages. Houghton
Mifflin. $16.95.

ALWAYS when reviewing a new book by the prodigious John Kenneth Galbraith, one
is tempted to while away the space simply quoting passages. His memoirs, ''A
Life in Our Times,'' don't alter this temptation. On every subject Mr. Galbraith
is succinct and witty. On the experience of growing up a Galbraith on a farm in
Ontario: ''My legacy was the inherent insecurity of a farm-reared boy in
combination with an aggressive feeling that I owed it to all I encountered to
make them better informed.'' On the uses of classroom discussion: ''Discussion,
in all higher education, is the vacuum which is used to fill a vacuum.''

On Franklin D. Roosevelt and the business community: ''Roosevelt is assumed to
have made hostility toward business an American intellectual norm. But it was
the business attacks on him that made it inevitable.'' On the economist Joseph
A. Schumpeter: ''Given the choice between being right and being memorable,
Schumpeter never hesitated.'' On the difference between capitalism and
Communism: ''Under capitalism man exploits man. And under Communism it is just
the reverse.''

But to resort exclusively to quotation of ''A Life in Our Times'' would disguise
several vital truths, not the least being that the book is full of strong
opinion and proceeds by the vehicle of anecdote. Of course, these elements
converge occasionally, as, for instance, when Professor Galbraith observes of
Harvard's social clubs: ''With one or two exceptions I've never known their
names. I became aware of the disinction attaching to the Porcellian, which is
said to be the most favored, when Richard Whitney, former head of the New York
Stock Exchange, was observed to be wearing its insignia, the Porcellian pig, on
his watch chain when he passed into Sing Sing in 1938 for varied thefts and
embezzlements.'' But the majority of the good stories in this volume are too
shaded to be packaged in a sentence or two.

But Never Impersonal

Also, merely to quote would be to obscure the serious business of the book. That
business is to trace the steps of its author's astonishingly varied and useful
life - his passage from that Ontario farm to Harvard to the New Deal to Fortune
magazine to India to fame and fortune high on the list of best-selling books and
on into voluble retirement. Though he warns us at the start that this book ''is,
deliberately, a view outward on events, people and ideas,'' Mr. Galbraith's
vigor of expression, as well as an account of a period of gloom and
psychotherapy, prevents the writing from ever sounding impersonal.

That serious business is also to set the record straight - on what his books
were about and how he evolved his theory of ''The Affluent Society'' and ''The
New Industrial State,'' as two of his most important works were named; on why
the bombing of Germany during World War II was less than useless, why it was
patently unnecessary to wage atomic warfare on Japan and why he came to be a
dissenter on the war in Vietnam. On inflation. On the ''secular priesthood''
that once presided at the State Department. And, enchantingly, on such movers
and shakers he came to know well as the New Dealer Leon Henderson, Paul Baran
(''the most interesting economist I have ever known''), Bernard M. Baruch, Adlai
E. Stevenson, John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson.

Finally, there is the serious business of acknowledging certain mistakes -of
having misdesigned his first model of ''wartime economic management'' when he
was in charge of preventing inflation during World War II; of having suggested,
in a memorandum to President Kennedy, ''that almost any alternative to (the
regime of Ngo Dinh) Diem would be better and would turn back the Vietcong,'' and
of having once ''inexcusably'' misused the word ''hopefully'' - though far more
often he is glad to acknowledge that he was right about things.

The Rhythm Is Right

There is one other reason not to succumb to a review composed entirely of
quotation. That is to avoid the implication that only certain passages in the
book are gracefully written. One further virtue that Professor Galbraith
acknowledges is that early in his writing career he began to experiment ''not
only with clarity but also cadence and rhythm.''

''There is,'' he writes, ''no mystery here; you test the words and sentences
until the result rewards the ear. If your ear is right, then so is the rhythm.''

As always, the rhythm is right in ''A Life in Our Times.'' But it didn't come
easily to the author. In a closing passage on writing, he confesses that the
present volume went through six revisions before its language seemed acceptable.
It is a relief to learn that. It is unfair enough that only one out of the
millions of us has the good luck to be John Kenneth Galbraith. It would be
intolerable if his prose style had come to him as magically as his identity did.


Eduardo Riveras Olmos John Kenneth Galbraith

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of John Kenneth Gilbraith

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 1, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Economic Scene;
Why Reagan Is in a Hurry

BYLINE: By Leonard Silk

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 844 words


PRESIDENT REAGAN has completed his first 100 days riding the crest of a wave of
personal popularity and rising public optimism about the economic outlook. The
latest New York Times/ CBS News Poll finds that 67 percent of the respondents
approve of Mr. Reagan's handling of his job, a little higher than President
Carter rated four years ago.

The rising confidence in Mr. Reagan appears to be translated by a growing number
of people into better prospects for their personal fortunes. The poll found that
36 percent of the public now expect to be better off financially a year from
now, while 18 percent expect to be worse off. Last December the optimists and
pessimists were evenly split, 25 percent to 25 percent.

Paradoxically, Mr. Reagan and his economic advisers are trying to restrain
rising optimism about the economy, which has been further buoyed by the leading
indicators and the remarkably strong performance of the gross national product
in the first quarter.

The Administration is concerned that, as an old Russian proverb has it, ''the
bride is too beautiful'' -too beautiful to support the Administration's case for
big three-year tax cuts, rapidly rising defense expenditures and projected
budget deficits in the presence of inflation. The rise in the prime rate and
other interest rates this week dealt a blow to the equity and bond markets,
still troubled by worries about chronic inflation.

The ghost of the ''guns-and-butter'' economic policy that unleashed inflation in
the wake of the Kennedy-Johnson tax cut of 1964 (which the contemporary
supply-siders hail as the very model for their own proposed cut) has hung around
to haunt the Reagan Administration. The President's aides have sallied forth to
quiet those critics who are saying that the Administration's plan to run budget
deficits for the next three years will aggravate inflation.

The President's men heap scorn not so much on the old-fashioned conservatives
who have always traced inflation to budget deficits but on the liberals whom
they accuse of deserting their former tolerance and sophistication about
deficits for the purpose of attacking the President's priorities, social
philosophy and defense buildup.

In his address to Congress Tuesday night, Mr. Reagan sought to allay anxieties
about inflation by presenting his program as a safe cure for the economy's
''sickness.'' While his own health was much improved, the President could not
say the same for the economy. Six months since he was elected, he said,
inflation was still at a double-digit level, mortgage interest rates hung at 15
percent, eight million workers were still unemployed, the average worker's
hourly wage was lower and 6,000 businesses had failed.

Some other President might have used the recent data suggesting a slowdown in
the rate of inflation, revival of production and heightened public optimism as a
means of spurring the economic recovery. But that was not Mr. Reagan's concern
Tuesday night.  Instead, in the presence of a warm and affectionate response
from Congressmen on both sides of the aisle, he recited a litany of sad economic
statistics as evidence of the economy's persistent sickness, which he had
inherited from President Carter, and the urgency of action to cure it.

At the same time, by stressing the economy's suffering from the disease
economists call stagflation (which includes a high level of unemployment and
idle capacity as well as inflation) Mr. Reagan was implicitly denying that the
general economic condition of the United States today is comparable to the
overstrained environment that confronted the Johnson Administration during the
Vietnam buildup, when the guns-and-butter blunder was committed.

The current environment of inflation, unemployment and excess capacity, Mr.
Reagan suggested, would not be quickly dispelled by his own complex mixture of
tax cuts and civilian spending cuts, defense increases, regulatory reforms and
monetary restraints. ''Because of the extent of our economy's sickness,'' he
said, ''we know that the cure will not come quickly and that, even with our
package, progress will come in inches and feet, not in miles.''

Then why all the hurry to push the big, complex program through Congress?
Because, Mr. Reagan said, ''to fail to act will delay even longer - and more
painfully - the cure which must come.''

Whatever the analytical uncertainties about the current economic environment or
the impact that the President's program will have upon inflation or stagnation,
however, there can be no doubt about the present favorable political environment
in the nation and in Congress for passage of Mr. Reagan's economic package.

Mr. Reagan means to seize that tide of public confidence, now that he has it. No
politician can ever assume that people will love him in November as they did in
May.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 2, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

KLAN OFFICIAL IS ACCUSED OF INTIMIDATION

BYLINE: By WILLIAM K. STEVENS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 853 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, May 1


Attorneys representing Vietnamese shrimp fishermen said today that a robed,
pistol-carrying leader of the Ku Klux Klan and a self-described Nazi attempted
to intimidate and harass their clients yesterday while depositions were being
taken in suit against the Klan.

The lawyers asked Federal District Judge Gabrielle McDonald to issue a
protective order and to assign Federal marshals to future proceedings. Late this
afternoon the judge granted both requests.

Judge McDonald is hearing a suit in which four Vietnamese refugees who have
settled in Texas are asking that American fishermen and the Klan be enjoined
from using threats in what the Vietnamese assert is an attempt to drive them
from the shrimping grounds in Galveston Bay. In the last few years about 100
Vietnamese shrimpers have come to the area and now outnumber the American
fishermen in the competition for the bay's limited resources.

A hearing on the request by the Vietnamese fishermen for a temporary injunction
against the American shrimpers has been tentatively scheduled for May 11, four
days before the opening of the Galveston Bay shrimping season.

In court papers filed today, Morris Dees, an attorney with the Southern Poverty
Law Center in Birmingham, Ala., said that yesterday's incident began as
attorneys for both sides were preparing to take depositions at the Houston law
office of Sam Adamo, who is representing the Klan and the American fishermen.
Mr. Dees said that a man entered the room and started taking photographs. He
said the photographer moved ''within three feet in front of the faces of the
Vietnamese plaintiffs and began taking their pictures.''

Acts at Bidding of Klan Chief

After about five minutes the man was ejected from the office, but he was called
back and questioned under oath. He identified himself as Russell Gregory
Thatcher and said that he was a member of the National Socialist Party of
America, a neo-Nazi group. He indicated that the Vietnamese and their lawyers
were ''his enemies,'' according to Mr. Dees' statement, and said that he had
been asked to go to the office by Louis Beam, the Grand Dragon of the Knights of
the Ku Klux Klan in Texas.

According to Mr. Dees, Mr. Beam, who is a defendant in the lawsuit, later
appeared in the room to have his deposition taken. He wore a white Klan robe,
and ''upon observation of plaintiffs' counsel,'' the court papers said, ''it
appeared that Mr. Beam had an ivory-handled revolver under his robe.'' The robe,
the statement said, ''was thin and the weapon was clearly visible.''

Lawyers for both sides conferred with Judge McDonald this afternoon. After the
private meeting, Mr. Adamo, the Klansman's attorney, said that he did not
contest Mr. Dees' allegations. Mr.  Adamo said that he agreed to the request to
hold future deposition hearings in the Federal Courthouse, with a Federal
marshal watching.

While the lawyers and the judge were conferring, Mr. Beam, 34 years old, told
reporters in the hallway outside the courtroom that he was not carrying a pistol
yesterday but rather that it was a Bible under his robe. He said that he had
held a cross up between himself and Mr. Dees, however, because, he considered
the lawyer to be ''possessed by Satan.'' ''If those demons get loose,'' Mr. Beam
said, ''we might need five or six U.S. Marshals.''

Robe Carried in Tote Bag

The slight, mustachioed Mr. Beam was wearing a short-sleeved shirt and tie
today, but he said that his Klansman costume and Bible were in a tote bag he was
carrying.

Eugene Fisher, a leader of the American shrimpers, has said that he invited the
Klan into the territorial dispute over the fishing grounds to gain attention to
his cause. Mr. Fisher acknowledged that he and Mr. Beam had taken the Fifth
Amendment when lawyers attempted to question them yesterday.

Waiting inside Judge McDonald's courtroom were Nguyen Van Nam, a former colonel
in the South Vietnamese army who is the leader of the Vietnamese fishermen, and
the three other Vietnamese plaintiffs. Mr.  Nam said that regardless of the
result of the lawsuit, most of the Vietnamese were preparing to leave the
Galveston Bay fishing villages of Seabrook and Kemah, where the dispute has been
centered, as soon as they could sell their boats and find employment elsewhere.

''I know the bay is overcrowded and overfished,'' Mr. Nam said. ''I agree with
that.'' But, he added, many Vietnamese would not be able to sell their boats by
May 15, when the shrimping season begins. He said that those remaining would
take to the bay alongside their adversaries to earn a livelihood.

Mr. Beam said today that the Klan would continue with plans to hold a rally in a
rural area south of Houston May 9 in support of the white fishermen. At an
otherwise peaceful rally in February, a boat was burned as a warning to the
Vietnamese fishermen.

Mr. Beam said today that the Klan would continue with plans to hold

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 2, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BACK ON THE BEACH

BYLINE: By Gregg Herken

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1144 words


In this last of meeting places We grope together And avoid speech Gathered on
this beach of the tumid river - T.S. Eliot, ''The Hollow Men'' Groped together
like Eliot's ''Hollow Men'' near the end of a particularly violent century, we
avoid speech on certain unpleasant topics. One is the continuing - and
increasing - prospect of nuclear war. ''Our minds have adjusted to it, as after
a time our eyes adjust to the dark,'' Jimmy Carter mused in his farewell
address. Beyond some on-again, off-again statements on the neutron bomb
reminiscent of the Carter years, the Reagan Administration has had very little
to say about nuclear weapons. There may be a little-suspected reason for White
House silence on the bomb: The Administration has perhaps concluded - rightly, I
would think - that the long debate on nuclear-weapons policy, begun after
Hiroshima, finally may be over.

The problem of nuclear weapons in foreign policy has always been simple to state
and impossible to resolve: How can we get utility from these terrible things in
international diplomacy without actually using them? It is a question that has
haunted American statesmen since the first bomb was exploded at Alamogordo,
N.M., in 1945, and their failure to find an answer has not been from lack of
trying.

Two ways of thinking about the bomb have evolved. The nuclear ''believer''
contends that the weapon has a psychological value apart from its destructive
potential in war, and, hence, that superiority in it should be translatable into
diplomatic advantage. The ''doubter'' accepts large opposing arsenals as the
price of a stable Pax Atomica, but ascribes no other utility to the bomb.

The history of nuclear weapons in the cold war has been, in one sense, a history
of how the believers have been confounded and the doubters vindicated. Harry S.
Truman's Secretary of State, James F.  Byrnes, breezily assumed in 1945 that
America's atomic monopoly would make the Russians ''more manageable'' on the
issue of Polish self-determination; manifestly, it did not. We learn from Mr.
Truman's recently discovered private journal that he twice entertained a Walter
Mitty-like vision of confronting the Russians and the Chinese with a nuclear
ultimatum over Korea, but Mr. Truman, unlike Mitty, fortunately was able to
distinguish between fantasy and reality. Dwight D. Eisenhower's Secretary of
State, John Foster Dulles - in whom this discernment was, some critics thought,
underdeveloped or wholly lacking - later credited the threat of massive
retaliation with ending the Korean War, but he also professed to believe that
only his leashing of Chiang Kai-shek kept Mao Tse-tung in power in China.
Kennedy Administration nuclear believers pointed to Nikita S. Khrushchev's
capitulation over the missiles in Cuba as proof of the bomb's irreducible
utility in a crisis. But Mr. Khrushchev, in his memoirs, showed a better
understanding of who deterred whom in the naval ''quarantine'' of Cuba in 1962:
''In our estimation the Americans were trying to frighten us, but they were no
less scared than we were of atomic war.''

The list of how and where the bomb failed to be an advantage in negotiations
could go on. The possession of thousands of strategic and tactical nuclear
warheads availed the United States not at all in Vietnam; nor does anyone really
expect that the present atomic arsenal, though grown larger and more versatile,
would give the Soviet Union pause if it decided to restore its version of order
in Poland.

The lesson of years of experience with nuclear weapons is clear: They serve no
useful purpose beyond preventing a final war - still our most vital task, in any
case. But this is not to say that the lesson has been learned or that the
doubters have won the debate on nuclear policy. Rather, in an ironic way, the
believers have now turned the argument around and come out on top. Finally
accepting the premise that there is no utility without use, they have embraced
the idea of actually using the bomb. Much of the subsequent talk about how we
might choose to use nuclear weapons concerns the vague and even psychological
importance of ''demonstrating resolve'' in a crisis. A few believers, writing as
strategists, seem to assume that Soviet-American relations will become like the
ritual skirmishes of certain South American tribes, with an occasional exchange
of missile silos or oil refineries before returning to negotiations-as-usual.
Certainly the most imaginative among these scenarios - propounded recently by
one of the nuclear gnostics at Herman Kahn's Hudson Institute - contends that
only a few bombs dropped upon Moscow might so disrupt the rigid, hierarchical
Soviet leadership as to compel the surrender of the surviving members of the
K.G.B. and Politburo. This strange and dangerous piece of optimism recalls Barry
Goldwater's cavalier suggestion of an earlier age that we simply lob one into
the men's room of Kremlin, and it shares some intellectual roots with the
plainly wishful thinking of Hitler's ''Mein Kampf'' - that one need only kick in
the front door and the whole rotten Bolshevik structure would collapse.

Farfetched, the believers' vision of the future should not be dismissed as
fanciful. Significantly, the nuclear-targeting directive approved by the Carter
Administration last August assigned first priority to the early destruction of
Soviet command centers. If deterrence - the strategy of the doubters - is not
yet dethroned as the basis of our military doctrine, it is at least challenged
by the assumption of this directive that a strategic nuclear war could be kept
limited both as to its duration and its effects. The illogic of blowing up at
the outset of a war - especially one you expect to be limited and victorious -
the only people among the enemy who may have the authority to surrender seems to
have escaped the believers.

The most curious thing is that there has been so little protest or reaction from
the doubters. The silence on nuclear-weapons policy becomes increasingly
unsettling the more it is prolonged. The complacency that attends the triumph of
the believers and of the attitude that sees these weapons as usable reflects
perhaps a loss of perspective so long after Hiroshima, or a new fatalism about
nuclear war. Groped together, we avoid even a whimper.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Gregg Herken, assistant professor of history at Yale University, is author of
''The Winning Weapon: The Atomic Bomb in the Cold War.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. DECIDES TO BACK RESISTANCE GROUPS ACTIVE IN CAMBODIA

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 825 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 2


The United States has decided to support efforts by China and other Asian
countries to put together a more unified resistance movement against the
Vietnamese-backed Government now in control of Cambodia, Administration
officials said today.

The American support so far has been limited to political moves, and officials
said they did not anticipate providing military assistance to the resistance
since China is now sending military equipment, not only to the hard-line
Communist guerrilla forces loyal to the former government of Pol Pot, but for
the first time to the much smaller non-Communist force led by Son Sann. Mr. Son
Sann served as Prime Minister under Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the former
Cambodian chief of state.

Mr. Son Sann, who describes himself as president of the Khmer People's National
Liberation Front, has been in the United States for the last week and met in
Washington Wednesday with John H.  Holdridge, the Assistant Secretary of
State-designate for East Asian and Pacific Affairs. The Khmers are the
predominant ethnic group in Cambodia.

Pol Pot Toppled in 1978

The former Prime Minister was preceded here several weeks earlier by some of his
top aides, who conferred with Administration officials and members of Congress
about their desire for political and military backing against the Government of
Heng Semrin, which was put into power in Phnom Penh by the Vietnamese after they
toppled the Pol Pot regime in December 1978.

''We are in favor of broadening the non-Communist Khmer resistance to the
Vietnamese,'' a State Department official said today. ''In that spirit, we
accorded some elevated importance to the visit of Son Sann. The main thing is
that we support the growing unity in the movement, but we do not wish to tell
them what to do.''

The official said that the United States hoped that the Cambodian resistance
forces would be able to overcome their own differences and would be able to come
up with a united leadership.

Also in Washington last week was Foreign Minister Siddhi Savetsila of Thailand,
who was also representing the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. Secretary
of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. told Marshal Siddhi that he would attend the
meeting of that grouping's foreign ministers in Manila in late June. By then,
American officials hope, a clearer idea of the leadership of the Cambodian
resistance movement can be worked out.

An international conference on Cambodia is expected to be convened by the United
Nations in Vienna in July, in keeping with a General Assembly resolution calling
for the departure of Vietnamese forces from Cambodia and the holding of
elections there under United Nations sponsorship.

Because of Mr. Pol Pot's poor international standing following his Government's
killings of hundreds of thousands of Cambodians after his regime took control in
1975, the United States and other nations would like to see the resistance taken
over by some political figures more acceptable to Cambodians and to the world
community.

A likely candidate in the past has been Prince Sihanouk, who currently is in
Peking but who recently has been living in Pyongyang, the North Korean capital.
Prince Sihanouk has met with representatives of the Pol Pot forces and last week
sent a message to Mr. Son Sann requesting a meeting with him.

Reluctant to Take the Lead

But Prince Sihanouk has been reluctant to take the lead in the resistance.
Whether he is simply waiting for the right moment to come forward or genuinely
prefers to remain in the background is uncertain, officials said.

The Prince has said that he continues to distrust the Pol Pot forces, which he
calls the Khmer Rouges, because they want to dominate the resistance movement.
Mr. Pol Pot lives in a mountainous area of Cambodia with some of the 30,000
troops he is believed to control. They have been armed by the Chinese and are
the most significant guerrilla force operating against Mr. Heng Semrin's troops
and the Vietnamese army.

It was reported from Bangkok last week that China had supplied military
equipment to Mr. Son Sann's forces along the Thai-Cambodian border. This was the
first time that anti-Vietnamese forces, other than those of Mr. Pol Pot, had
been helped by the Chinese. An official here said it was his understanding that
the only condition set down by Peking was that the arms not be used against
rival resistance groups but only against the Heng Semrin regime.

The press reports, which have not been contradicted here, said that there was
enough equipment to supply four to five battalions of some 1,500 to 3,000 men.
The decision by China to supply the equipment was viewed here as part of an
effort by Peking to persuade Mr. Son Sann to play an active role in a more
united resistance effort.

The State Department said that Prince Sihanouk met last week in Peking with the
senior diplomat in the American Embassy, J. Stapleton Roy, but it gave no
details.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 66 words

DATELINE: STOCKHOLM, May 2


A 14-member tribunal, patterned on the Bertrand Russell inquiry in 1967 into
American involvement in Vietnam, began hearing testimony yesterday about alleged
Soviet violations of international law in Afghanistan. The tribunal includes
former Foreign Minister Ernesto Melo Antunes of Portugal, Eduardo Galeano, the
Uruguayan author, and George Wald, the Nobel Prize-winning American biologist.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

WORLD SOCIALISTS SUPPORT PEACE TALKS ON SALVADOR

BYLINE: By FRANK J. PRIAL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 18, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 962 words

DATELINE: AMSTERDAM, May 2


A peaceful solution to the fighting in El Salvador, new pressure on the
superpowers to reopen arms control talks, and a possible way out of Western
Europe's economic troubles were the principal topics discussed at the Socialist
International's World Leaders Conference here this week.

The Socialist International is a London-based political organization composed of
Socialist, Social Democratic and Labor parties in 39 countries throughout the
world. It was founded by Karl Marx, but its present members, while of the left,
are almost all militantly anti-Communist.

The topics agreed upon for discussion were acknowledged to be far too diverse
for one or two days of talks, but, as Michael Harrington, the chief
representative of the United States' small band of declared Socialists, said,
''The real action is in the corridors and at the bar.''

'Free Exchange of Ideas'

Bernt Carlsson, the secretary general of the group, said, ''It's an opportunity
for a free exchange of ideas unhindered by parliamentary restrictions.''

Illustrating his point, Chancellor Bruno Kreisky of Austria and former Foreign
Minister Abba Eban of Israel, who were widely reported to have given speeches
critical of each other in the closed sessions, were observed huddled in a corner
of the convention center's cafeteria, chatting animatedly and amicably. Most of
the participants stayed in Amsterdam for several days after the sessions
Wednesday and Thursday to pursue private discussions.

After a report by Hans-Jurgen Wischnewski, secretary general of the West German
Social Democratic Party, on the crisis in Central America, the conference agreed
to back peace-making efforts in El Salvador by Mexico and Venezuela and called
on the United States to support a negotiated rather than a military settlement
in that country. Mr. Wischnewski made a fact-finding trip to the area at the
behest of the German Social Democratic Party and of Willy Brandt, the former
West German Chancellor and the president of the Socialist International.

Says Mediator Is Essential

Guillermo Ungo, leader of El Salvador's National Revolutionary Party, reported
that a political solution would be possible only with the help of a mediator.
Neither the rebels nor the military were yet in a position to sit down together
and work out a settlement, he said.

Noting that the ruling junta has stated that it prefers to wait until elections
are held next year, Mr. Ungo said, ''If we wait until then, we will have to hold
the elections in the graveyards.''

American Socialists are equally interested in a negotiated settlement, according
to Mr. Harrington, who is national chairman of the Democratic Socialist
Organizing Committee in the United States.  ''The left is weak in the U.S. at
the moment,'' Mr. Harrington acknowledged, ''but we have an extremely powerful
ally in our efforts in Latin America - the Catholic Church.''

Even conservative American bishops have been appalled by the bloodshed in El
Salvador, Mr. Harrington said, and are eager to work toward a peaceful
settlement of Central America's problems. American Socialists, along with some
Roman Catholics, Protestants and labor union activists, are planning to hold a
major conference on democratic change in Latin America in the spring of 1982,
Mr.  Harrington said.

'Eurosocialism' Discussed

On hand to discuss ''Eurosocialism'' were several European Socialists and Social
Democrats, including Francois Mitterrand and Michel Rocard of France, Tony Benn
of the British Labor Party, Mr.  Brandt, and former Prime Minister Olof Palme of
Sweden. Also present were Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, former
Senator George S. McGovern of South Dakota and Representative Ronald V.  Dellums
of California, the only registered Socialist in Congress.

In discussing disarmament, the World Leaders Conference informally endorsed the
already well-known position of the European left on disarmament: support for the
growing antinuclear, anti-NATO sentiment in Western Europe.

''Detente,'' said Chancellor Kreisky, ''looks a lot different 40 kilometers from
the Warsaw Pact border than it does in, say, Houston, or even in the Middle
East.'' Both the United States and Israel support the idea of arguing from
superior strength rather than a supposed equality.

Noting that the United States had failed to achieve peace in either Vietnam or
Iran by using or supplying military force, Mr. Kreisky said: ''Can anyone
seriously imagine that this method will now be successful in Latin America or
anyplace else in the world? The two superpowers must be brought back to the
negotiating table.''

Urges a Sense of Trust

He said the task of the Social Democrats is to maintain communication with the
United States and build up a sense of trust in Soviet efforts to control arms.

He was critical of some speakers who were harsh about the shift to the right in
the United States. ''This change reflects the will of the American people,'' he
said. ''It is a profound change and we in Europe must respect it.''

Mr. Eban, one of the few participants to speak from a prepared text, criticized
the West for arming the Arab countries in exchange for oil. ''The modern
pilgrimage of the West is not to holy places,'' he said, ''but to oily places.''
He called for a tough stance toward the Soviet Union - ''there is no
incompatibility between holding a position of strength and negotiating'' - and
he urged the nations of the Common Market to suspend their independent efforts
to achieve a settlement in Middle East.

''We don't need additional negotiating parties when both Israel and Egypt have
accepted the Camp David framework,'' he said. ''Israel's fate cannot be left to
declarations in Venice or working papers in Brussels.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 10, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday incorrectly characterized
the attendence at a conference of Socialists in Amsterdam. The people listed -
including Francois Mitterrand of France, Tony Benn of Britain and Senator Edward
M. Kennedy - were actually present at a conference in Washington in December
sponsored by the Institute for Democratic Socialism, which sent a delegation to
the Amsterdam meeting.

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnamese Move Close to Border

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 21, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 70 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 2


About 1,500 Vietnamese troops with tanks have moved close to Cambodia's border
with Thailand after reports of a Chinese arms shipment to an anti-Vietnamese
group in the area, Thai army sources said today.

Western intelligence reports say that Chinese arms and uniforms, enough for at
least two battalions, reached the non-Communist Khmer People's National
Liberation Front late last month.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

FOES AND SUPPORTERS OF REAGAN POLICIES PLAN RALLIES

BYLINE: By JUAN de ONIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 23, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 486 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 2


Opponents of United States military aid for El Salvador, higher military
spending and budget cuts in social programs have scheduled an ''antiwar'' march
to the Pentagon tomorrow. A counterdemonstration has been scheduled by
supporters of Reagan Administration policies.

''We have chosen the Pentagon not only because it is a symbol of the
Administration's militarism but because money that is being cut from social
programs is going into making bombs,'' said Larry Holmes, a New Yorker who is an
organizer of the Pentagon demonstration.

Working through a coalition called the People's Antiwar Mobilization, the rally
has scheduled speakers who were prominent opponents of the Vietnam War,
including Paul O'Dwyer and Bella S.  Abzug of New York, and younger social
activists representing organized labor, blacks and church groups.

The demonstration is also being supported by Committees of Solidarity with the
People of Salvador, which have been organized in major cities and on university
campuses to support the Salvadoran guerrilla movement that is trying to
overthrow the military-backed Government of President Jose Napoleon Duarte.

A Rally at the Pentagon

The march will begin near the State Department and end with a rally in front of
the Pentagon. Preparations for the demonstration have been cleared by the
police.

In addition to Mrs. Abzug, a former New York representative, and Mr. O'Dwyer, a
former president of the New York City Council and an unsuccessful candidate for
Mayor, the scheduled speakers represent black groups, unions, human rights
organizations and both Roman Catholic and Protestant groups that have worked in
El Salvador.

Also scheduled to speak is Sister Geraldine Blake, coordinator for Central
America of the Maryknoll nuns, two of whom were killed in El Salvador in
December along with two other American missionaries. The killings have been
attributed to security forces, but an investigation ordered by the Salvadoran
Government has not identified the killers.

Foes Going to Lincoln Memorial

A counterdemonstration has been planned at the Lincoln Memorial by a Committee
to Save El Salvador. This committee is backed by a pro-Administration group
called the Institute on Religion and Democracy. Its board of advisers includes
Michael Novak, who represented the Reagan Administration in an appearance before
the United Nations Human Rights Commission, and the Rev. James V. Schall, a
Jesuit priest who is a professor at Georgetown University's School of
Government.

Father Schall described the group as a ''mainline Christian organization that
opposes church positions that are unsupportive of democratic values.''

The counterdemonstration is also supported by William Doherty, director of the
A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s American Institute for Free Labor Development, which has helped
organize a land-reform program in El Salvador, distributing large estates to
peasants.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 10, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
An article last Sunday about plans for rallies over aid to El Salvador
misidentified the sponsor of a pro-Administration counterdemonstration. It was
the Collegiate Association for the Research of Principles. The Institute on
Religion and Democracy and William Doherty, the director of the American
Institute for Free Labor Development, had no connection with the event.

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW LIFE'S CULTURAL DEMONS TORTURE LAOTIAN REFUGEE

BYLINE: By WAYNE KING, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 28, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1456 words

DATELINE: MINNEAPOLIS, April 30


In retrospect, there were clues that all was not well with Theng Pao Yang. But
that would not seem unusual for a Hmong tribesman, one of the thousands who fled
the remote shellscarred mountain fastnesses of Laos, eluding gunfire, disease
and starvation, to begin a disturbingly strange new existence in the United
States.

Theng Pao Yang spent five years in a refugee camp in Thailand before he, his
wife, Yi Ly, and their small children resettled 17 months ago in the bustling
grain town of Fairfield in southeastern Iowa under the sponsorship of the First
Baptist Church.

Installed in a small cottage, the two adults began church-sponsored English
classes with other refugees, while the two older children, an 8-year-old boy
named So, and a 6-year-old girl named Bay, attended public school, with special
instruction in English. The two younger children, Chu, 3, and Mai Yai, 12 months
old, went with their parents to classes.

Those here in Minneapolis who are familiar with the dark odyssey of Theng Pao
Yang say that he was often sad, withdrawn, wrapping his family about him like a
cloak, fretful when they were not nearby, bursting into tears for no apparent
reason.

The Tears Were Understandable

But Theng Pao Yang was a man wrenched from his homeland, forced into a refugee
camp, hurled half a world away into a cold and alien land. So his tears were
understandable and gave no real hint of what was to come.

On a chill Tuesday afternoon in late January, investigators say, Theng Pao Yang
gathered his wife and four children about him, ushered them into the basement of
the white frame bungalow, and, dressed in the traditional tribal robes of
ceremony, helped the children climb on chairs and slip twine nooses hung from a
water pipe about their necks, one by one, and then he hanged himself.

According to the investigators, Yi Ly, consistent with the patriarchal way of
the Hmong society, had acquiesed in her husband's decision to end their lives,
assisting in the traditional ritual of destroying valued possessions before
death, a handful of dollar bills, a casette tape player, a Hmong flute.

But at the last minute, Yi Ly could not go through with the hangings, considered
the honorable way of suicide among the Hmong.  The investigators say she ran
upstairs, found a knife and managed to cut her husband down and lift the chidren
from their nooses. The boy, So, was dead. Theng Pao Yang and the other three
children survived.

Questions Remain Unanswered

Because of the language barrier and Theng Pao Yang's confused mental state, the
precise reasons for the pathetic occurrence were yet to be unraveled. Initially,
Theng Pao Yang spoke of being called by a sister who had killed herself in Laos;
of threats against his life by other refugees living in the area, lowland
Laotians who refer to the Hmong as Meo, or ''barbarians;'' of being told to
commit suicide by Jesus, of fears his children would be taken from him.

But whatever the reasons, there are indications that Theng Pao Yang's paranoia,
itself possibly a result of what was described at a grand jury inquest as
''refugee trauma,'' was compounded by the isolation of language and the clash of
cultures.

For the Hmong, about 35,000 of whom, by State Department count, are now in this
country, the clash is severe.  Migrants from southern China, the Hmong,
numbering about 350,000 before war, starvation and disease killed them by the
tens of thousands during the past two decades, lived in primitive isolation in
the green and misty Laotian Highlands.

Recruited by the Central Intelligence Agency to aid in the socalled secret war
in Laos, many were killed and others forced to flee when the Pathet Lao overran
the country in 1975.

Of the Hmong now in this country, the largest communities are in Missoula,
Montana, home of Gen. Vang Pao, the exiled guerrilla fighter and leader of the
Hmong in this country; Santa Ana, Calif.; Providence, R. I.; Denver, and here in
Minneapolis and St. Paul, where the largest contingent, 10,000 to 12,000, now
live, a number swelled almost daily by secondary migration of the Hmong from
elsewhere.

Resilient in the face of their difficulties, some of the Hmong adapt well.
Others, of which Theng Pao Yang is an extreme case, find the problems of
assimilation devastating.

Now relocated here with his family and slowly readjusting, Theng Pao Yang still
suffers bouts of depression. When he talks of what happened, in the tonal,
songlike Hmong dialect, the words gush forth, first in bursts, then as he breaks
into sobs, into a wail of anguish.

His 'Personal Demons' Closed In

Manh Her, 28 years old, himself a Hmong refugee who is now a caseworker helping
his people adapt to their life here, interprets the tale of misunderstanding.

''He is buried there in Iowa,'' Manh Her relates. ''He has no friends, he does
not understand English. That is the problem, he is a stranger and he is
frightened, and he thinks people are going to kill him.

''He is in church and he doesn't have any money for an offering, and he thinks
people talk about him, that because he doesn't put an offering in the Sunday
school, that he is bad, and that maybe they are going to kill him. Then the
school told him that the next day when he comes to school for English class, his
children have to stay home, and the teacher pointed outside, and he said he
thought they were going to take him out there and kill him.''

Thus, pursued by his own personal demons, demons spurred by words he did not
understand, Theng Pao Yang made his decision.  ''He was very, very frightened,
because of the language, and that made him very, very sick,'' Manh Her said.
''So, since he is going to be killed, he decides that he must kill his children
himself, that is the more honorable way.''

Grand Jury Brings No Charges

At the grand jury inquest that followed, a Jefferson County attorney, Edwin
Kelly, told the jurors of ''trauma syndrome'' often suffered by refugees like
Theng Pao Yang, of its symptoms of paranoia, nameless fear, inability to
concentrate. The jury brought no charges.

J. Donald Cohon Jr., the San Francisco psychologist whose 1977 study of the
literature on refugee trauma formed the basis for Mr.  Kelly's presentation to
the Iowa grand jury, noted with some irony in a telephone interview that the
concept of refugee trauma, more properly described as ''post traumatic stress
disorder,'' evolved in part to define a pattern of dislocation among Vietnam
veterans.

Now, he said, ''it is being applied not only to the Vietnam-era veterans but to
the Vietnamese themselves, to the Laotions, the Hmong, the Cambodians.''

In the past two years, a dozen young, healthy Laotian males have died
mysteriously in their sleep. Dr. Michael McGee, assistant medical examiner for
Ramsey County, which includes St. Paul, said that a search of the medical
literature disclosed the possibility that the young men might literally have
been frightened to death.

Called ''bangungut,'' a Filipino word for ''nightmare,'' and described as
''Oriental nightmare death syndrome,'' the affliction, Dr. McGee said, is
confined in the literature to Filipino males between 30 and 40 who die in the
early morning hours. In the St. Paul cases, he said, the cause of death was
attributed to ''probable cardiac arrhythymia,'' or irregular heartbeat.

For some refugees, like 29-year-old Leng Vang, who came to Minneapolis in 1976
and whose adaptation has been conspicuously successful - two cars, house in the
suburbs, good job and respect of his peers - the past can still return to haunt.
In the midst of his American dream, there is a recurring nightmare.

''It has to do with the war,'' he said, ''back in Laos. It is getting to be
worse.'' In the dream, he said, ''I am in uniform and fighting the Communists,
being shot, being wounded, being punished, being forced to surrender.''

Often, he said, there is a singular aspect to the nightmare: as he is pursued by
the Communists, he carries an American briefcase, and wears American shoes. He
tries to discard them.

''I think of putting the things away from me,'' he said, with a small laugh,
''and dressing like a Hmong villager, so I will not seem to be educated by the
Americans, so I would survive.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Hmong refugees working in garden in Minneapolis
photo of Yi Ly

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Common Cause Chooses Wertheimer as President

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 28, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 162 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 2


Common Cause, a citizen lobbying group, today chose Fred Wertheimer, the
organization's senior vice president since 1977, as its new president.

Mr. Wertheimer was elected unanimously by the group's governing board to succeed
David Cohen, who had declined another term. Archibald Cox, the former Watergate
special prosecutor, is chairman of Common Cause, which was founded by John
Gardner in 1970.

In his acceptance speech, Mr. Wertheimer said: ''If the Reagan Administration's
economic program is solving the problem of inflation, we must be ready to join
in the applause for dealing with an issue of paramount importance to the people
of this country.

''But if in the implementation of the Reagan Administration's economic policies
it becomes clear that this is 'an attempt to do it with mirrors,' as the Johnson
Administration tried to do during the Vietnam War, then we must be ready to say
so.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

OPPOSITION GROWING TO LEADER OF MINERS

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 35, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 943 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 2


There was a time two years ago when Sam M.  Church Jr., then the newly elevated
president of the United Mine Workers, spoke openly of leavening the double dose
of democracy the union membership received in 1973.

Under the drastically reformed union constitution adopted that year, the rank
and file were given two chances to pass judgment on a new contract negotiated by
its president: once in the elected 39-member bargaining council, and again in a
secret-ballot ratification vote by the entire membership.

In three of four such ballots since the 1973 reform, the membership has said,
''No,'' resulting in a strike with nationwide effects. The strike in 1977-1978
lasted 111 days, with two contract rejections by the rank and file.

However, at the union's last convention in Denver in 1979, Mr.  Church decided
not to ask the delegates to abolish the bargaining council, though he had
considered such a move before the meeting.

Not Concerned About Re-election

It is possible that Mr. Church, repudiated by the rank and file's recent 2-to-1
rejection of his first negotiated agreement with the bituminous coal operators
and scorned at the same time by a coal industry that will not resume talks with
him because of it, now privately thinks even more of consolidating his control
over contract bargaining. But another result of the union's more democratic
politics is that such a possibility is even more unlikely.

Mr. Church, a 44-year-old former mine electrician who has been in office for 18
months at a salary of $50,000 a year, is up for reelection in November 1982. He
has said that he is not thinking about re-election while his ''people are
suffering.'' But because he failed to win the contract's acceptance, an
anti-Church campaign has been set in motion.

Between now and this November, eight of the union's 18 districts in the coal
states plan to hold elections for regional officers, which is another reform of
the 1973 constitution. John L. Lewis, the union's head from 1920 to 1960, used
to appoint and dismiss district officers at will.

Church Backers Defeated

In two elections just held, potential rivals to Mr. Church defeated loyal
followers of the union president. The overwhelmingly rejected ''Church
contract'' may be the decisive issue in four more district elections scheduled
for May. In each of the districts, miners rejected Mr. Church's assertedly
''good contract'' by around 90 percent.

The outcome in forthcoming elections in District 4 in western Pennsylvania and
in Districts 17 and 31 in West Virginia is one reason the coal operators are
refusing to renew negotiations with Mr. Church to end the strike, now in its
37th day.

This spring, as is usually done in anticipation of a strike, miners and their
families saved more money and planted extra rows of vegetables. Now Mr. Church
admits that he ''made a mistake'' in believing that union's 160,000 members
would ratify his proposed settlement, which contained terms that even Bobby R.
Brown, the chief negotiator of the Bituminous Coal Operators Association, had
doubted they would accept.

In his attempt to gain a new contract without the traditional triennial strike,
Mr. Church has developed several opponents to his leadership.

Officials Worried About Elections

Among the U.M.W. officials worried about the regional elections this month are
two men who sat with Mr. Church at the bargaining table.

One of them, Walter Suba, the union executive board member from District 4 in
western Pennsylvania, is facing a strong challenge in a Tuesday election from
Rich Trumka, a 32-year-old lawyer now working in the mines after a brief tour of
duty in the union's general counsel's office here.

In the 1970's, after the Vietnam War ended, younger men, including veterans and
college graduates, such as Mr. Trumka, became a significant force in the union's
membership, a change furthered by the retirement of older miners.

Another threatened official is Jack Perry, president of District 17 in
Charleston, W.Va., which has the union's largest regional membership. Mr. Perry
agreed to Mr. Church's contract proposal both at the bargaining table and as a
member of union's bargaining council.

Others Gaining Attention

However, when Mr. Church's contract terms were sent to the rank and file for a
March 31 ratification vote, Mr. Perry ''went fishing.'' He not only failed to
appear at a rally held by Mr. Church in Charleston to promote a favorable
ratification vote among District 17's 25,000 miners but was credited with
holding the rally's turnout to no more than 70 union members, who noisily railed
at the union president.

As a result of Mr. Church's sudden vulnerability, also gaining attention are
Cecil Roberts, 34, the vice president of District 17, and Don Redman, a young
miner who was elected last month as president of District 5 in Pittsburgh. Mr.
Roberts and Mr. Redman are close personal friends and have already formed a
network of rank-and-file supporters. Although not regarded as a serious threat
to Mr. Church in the 1982 election, Willard A. Esselstyn, the current
secretarytreasurer of the union, is also complicating the union leader's
political problems. Mr. Esselstyn, increasingly and openly at odds with Mr.
Church, is said to be putting together a slate of candidates to oppose the union
president.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ECONOMIC AFFAIRS;
WANTED: MORE SKILLED WORKERS

BYLINE: By Lester Thurow

SECTION: Section 3; Page 2, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1164 words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


To meet the competitive economic challenge that is now coming from abroad, the
United States is going to have to repair some of its major structural
weaknesses. Nowhere are the repairs more urgent than in the institutions, or
lack of institutions, for training skilled blue collar workers - the tool and
die makers, machinists pipefitters and the like.

During recessions America's inability to train enough skilled blue collar
workers is hidden, but shortages break out whenever unemployment falls. What do
employers complain about in tight labor markets? Certainly not an inability to
hire unskilled workers, or an inability to hire college-educated labor.
Complaints almost always focus on shortages of skilled blue collar workers.

As the economy expands, it runs into bottlenecks created by shortages of skilled
labor. Production cannot expand. Standards of living stagnate and Americans
cannot build the products that would allow them to compete with the rest of the
world.

As rising demand presses in on limited supply, prices rise and inflation breaks
out. In an ultimately self-defeating effort to get the skilled blue collar
workers they need, employers begin to raid one another for labor. As each
employer bids to get the labor he needs, wages soar.

Our national defense suffers. Employers raid the military services for skilled
technicians. The Armed Forces find that they cannot maintain their equipment
because they have lost their skilled blue collar workers. Military equipment
sits unrepaired because there is a shortage of people to use an abundance of
parts and equipment. When the defense industries expand, as they are poised to
do now, they raid civilian industries.

Paradoxically, the shortage of blue collar workers creates unemployment for the
rest of the population. The policy makers regulating monetary and fiscal affairs
attempt to hold unemployment at levels where inflation will not accelerate. But
since skilled blue collar workers reach full employment while there are still
millions of unemployed unskilled workers, the national unemployment rate must be
held at very high levels.

Basically, the problem lies in an institutional structure where no one has an
economic incentive to take responsibility for insuring that enough skilled blue
collar workers are trained.

Government is involved in educating labor and runs (or did until the
Reagan-Stockman cutbacks) manpower training programs to turn low-income
individuals into unskilled or semi-skilled workers with higher earnings
capabilities. But government has stayed out of the business of training
middle-or high-income skilled blue collar workers. In 1979, the last year for
which detailed income data are available, fully employed male skilled blue
collar workers had median earnings of more than $17,000. Only professionals and
managers had higher incomes ($21,000).

In West Germany, government solves the problem with elaborate apprenticeship
training programs for those who do not go to college.  These programs are
jointly financed by government and industry and involve more formal education as
well as substantial work and on-thejob experience.

American industry does not want to train skilled blue collar workers because
they are both expensive to train and apt to quit for a better job before an
employer can recoup the costs of training.  Each employer finds it cheaper just
to raid other employers.

In Japan, with its lifetime employment where workers cannot quit (who would hire
them?), companies take the responsibility for training skilled blue collar
workers. They know if they don't, they won't have any skilled blue collar
workers. Raiding others is impossible. But they also know that they will get the
lifetime use of any training that they give. No one is going to raid them.

In the United States, blue collar skills are almost always acquired in a
haphazard process of on-the-job training where one worker informally learns from
another. When labor markets are tight and output expands, employers promote
half-trained people and count on learning-by-doing to apply the final polish to
their skills.  Apprenticeship programs exist, but they train very few of those
that eventually acquire blue collar skills.

Acquiring skills by osmosis is not the best of training processes even in an
expanding economy. It is a terrible process in an economy that is subject to
repeated recessions or to a sustained period of high unemployment, such as we
are undergoing at the moment. Since workers cannot advance into higher skilled
jobs, informal learning stops. Young workers are laid off, their skills atrophy,
or they find new jobs in areas where their old skills are irrelevant. As the
recession continues, the supply of skilled workers stagnates or even declines.
The proportion of the labor force that is unskilled rises.

It is tempting to recommend the adoption of the German system of apprenticeship
training and education, but that has been recommended so often, and ignored so
often, that it hardly seems worth the effort.

Perhaps the problems should be dealt with in the context of the present military
buildup. Industry now uses the military as a training system. Perhaps this
should be recognized, made formal, expanded, and extended to military
contractors.

Since the nation is about to embark on a major military buildup, it is almost
imperative that we do so. Between fiscal 1981 and 1986, the Reagan
Administration is planning to increase military spending to $343 billion a year
from $162 billion. This buildup, adjusted for inflation, is more than three
times the buildup during the Vietnam War.

During Vietnam there was a severe shortage of skilled blue collar workers. It is
not clear how a military buildup of the current magnitude can occur without
draining skilled workers from civilian industries. But if this happens, civilian
industries will not be able to compete on international markets.

Thus military contractors should be given funds not just to produce military
equipment, but also to produce skilled workers. They should be prohibited from
hiring skilled workers from civilian industries but paid to train all of the
extra skilled workers that they will need over the next five years. And when the
current expansion of military production is over, the economy would receive an
extra bonus in the form of a much larger supply of skilled blue collar workers.

The military-industrial complex should be made into the prime training ground
for skilled blue collar workers. It is in their interest in the short run and
everyone's interest in the long run.  end

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of an ad for the Army Graph of blue collar workers

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IS PEKING'S LIBERALIZATION REALLY OVER?

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1188 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG


From a small room below street level in a student hostel at Hong Kong
University, there is likely to issue, any day or evening, the crackling of
broadcasts from China, the murmur of a cultivated Central European voice
dictating Communist propaganda into a tape recorder, the noble lines of a Bach
sonata for violin solo played by an accomplished musician or the barking of a
robust German Shepherd dog.

The nameplate says ''1. La Dany,'' which gives no clue except to those in the
know, because Father Laszlo Ladanyi of the Society of Jesus works anonymously.
Those in the know are toilers in the same vineyard as the priest - students of
contemporary China. Father Ladany, as he now spells his name on his personal
stationery, is a leading practitioner of the craft of China-watching, widely
respected even by those who do not always share his conclusions.

In a field where backbiting is not uncommon, Father Ladany could listen in on
the private conversations of his colleagues without embarrassing them. ''He is
pre-eminent,'' said Robert Elegant, a veteran journalistic China-watcher before
he turned novelist. ''His track record is better than anyone else's.''

On the other end of the spectrum from Mr. Elegant, whose admiration for
Communist China has always known limits, are China's former friends, the
countries of the Soviet camp. ''Most of their embassies in Peking are on my
mailing list,'' said the priest contentedly, puffing on a pipe that had gone
cold.

Father Ladany's mailing is the oldest journal of China-watching, China News
Analysis. Now a fortnightly, it was founded in 1953; the current issue is No.
1,204. Except for 76 quarterly issues devoted to Vietnam, the journal is the
work of Father Ladany. Each issue is a seven or eight-page essay devoted to a
single theme, rather than a newsletter giving snippets of current news. ''My
files go back 30 years,'' said the gaunt and grey-haired Jesuit.

At 67, the Hungarian intellectual is slightly weary because nothing seems to
happen that hasn't happened before, but also intellectually alert, because he
does not appear to have abandoned hope that something new and better might come
along. ''When I want to write about a subject, I read the files and then go for
a walk and think, 'What's new now?' ''

Father Ladany's views are remarkably free of ideology, Communist or Roman
Catholic. Having spent 41 years in China and Hong Kong, he sees events through
the prism of millennia of ebb and flow in the history of the Middle Kingdom. In
a long afternoon of conversation, the priest-historian betrayed neither
adulation for a hero nor hatred of a villain. ''Only one thing is certain in
China,'' he said. ''Every few years, the whole system changes. Between
dynasties, it takes 50 to 100 years until the new emerges,'' he continued. ''We
are in that period. The Chinese think like that; you Americans don't. In your
system, everything changes every four years.''

His disabused view has put Father Ladany occasionally at odds with his fellow
China-watchers and subscribers, but he is taken seriously even by those who
disagree, and the journal, sold by subscription only at $135 a year, is
self-supporting. ''He has been unfashionable at times,'' an American
China-watcher said, ''because he is usually right.''

While the opening of the United States Embassy in Peking has reduced the number
of American China-watchers in Hong Kong, the United States Consulate General
continues the work. Its Chinese staff members are free from restrictions that
affect all Chinese working for embassies in Peking. They point out the nuggets
of new information and interpretation that appear in Chinese media, while those
in Peking are under evident instructions to be no more than clinically neutral
translators.

'A Very Nervous System'

American diplomats in Peking think Father Ladany too pessimistic; he finds many
Americans interested in China insufficiently skeptical and too eager to believe
the facade presented by a regime that represents one billion prospective
customers. Presently, Father Ladany believes that the liberalizations instituted
by Deng Xiaoping have already run their course and have in most respects already
been reversed. ''The whole population must say that nothing has changed,'' the
priest said. ''Before, everything was all wrong; now, everything is all right.
They must say the reversal has not taken place.'' In Father Ladany's apparent
view, a Stalinist regime can reverse course publicly only when the leadership
has been unseated; leaders still in power cannot admit to having been
unsuccessful or wrong.

The priest believes that conservative pressures, coming largely from the
military, have forced Mr. Deng to abandon his liberal positions. ''The Russian
system is stupid but stable,'' he remarked.  ''The Chinese are always
intelligent but Utopian and unrealistic. It is a very nervous system.''

Father Ladany has a staff of five Chinese who help him to read about 15 Chinese
newspapers, monitor broadcasts, read the publications of the Hong Kong Communist
community, which he considers the most enlightened, liberal and avant-garde of
the Chinese party, and to receive Chinese visitors who have left for exile. He
sees few foreigners, he said, because they either ''discover China as if they
were Columbus'' or, ''like Germans, take down all the data when they visit a
commune, multiply it by the number of communes and think they know China.''

Nothing in early life predisposed Father Ladany for his present calling. The son
of a physician, he was born in Budapest, obtained a doctorate in law and studied
the violin at the conservatory until he discovered his priestly vocation. He was
sent by the Jesuits to Peking in 1940 to study Chinese, not at his request, was
ordained in China in 1946 and left in 1949. His order imposes no other priestly
functions on him, he said, ''because we believe God created the whole world and
not only church buildings.''

He began to publish his journal anonymously and divided his name into two parts
because in the early years he still had close relatives in Hungary. He returned
there for a visit in 1976 and came back with his violin, a 19th century Italian
instrument, which he had left with relatives when he joined the church. Life has
rarefied his musical taste to unaccompanied Bach only. He thinks in Chinese and
English now, he said, having forgotten some Hungarian. It appears fluent, as are
his German, French, Italian and Latin.

Father Ladany charitably did not discuss his critics, but in a note delivered
after the conversation, he recalled with delight that Simone de Beauvoir once
wrote that his journal was ''une publication venimeuse (poisonous).''

He believes that China will survive all Utopian experiments.  ''China has a
vitality which is well beyond that,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Father Laszio Ladany

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The Vietnam Generation

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 484 words


It was six years ago this week that Saigon fell, an event that finally put an
end to United States involvement in the Vietnam war.  The anniversary merited
some attention in the media, and perhaps by coincidence, two new books appeared
in which veterans of the fighting recall, in searing words and images, their war
experiences.

For those who protested and those who went - and if you were the right age
during the late Sixties, you were likely to be one or the other - the subject of
the war still arouses strong feelings. Sorting ours out, we wind up focusing on
a teen-ager we know who was born shortly before the 1968 Tet offensive.

When U.S. involvement ended, she was only 7, too young to be aware of much. Now
she is old enough to be aware of plenty, however, and to make her opinions
clear. She wants to join the Army, she says, or perhaps the Marines. On
television, she points out, it is said that the Army will help to pay for
college. Her friends at school don't know why we didn't bomb the daylights out
of Iran when they took our people hostage. The peace movement was something
their parents, older people, did. It's not for them.

In fact, they find it hard to picture those parents evading the draft, marching
on Washington, going limp before the police. They seem intrigued by tales of the
napalm and body-count war, the war of drugs and rock-and-roll. When our teenager
heard about the vivid bat-tle scenes in ''Apocalypse Now,'' she pleaded to go,
but her parents wouldn't take her, afraid to let her enjoy it for the wrong
reasons.

Theyfeel, suddenly, as if someone has taken the generation gap and turned it
over like an hourglass.  The accumulation of awareness and passion once powerful
enough to alter a nation's life now trickles only slowly down upon a new
generation with a disturbing interest in violence.

Mark Baker, who compiled Vietnam veterans' stories for his book, ''Nam,'' points
out that it was during the war years that slang meanings proliferated for the
word ''wasted.'' It could refer to exhaustion, drug experience, death. Now the
veterans of the fighting wonder if it should refer to them as a generation, and
the veterans of the peace marches, eyeing the inclinations of the young people
who never experienced Vietnam, may wonder the same thing.

Perhaps, though, such a conclusion is far too harsh. There may be no way to
bridge a true generation gap; but it should not matter so long as each
generation carries its wisdom well. History moves forward when the painfully
earned insight of youth informs the use of power later on. Let today's young
people look curiously at images of war. Let today's parents do what they can to
keep them from becoming real.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

McCarthyism?

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 561 words


Could McCarthyism come back?  Fears rose after last fall's elections. Strom
Thurmond, the new Senate Judiciary Committee chairman, reinstated the old
Internal Security Subcommittee. He gave it a title for the 80's - the
Subcommittee on Security and Terrorism - but some of the look of the 50's. He
appointed as chairman Jeremiah Denton, an Alabama Republican and former Vietnam
war prisoner who has won attention for his superpatriotism and moralistic
pronouncements.

As a consequence, there was special reason to pay attention to the
subcommittee's opening hearing last week. It was not an occasion for panic. So
far, two judgments appear to be warranted. First, Senator Denton seems to be
fishing, but he also seems determined to be fair.  Second, circumstances have
changed.

The subcommittee's main mission apparently is to find a foreign connection,
preferably Soviet, to terrorist activities in the United States. Its first
hearing turned out to be rambling and unfocused, serving mainly to publicize
some books and theories about Sovietinspired terrorism and propaganda methods.

There were intimations of controversial excursions into subversion, security and
civil liberties issues and perhaps the role of journalism. Like the Reagan
Administration, Chairman Denton is skeptical of restraints on
intelligence-gathering and F.B.I.  investigation methods imposed during the Ford
and Carter Administrations. But there were promises not to hunt witches.

McCarthyism was a special brand of Congressional foul play. Senator Joe McCarthy
of Wisconsin, preying on an anxious and badly informed public, abused procedure
and privilege to air charges of disloyalty against hundreds of Americans of
differing political views. He was a master at news manipulation and the big lie.
He smeared even President Eisenhower. Only his excesses brought him to ruin.

Small wonder that many who remember are watchful for the first sneak attack on a
dissenter's reputation. But some of the conditions that bred

McCarthyism are missing. Yes, there are resurgent fears of foreign aggression
and a sense of lost national might. But the world has changed; where are the
scapegoats? Harry Truman may have ''lost'' China but

Richard Nixon courted the People's Republic. Franklin Roosevelt may have
''appeased'' Russia, but Ronald Reagan is selling the Soviets grain.  Another
major change is at the F.B.I. J.Edgar Hoover once fed his ideological allies in
Congress with tantalizing reports on political dissidents. But now, Director
William Webster is both alert and balanced in his assessment of terrorism. His
estimate that there is now ''no real evidence'' of Soviet-sponsored terrorism in
the United States should reassure many and frustrate those who see Reds under
beds.

We expect the F.B.I. to continue watching for spies and troublemakers. Senator
Denton's subcommittee undoubtedly will do so, too. The test for the Senator will
be simple: How will he proceed?  His agenda is of questionable value but so far
there is no reason to doubt his promise of fair play.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE AMERICAN DUEL OVER GUNS

SECTION: Section 6; Page 35, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6221 words


Michael Norman is a frequent contributor to The Times Magazine. By Michael
Norman Guns are a great and a brilliant example of the individuality of our
citizens, just like owning an automobile. -WILLIAM B. RUGER, a gun manufacturer.


---

Selling guns is like selling insurance: You sell someone cheap insurance and
it's no good to them, sell them good insurance and they're protected. -HARRY
MEHR, a gun dealer.

---

If someone really wants to get a gun, even in New York, they'll do it; there's a
lot of steel out there. - JOSEPH DUGAN, a Federal gun agent.

---

My daughter lives in the country and is often alone. She says, ''Dad, as long as
I have my gun in the house, I'm not afraid.'' - LEWIS KENDRICK, a National Rifle
Association member.

---

A couple of people have said to me, ''Why do you keep speaking out? It just digs
up Stuart's memory.'' I speak because I want people to know my son was murdered
with a gun, and I hope they feel like crawling under the table. - LOIS HESS, a
gun-control advocate.

Once more, the gun. And once again the duel of voices that follow it.  The shots
that wounded Ronald Reagan in March and killed John Lennon in December have
given a new immediacy to an old but persistent problem: Americans are a people
armed.

Public officials estimate - and this is only their guess - that there are close
to 170 million handguns, shotguns, and rifles in the closets and night tables of
approximately half the homes in the country. Last year alone, the nation's gun
dealers sold more than 5,900,000 weapons, about half of them pistols and
revolvers.

Some see this weaponry as a burgeoning and lethal inventory and want it
controlled. Others believe it is a vital arsenal, one that is necessary to
protect basic rights and freedoms.

The advocates of gun control want the Federal Government to regulate the sale
and possession of weapons, particularly handguns.  They reason that any assault
or murder - including the wounding of a President or the slaying of a revered
musician - is a crime of means. Reduce the number and availability of guns, they
say, and the rate of killing and violence will drop.

The opponents of gun control argue that given the number of guns, the percentage
used in crime is small, and only violent criminals should be prohibited from
owning them. They believe that ''every lawabiding citizen'' has a
constitutional, indeed a natural, right to have a gun, and that during these
days of rising lawlessness and personal attack, owning a gun is almost a
necessity.

We have heard these arguments, these voices of the American gun, for decades.
But we rarely come to know the people behind them. What follows is an encounter
with five such people, four men and one woman, who either by choice or chance,
spend each day preoccupied with one of the nation's most enduring appliances,
the gun.

Question: ''What is your reaction when you hear that one of the guns you made
has been used to kill someone?'' Answer: ''If I feel anything, it is that the
moral responsibility lies with the man who pulls the trigger.'' Gun
manufacturers tend to suffer a kind of reverse anthropomorphism; that is, in
many eyes they have the personalities and characteristics of the objects they
produce. William B. Ruger likes to tell the story of how he was once at a
Manhattan cocktail party, taking part in a conversation with a small group of
people who did not know him. Being an articulate man, well versed in a wide
variety of subjects, Ruger blended in easily. At one point, a woman on his right
happened to ask what he did for a living. Ruger gave his answer and the
conversation gave way to a cold silence.

''When you mention you're in the gun business,'' he says, ''people look shocked.
They infer that you have an utter disregard for human life, which is
preposterous.''

William B. Ruger is founder, chairman, and chief executive officer of Sturm,
Ruger & Company Inc., among the top 12 of some 60 firearms manufacturing firms
in the United States. The company, based in Southport, Conn., is best known for
its western-style revolvers, but it makes a full line of weaponry - target
pistols, police handguns, rifles and shotguns - and despite the price, an
average of $150 to $760 a gun, Ruger firearms are very much in demand. Last year
the company had net sales of more than $80 million, giving Ruger a significant
portion of this country's firearms business, an industry estimated at almost a
billion dollars a year wholesale.

Like businessmen everywhere, gun manufacturers press for laws and regulations
that favor the free disposition of their products. Thus it should come as no
surprise that William B. Ruger has little regard for the notion of gun control.
But his feelings on the subject are only marginally tied to a desire for profit.

The gun has been the object of his wonder, the focus of his talent, and the
symbol of a time in which he often wishes he had lived. As a boy growing up in
Brooklyn, he doted on guns with the same passion other youngsters showed for the
Dodgers. At one point, he read everything the New York Public Library had to
offer on the subject.  He studied gun metallurgy, gun mechanisms, gun designs,
and he came to regard the gun as a uniquely engineered tool. He also studied
history, particularly as it revolved around the gun. He was fascinated with the
opening of the American West, and he was intrigued by the exploits of European
explorers in Africa. Years later, when he went on the first of his two safaris,
''It was like making a pilgrimage,'' he says.

As a college student, Ruger spent two desultory years at the University of North
Carolina. During the day he listened to lectures on business administration. At
night he worked on a design for a light submachine gun. Soon, the intricacies of
accounting surrendered to the mysteries of muzzle velocity and Bill Ruger quit
school and went to work in a gun factory. Five years later he struck out on his
own, set himself up in the tool business, and quickly went bankrupt.  But in the
interim, he had perfected a design for a .22-caliber automatic pistol, and with
a $50,000 loan from a friend, Alexander M. Sturm, William B. Ruger in 1949
became a gun manufacturer.

His two plants, one in Southport and another in New Hampshire, now employ 1,400
workers who are paid by the piece and often earn as much as $30,000 a year. Many
of these men are Bill Ruger's kind of people. ''A lot of our employees have a
strong interest in guns,'' says a company official, ''and that gives them more
than a detached view of the product they make.''

The founder's office is a large chamber with a hardwood floor. It is dim and
quiet, like a squire's den. Along one wall are gun cases filled with modern and
antique weapons. The founder usually positions himself between a long table and
an old, massive rolltop desk upon which rest a dozen handguns. To his left, high
on a wall, hang the stuffed heads of a lion, an antelope, a rhino, and a ram,
the fruits of his pilgrimage. There is room for another trophy or two, but it is
unlikely Bill Ruger will supply them. At 64, he is beset with arthritis and no
longer takes to the field.

Still, at well over 6 feet and 200 pounds, he is a bulwark of a man, with a high
forehead, wire-rimmed glasses, a brush mustache, and a heavy, sonorous voice.
The conversation on a recent Thursday turned on his favorite subjects: frontier
art, Evelyn Waugh, the decline of 19th-century values, but most of all, guns. He
held in his hand his latest innovation, the Redhawk, a .44 magnum doubleaction
revolver. The gun is used in a new sport where shooters take aim at metal
targets shaped like animals. However, when turned on a more vulnerable target,
the Redhawk can knock a man off his feet or shatter a limb.

''I fully realize that our products can be used to shoot at things other than
inanimate objects,'' Ruger says. ''But if it hadn't been one of my guns (used in
a crime or a shooting), it would have been of someone else's. It would have been
a knife.''

The wounding of the President ''dismayed'' Ruger. ''To me it represented a
sickness in our world,'' he says. ''There's so much hostility, so many people
stimulated to violence. But to be talking about gun legislation as a cure for
this is ridiculous. I know I'm in a position to be discredited on this subject,
but gun control is a crudely simplistic approach to crime put forward by a small
minority, a psychotic group trying to inflict their will on the nation. We need
to look at some of our social problems, to marshal a new sense of right and
wrong.''

But most of all, he feels that gun control would weaken the philosophical
underpinnings of the Republic: ''The United States, with the view of life
embodied in the Constitution, is a kind of paradise. And there is no plainer
indication of that than the concrete fact that I am able to produce guns.''

Given the opportunity, Harry Mehr could probably sell 60 pounds of marbled beef
to a confirmed vegetarian. Some years ago when he first got started in the
retail business, Harry got a break on a pallet load of Army surplus bibles. Not
sensing any religious fervor in the marketplace, Harry pondered the problem of
how to move his merchandise. Then he hit upon an idea. He designed a magazine ad
that showed a book in a plain brown wrapper next to an illustration of a man and
a woman facing each other. He captioned this tableau, ''What Every Married
Couple Should Have.'' Harry sold every one of those bibles.

Harry's Army and Navy is a busy sporting goods store in the New Jersey suburb of
Hamilton Township. For 30 years, its proprietor has followed the same basic
creed: ''I won't cheat my customers, but if there's an angle, I'll grab it.''
Grabbing the angles, Harry last year sold $1.5 in merchandise, 30 percent of it
in guns and ammunition.

He regularly keeps in stock 400 handguns, 1,500 to 2,000 shotguns and rifles,
and roughly half a million rounds of ammunition. Of all the items in the store,
guns require the least amount of Harry's virtuoso hustling. They sell easily,
and they do so in a state where gun buyers are screened for criminal records and
psychiatric disabilities, and must apply to the police for a purchase permit
that usually takes 30 to 90 days to obtain.

Harry estimates that last year he sold more than 800 handguns at an average
price of $170. This year business is even better. His handgun sales are up more
than 20 percent. He says his customers come from every conceivable profession,
occupation, and economic class. At least two out of every 10 are women.

It is Friday at Harry's, payday for most people, a propitious time to observe
the purchase of guns. In comes a young couple trailed by a bright-eyed
youngster, his baseball cap slightly askew. Harry, as he usually does, is
manning the cash register and barking orders over an intercom system to his
clerks. The register sits atop a glass case filled with six dozen handguns. The
weapons rest side by side on strips of yellow rug, their barrels pointing
outward at knee level.  The face under the baseball cap is restless and unhappy.

''I wanna buy a gun,'' he whines, his nose pressed against the gun case.
''Shhh,'' orders his father.  ''I wanna buy a gun.'' Harry scowls. He reaches
into a drawer behind the counter and pulls out a mock .45-caliber round.
''Here,'' he says to the boy, like a grocer proffering a peppermint stick,
''have a bullet.'' The child smiles and is towed away by his parents. ''You
know,'' says Harry, ''the gun business is a funny business. You tell parents who
buy guns to hide them. Then you hear about a kid shooting himself. Most people
who come in here are ignorant of guns. They pick one up and they're pointing
here and there and at me. I'm sure they're going to end up shooting themselves.
But what can I do? The law says if you carry guns and someone has a purchase
permit, you got to sell to them. You stop selling guns and you're out of
business. I mean gas goes in cars, right? Cars kill people, right? But gas
stations still sell it.''

The door swings open. A short muscular man in a white T-shirt and blue warm-up
pants eases up to the counter. He has a gun purchase permit in his hand.

''Let me see the cheapest magnum you got,'' he says to Harry.  ''What do you
want the gun for, home use?'' Harry asks.  ''Yeah.'' ''What size barrel you
want?'' The man does not answer. He seems transfixed by the objects on the
strips of yellow rug.  ''Does it have to be a magnum?'' says Harry as he unlocks
the case and slides back the door.  ''No. You got a .38?'' Harry hands the man a
Smith & Wesson .38-caliber revolver with a four-inch barrel. The man twirls the
chamber, cocks the hammer, and pulls the trigger.

''How much?'' ''That's a hundred and eighty-five fifty, but I'll give you a 10
percent discount.'' ''Hold that,'' says the man. ''I'll be back tomorrow.''
Harry turns from the register, takes a sip of tea, and shakes his head: ''I say
this, most people are buying police-style revolvers or semiautomatics. Now, you
know they don't want those for hunting.  People are preparing for something.
They know it's coming. You never know what to expect in hard times.''

Not all of Harry's guns end up in the hands of xenophobic home owners. He says
he receives about 15 calls a year from police and Federal agents who are trying
to trace guns that were used in major crimes or killings. From this he knows
that weapons he has sold have been involved in two major robberies, one murder -
a man in a nearby town shot his wife in the head - and one suicide.

It is very near dinner time and the store is almost empty. A slender black woman
in white pants and a peach-colored blouse slips up to the counter. Harry is busy
giving one of his clerks a lecture on the virtues of keeping an accurate
inventory and does not notice the woman. She stands there for several minutes,
very still, tightly clutching her handbag in front of her. Finally, Harry turns.

''Can I help you?'' ''Yes, you can,'' she says in a whisper, and pulls from her
purse a small plastic bag with a handgun inside. ''My fiance bought this here
and I wondered if you'd care to buy it back. Here, here are some papers the
police gave me.''

The gun, a Harrington & Richardson .38-caliber revolver, model 925, was
purchased on Jan. 24, 1979, by Eric Antell Stafford of Browns Mills, N.J.
According to authorities, Stafford later used the weapon to commit suicide. The
medical examiner's report notes that Stafford had a history of psychiatric
illness and that he had been treated for this in a Veterans Administration
hospital before he bought the gun.  Yet, to purchase the weapon, Stafford was
required to state on a standard Federal and state form that he had never been
treated for mental illness.

''He was kinda depressed all the time, know what I mean?'' the woman is telling
Harry. ''I got the gun 'cause I'm the executor of his estate. We were together
for seven months. I didn't know about the gun. When they told me I said, 'Wow,
he coulda shot me or my son.' ''

Stafford had paid $85.55 for the H.& R. .38. Harry gave his fiance $40 for the
gun. When she was out the door, he wiped it clean with a rag, attached a small
white label marked $64.25 to the trigger guard, and set the weapon neatly on a
strip of yellow rug in the glass case.

''There ain't nothin' in the store that cheap,'' he said. ''That'll sell fast.
You'll see. It won't be in here more than two days.''

Statistics are like poetry; only after careful explication do they yield their
meaning. For instance, authorities estimate that there are two million illegal
handguns in New York City. The Federal agency responsible for reducing this
illicit arsenal is the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, the B.A.T.F.
Each year, either through confiscations or purchases by its undercover agents,
the New York B.A.T.F. acquires nearly 2,000 handguns. If the bureau continues at
its current rate and if the flow of illegal weapons into New York stops -
something no one envisions - it would take the B.A.T.F. a millennium to disarm
the city.

Another statistic. The New York Police Department, independent of the B.A.T.F.,
last year confiscated over 8,100 handguns. Thus it would appear that law
enforcement is whittling away at the city's cache. But the number of weapons
seized may be equal to or more than - no official can even guess - the number of
guns illegal traffickers funnel into New York.

In the face of all this, authorities, particularly those in the B.A.T.F., prefer
to discuss the only number that carries its own meaning. ''If we get just one
gun in a raid or buy, then that's one gun that won't be used to kill someone,''
says Nick Angell, special agent in charge of the B.A.T.F.'s New York district.

The B.A.T.F. has 100 agents in New York. Each year they spend more than $75,000
to buy illegal weapons from street dealers. By tracing these weapons to their
source, agents hope to catch the illegal distributors who are supplying them.
Last year the bureau arrested three men who had ferried 800 guns into New York.
The weapons came from Ohio, which, like Florida and Georgia, is the source of
most of New York's illegal guns.

But for every illicit distributor the B.A.T.F. puts out of business, perhaps a
hundred others will go on operating unchecked.  There are too many weapons, too
few agents, and in New York -''one of the most lucrative markets in the country
for illegal guns,'' says Angell - too much money to be made.

Thus it was that on a dog-day afternoon last summer, moved by a strong desire
for profit and a certain feeling of impunity, a man known only as Raoul placed a
telephone call to a Manhattan number and told the party on the other end of the
line that he had guns to sell. ''The guy was real confident, real sure of
himself, and he knew we'd pay good money,'' said agent Joseph Dugan, the man who
took the call. Dugan's squad is one of six in the city. Its special telephone -
an undercover line disguised as a private number - rings often with calls from
small-time gun peddlers.

Raoul had asked for Williams and Johnson (pseudonyms), agents posing as crooks
in the market for illegal guns. Raoul had handguns and a shotgun to sell. A
meeting was arranged for later that afternoon on a street corner in Spanish
Harlem.

At 4 o'clock, Williams taped a small radio transmitter to his left thigh and,
with Johnson, piled into a battered blue sedan for the ride uptown. In the trunk
was a satchel with a thousand dollars inside. Joe Dugan and another agent
followed in an unmarked car.

The plan was to tail the undercover men so help would always be half a block
away. ''We play it safe,'' said Dugan. ''We've had guys ripped off. Someone will
put a gun to their head and say they're gonna pull the trigger. We tell our
guys, 'Give 'em the money. Don't be heroes.' ''

Raoul was on time. He slipped into the back seat of the sedan and directed the
undercover men to an address a block and a half away.  Following 500 yards back,
Dugan taped and monitored the conversation on his police radio.

''Hey, man,'' said Raoul, ''I got a .38, a .25 and a .22. I got the stuff around
the corner. Yeah, that's it, stop here, over there.'' He scampered into the
building and left the undercover men waiting in the car. Raoul, as it turned
out, was the spokesman for a gang of Costa Ricans who had recently collected a
modest supply of weapons.  When he returned to the street, there were several
men with him.  Dugan was worried. ''This has got a smell to it,'' he said.

''My friend wants a hundred and fifteen for the .22 and two hundred for the
shotgun,'' Raoul said. Williams and Raoul began to bargain, the peddler
demanding more, the agent insisting the guns weren't worth the price. Finally,
Williams bought the shotgun. He told Raoul he would return the next day to look
at another batch of weapons.  ''I'll wait for your call,'' said the undercover
man.

''They tried to sucker us,'' said Dugan on the ride back to B.A.T.F.
headquarters in lower Manhattan. ''They were testing us. We bought the shotgun
to get an entree. They said they've got some new guns and those are the ones we
want; those we can trace.''

The operation had tied up six agents for three hours and had yielded very
little. What's more, there was no guarantee that Raoul would keep his
appointment the following day. He might slip away as unexpectedly as he had
appeared. No matter. The telephone with the Manhattan number rings often and the
caller always has guns to sell.

''I remember about 10 years ago I was sitting at the sign-up table of the state
shooting championships and this guy walks up to me to put down his name. He had
only one arm and on his hand he had only two fingers. I was reluctant to let him
compete, the safety factor and all. Well, the guy behind him, I guess it must
have been his friend, motioned to me that it was all right. So I signed him up.
Later I saw him load his gun himself, fire it, and compete using just his little
stump and two fingers. Everyone was amazed. It was a real inspiration.''

Lewis J. Kendrick, colonel, United States Army Reserve, retired, can think of no
comparable test of skill, no keener measure of discipline and concentration,
than being able to shoot the middle out of a target with a rifle or pistol.

He got his first taste of shooting 40 years ago as a military man.  In the
beginning, it was merely his hobby and pastime. Now it is his preoccupation. The
colonel is one of the 12 founders of the Tenafly, N.J., Rifle and Pistol Club.
He is also president of the Association of New Jersey Rifle and Pistol Clubs, an
almost full-time volunteer job. And he is the proud holder of an endowment
membership in the National Rifle Association. He achieved this last status by
paying a $500 donation that entitled him to have his name engraved on a brass
plaque that hangs in the lobby of N.R.A. headquarters in Washington.

At 65, Lew Kendrick is a trim 5 feet 6 inches with salt-and-pepper hair and a
manner that is formal but by no means unapproachable. For 32 years he worked as
a production manager for a mill and yarn company. He fought in World War II, won
the Bronze Star for valor, and gave more than two decades of faithful service to
the National Guard. Yet he is hardly an avowed militarist. When the Korean War
broke out, his commander from the old days called and asked if he wanted to get
into the fight. Lew Kendrick thanked him for the offer, then turned him down.
''I had a family,'' he said. ''There was too much at stake.''

He does not hunt and has never fired any of the six rifles or eight handguns he
owns at another human being. However, he believes ''a gun in the house is a
deterrent to an intruder.'' He says that if he were ever to find himself
confronted with an unwelcome guest, he would ''cover him and call the police,''
that is unless he was attacked, in which case he would try to disable, or as he
says, ''cripple him,'' rather than shoot to kill.

The colonel considers himself a brother in the ''fraternity'' of marksmen.
Shooters, target shooters in particular, are ''one grand bunch of people'' who
abhor the misuse of guns. ''I do a slow boil when I see a stop sign full of
bullet holes,'' he says.

Kendrick believes that the sport of shooting is under siege by people who do not
understand it and so he spends most of his time ''trying to protect our
rights.'' Four nights a year, he presides at the meeting of the state rifle
association. These affairs are held in a Newark Holiday Inn where 30 delegates
representing 100 gun clubs and 3,000 members gather for a buffet of cold cuts,
hot snacks and gun talk.

They are a heterogeneous group: Poles, Italians, and a Cuban; Democrats and
Republicans; crew-cut and coiffed; an accountant, a mason, a dentist - and
Winnifred A. Carr, ''Winnie'' to her friends, a 75-year-old grandmother who has
been shooting a .22-caliber small-bore rifle in competition since 1950.

They talk about range scores, antique weapons someone ''got for a song,''
B.A.T.F. ''harassment,'' plans for a new clubhouse, and the welcomed predicament
of an old nemesis: ''Hey, did you see where one of the gun-control Congressmen
got named in the Abscam thing?''

The association, in effect, is the state chapter of the N.R.A. and most of its
members, Kendrick included, are of one mind, the N.R.A.'s mind, on the issue of
gun control. In brief, they argue:

Less than one half of 1 percent of all guns in this country are used in crime;
the Federal 1968 Gun Control Act is used by Federal agents to violate the rights
of lawful gun owners and collectors; instead of more laws, the country needs
tougher judges; owning, selling, and manufacturing guns should follow the policy
of laissez faire, and the Second Amendment to the Constitution guarantees the
right of every citizen to own a gun, even though the four Supreme Court
decisions dealing with this belief have never confirmed it.

And there is one final point, the main tenet of the shooter's creed. Although he
gives no specific example, Lew Kendrick is convinced ''that with strict gun
registration always comes confiscation. It's been proven all over the world.
Every country that's been overrun or ruled by a dictator, the first thing the
Government did was to knock on the door and take away the guns.''

Lois Hess likens the death of her 24-year-old son, Stuart, to an execution. When
she thinks about it, which is every day, she sees him standing there six winters
ago in the empty bedroom of a townhouse he had just constructed, surrendering
first his money, then his car keys to the man who held a gun to his head, then
''begging for his life'' before the man pulled the trigger.

The gun in question was a .38-caliber Taurus revolver and the man convicted of
using it was Claude Waddy Jr., of Baltimore. The judge who tried the case called
it ''one of the most callous, brutal, and senseless killings that I have heard
described in a courtroom for some time.''

At first, Lois Hess focused her rage on Waddy. During the trial, she plotted his
death. She thought she would ''buy a small concealable weapon'' in a gun shop
near her home, ''smuggle it into the courtroom,'' and dispatch Waddy with the
same swiftness he'd shown her son.

The plan, of course, remained just a plan. Lois Hess, 53, of Baltimore County,
Maryland, mother, part-time real-estate broker, former bridge player, hardly had
the disposition for killing.  Instead, she decided to seek her revenge in a way
that was more socially acceptable, so she swung her attention from murderer to
murder weapon and made herself part of a crusade for gun control.

She speaks to any group or forum that will hear her and in doing so serves the
cause of gun control by giving it a symbol, a victim, to parade in public. And
the cause serves her as well, providing opportunity after opportunity to unload
excess emotional baggage and to exorcise her grief.

''I don't know all the facts and figures of the issue,'' she admits. ''I just go
out and speak. That's what I do, every day being The Victim. It's therapy for
me.''

It's also clever politics. The other side in the gun-control debate - the N.R.A.
and the firearms industry -has long known that the way to win converts is to
appeal to the viscera and bypass the head. And now groups like Handgun Control
Inc., of Washington, the organization in which Lois Hess is an officer and
volunteer, are following the same practice.

Each month Handgun Control publishes and distributes its ''Handgun Body Count,''
a list of people killed by handguns that is culled from newspapers nationwide.
The body count - and it is no accident that this Vietnam-era term is used - is
added to a ''Scroll of the Dead,'' a cumulative list of those killed. The scroll
is held neatly together with a thin black ribbon and is available as a stage
prop for the organization's speakers.

There is also a widely distributed 22-minute film entitled the ''American
Handgun War.'' The movie, narrated by the actor James Whitmore, opens with an
animated shot of blood dripping down the title. This is followed by scenes of a
jogger getting shot, a woman being mugged, a body being lifted into an ambulance
and other threatening vignettes. Meanwhile, Whitmore intones some statistics -
24 Americans killed by handguns every day, four handguns produced and sold every
minute - then he says: ''We want to believe that these tragedies only happen to
someone else. ... But in all likelihood, you'll get your chance. ... There is a
1 in 5 chance you or some member of your family will be attacked or threatened
by someone with a gun. ... Think about that tonight as you're going to your car,
or waiting for a bus, or walking your dog. ...''

The film is as bold as any piece of propaganda the N.R.A. has produced. Still,
it is just so much celluloid compared with Handgun Control's pre-eminent victim,
Lois Hess. ''It's one thing for us to say here's the statistics and political
logic; it's another to listen to Lois,'' says the organization's director,
Charles Orasin. ''She has a tremendous impact on people.''

These days, Lois Hess is busy. After John Lennon's death, the organization
received donations of half a million dollars in just three months, and following
the assassination attempt on the President, Handgun Control put a full-page ad
in The New York Times that prompted an avalanche of mail. Lois Hess is both
elated and bitter about all of this: ''The response was tremendous, but people
still forget about the importance of just one human life. Stuart was just as
important as the President.''

When she speaks in public, giving the details of Stuart's murder and talking
about her ''six years of tears,'' she commands an attentive and often rapt
audience. But her posture on the stump for strict gun control is actually a
tempered version of an unsettled woman who still clings to her son, her
firstborn of three children.

Her ample, well-appointed home in suburban Baltimore, where she lives with her
husband, Dick, a builder and real-estate broker, is filled with reminders of
Stuart Hess.

He is in the living room, in pictures on a sideboard, and in a bound volume that
holds a copy of the eulogy delivered at his funeral.

He is in the den - she calls it her ''gun room'' - in a plastic paperweight
preserving his ring, bracelet and other mementos, and also in the large envelope
that contains the 8-by-10 glossy pictures of his corpse the prosecutor showed to
the jury.

He is in the master bedroom, in each of three huge framed collages made up of
more than a hundred photographs. Each frame has a theme: Stuart as a youngster,
Stuart growing up, Stuart in college. In one frame, he is shown as an
11-year-old dressed in shooting garb and holding a gun. The picture is labeled,
''Senior Riflery Team.''

''I miss everything about him,'' she says. ''I used to return to the murder
scene a lot, trying to figure out how it could have happened. I can't imagine
how scared Stuart was. That really bothers me. There's also an extra anger when
the body is mutilated. Did you know he was frozen to the floor in his own blood
when they found him?''

Extra anger. Lois Hess supports capital punishment: ''The few mistakes that
would be made would be worth it.'' And she often thinks about an ad hoc kind of
justice: ''When I read about these punks in the street and all the trouble they
get into, I say why can't something happen to them?''

And finally, there's her feeling that she's been betrayed: ''I grew up saluting
the flag and singing ''The Star-Spangled Banner.'' I even loved eagles; I used
to have them, replicas, all over the house. I always thought life was fair. If
you were a good person and you were honest and you hung around with decent
people, then nothing would happen. Murder? That was something that took place in
lousy neighborhoods in a cheap bar. That didn't happen to my kids.''

STATE LAWS: Each state has its own laws regulating the purchase, possession, and
manufacture of guns. The laws vary widely in scope, restrictions and penalties.
The nation's capital has the most stringent. It is virtually impossible for
anyone other than a lawenforcement officer, security guard or courier to obtain
a handgun in Washington. Massachusetts, New Jersey and New York require thorough
background checks before a gun purchase permit is issued; New York and
Massachusetts have a minimum jail term of one year for anyone who possesses an
unlicensed handgun. Many states, however, such as Florida and Virginia, require
nothing of a gun buyer or only that he show a driver's license at the time of
purchase. This disparity in the laws makes it possible for someone in a
restricted state to buy a handgun elsewhere.  FEDERAL LAW: In the main, the
Federal 1968 Gun Control Act prohibits the sale of weapons through the mail and
bans the importation of the so-called Saturday Night Specials (cheap handguns).
However, it does not proscribe the importation of foreign-made parts that make
up those guns. The Gun Control Act, in effect, makes it a felony for anyone
other than a federally licensed dealer to purchase guns in one state for sale in
another. The law requires all dealers to keep a record of all gun sales. A
dealer must refuse to sell a gun to a minor (under 21), convicted felon,
fugative, drug addict, mental defective, alcoholic, or a resident from another
state. But since no prior check is required, there is no way for a dealer to
know if a potential customer is ineligible.  PROPOSED CHANGE IN THE FEDERAL LAW:
The progun forces, led by the National Rifle Association, support a bill
sponsored by Representative Harold L. Volkmer, Democrat of Missouri, and Senator
James A. McClure, Republican of Idaho, that would amend the Gun Control Act to
permit anyone to buy guns in any state as long as the transaction did not
violate either the laws of his own state or the laws of the state in which the
gun is being purchased. Whatever checks the state involved requires (i.e., state
where gun is being bought and state where buyer lives) must be adhered to as
well as Federal law. Further, the amendment would, in effect, ease the
restrictions on the transportation of guns between state borders, and would also
require Federal agents to show reasonable cause before they could inspect a
dealer's records for accuracy.

The antigun forces, like Handgun Control Inc., of Washington, support a measure
sponsored by Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, and
Representative Peter Rodino, Democrat of New Jersey, that, in summary, bans the
sale, manufacture and assembly of Saturday Night Specials; requires a 21-day
waiting period either to purchase a gun or to get a purchase permit; prohibits
pawnshops from selling handguns, and mandates a prison sentence for anyone using
a gun in the commission of a felony.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of handguns confiscated from John Hinckley photo
of prospective gun buyer examining wares photo of a woman testing a handgun
photo of Gun Manufacturer William Ruger photo of Lewis Kendrick photo of handgun
dealer Harry Mehr photo of Lois Hess, pro- gun control worker

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 6; Page 154, Column 5; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 144 words


Before an already bloated defense budget is expanded, perhaps the new
Administration will recall other recent problems of perception - an arms race to
close a missile gap that didn't exist; a now dismantled multibillion-dollar
antiballistic missile system that was uniformly criticized by Presidential
science advisers as technically not practicable and strategically unsound (much
the same criticism as for the MX); and a war that, according to President Nixon,
continued to be fought in order to avoid the perception of weakness and win an
''honorable peace.''

Among the lessons of the war in Vietnam and the Iranian revolution should have
been the failure of Realpolitik. Adding further overkill to our strategic forces
is not likely to advance United States foreign-policy objectives.
ARTHUR CHARO, Department of Physics, Duke University, Durham, N.C.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of plane

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LONG ISLAND JOURNAL

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 3, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1016 words


THE Village of Freeport has hired the first woman for its police force. She is
27-year-old Susan Kretzmer, a former waitress who began her recruit training
course last week at the Nassau County Police Academy.

Miss Kretzmer and seven men chosen from a county Civil Service list are the
first police officers to be hired by the village in the last four years. No
appointments were made since March 1977 because of a court action instituted by
the Department of Justice against the Nassau County Police Department, charging
that there were insufficient minority members on the police force.

As a result, the Nassau Civil Service Commission would not release its list of
eligibles to any police departments in the county.  However, a ruling by Judge
George C. Pratt of Federal District Court held that villages were not part of
the Justice Department suit.  Therefore, the list was released to Freeport and
used for hiring the new police personnel.

How do you determine the sex of a 12 1/2-ton whale? Carefully, very carefully,
said David Weiner, a research scientist who swam out and took tissue samples
from Physty, the ailing sperm whale that was treated at Robert Moses State Park
on Fire Island after twice trying to beach itself.

The 25-foot whale had flipped two divers out of the water when it swished its
tail near them. Also, while gently swimming around the boat basin, it had
knocked out several 2-by-6-foot planks of bulkheading.

''I swam out to the whale with food,'' Mr. Weiner said. ''The whale was very
cautious at first. I put my hand on him and tried to feed him a few squid. I
swam back to his dorsal fin and took some tissue and blood. The whale didn't
really like the tissue test and started moving around. I got only a small amount
before he pushed me away.''

Mr. Weiner, a biologist at the State University at Stony Brook, took the tissue
samples back to the university's laboratories, where a chromosome test showed
that Physty, nicknamed after his species, Physeter catodon, was a male.

''The press wanted to know the sex,'' Mr. Weiner said. ''It didn't make much
difference to us. We did the test to keep the press happy.''

However, the tissues and blood samples that he took to determine the nature of
the whale's illness were of little use because they were spoiled by salt water.

Mr. Weiner was part of a major effort by scientists to save Physty's life.
Despite treatment with penicillin, the mammal, which was believed to be
suffering from pneumonia, appeared to be dying. A break in the case came when
Mr. Weiner inserted a pair of nine-inch swabs into the whale's blow hole and
swam back to shore, holding the swabs over his head to keep them dry. Cultures
made from the mucouslike substance in the blow hole confirmed that a new drug
was needed to treat the whale.

Mr. Weiner and other divers then fed Physty squid that had been loaded with the
new drug, which was donated and flown to Long Island from Michigan by the
Parke-Davis Company. Physty, the only whale known to recover after being in
captivity, according to Mr. Weiner, was released in the open sea.

Very little is known about the physiology of sperm whales, and scientists are
always eager to get tissue and blood samples from them.

''This was one time I was happy I did not get a good sample,'' Mr.  Weiner said.
''The best samples I get are from dead whales.''

Former President Gerald R. Ford will have a reunion of sorts on Wednesday when
he receives an honorary Doctor of Laws degree from Hofstra University. Among
those turning out to welcome Mr. Ford will be Dr. Alfred Sternfeld, who attended
the University of Michigan in the 1930's, when the man who was to become
President was a big star on the football team.

Adelaide Sternfeld, the doctor's wife, will also have a special interest in the
ceremonies marking Hofstra's 45th anniversary, for she was a member of Hofstra's
first graduating class.

Mr. Ford, who will deliver a major address at the the founders day celebration,
will be the second former President to receive an honorary degree from Hofstra.
The first was Dwight D. Eisenhower.

Dr. Sternfeld, who lives in Garden City, said of the former President: ''I'm
coming especially to see him again and listen to what he has to say.''

On the official welcoming committee is Frank G. Zarb of Sands Point, who was
head of the Federal Energy Administration during Mr.  Ford's tenure. Mr. Zarb,
who graduated from Hofstra in 1957 and is a trustee, will read the presentation
for the honorary degree and will welcome Mr. Ford when he lands by helicopter on
campus.

An F-105 Thunderchief, a fighter bomber still being deployed by the United
States Air Force, landed last week at Republic Airport in Farmingdale, en route
to its permanent home at Nassau County's new Cradle of Aviation Museum at
Mitchel Field. The plane, built on Long Island by Republic Aviation (now
Fairchild Republic), is the type that flew more than 75 percent of the missions
over North Vietnam.  Fairchild Republic is assisting Nassau County's Department
of Recreation and Parks in moving the plane, a gift from the Air Force, to the
museum, where it will be on display.

The fledgling museum has also acquired a 40-foot-high lunar module, built by the
Grumman Aerospace Corporation and designed for the original Apollo mission to
land on the moon. The National Aeronautics and Space Administration donated the
ascent and descent vehicle to the Smithsonian Institution, and the institution
has, in turn, given it to the Cradle of Aviation Museum on a permanent loan
basis.

The museum is open from May through September on a reservation basis for groups.
A spokesman for the Department of Recreation and Parks said it hoped to have the
facility open to the public on a seven-day basis by next spring.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW JERSEY GUIDE;
FOR WHAT IT'S WORTH

BYLINE: By Martha G. Wilson

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 23, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 884 words


An Army colonel found that a Japanese sword he owned was worth $70,000.  Two
paintings discovered in an old house were identified as works of Paolo Veronese
and worth $378,650.

There are just two examples of items that have been brought to the Heirloom
Discovery Days held by Sotheby Parke Bernet, the New York auction house.  Such
events have become popular ways for institutions to raise funds, for Sotheby's
to seek new finds and for people to learn about the objects they live with or
have in their attics.

Such an event will be held Saturday from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. at the State Museum
in Trenton, with the proceeds to benefit the museum's Acquisition Fund.  The
cost will be $5 for each object appraised, and they can include American
furniture and metalware, Oriental items, American and European art, porcelain,
silver, pottery, glass, rugs and antique jewelry.  Clear photographs can be used
to appraise items that are too large to carry.

The experts will not appraise books, coins, modern jewelry, Greek and Roman
antiquities or pre-Columbian or American Indiana artifacts.

To beat the rush, from 6 to 9 P.M. on Friday and at a cost of $15, the experts
will appraise two objects for each person.  There will be hors d'oeuvres, a cash
bar and jazz-piano entertainment.  Reservations are necessary, and can be made
by calling (609) 394-5310.

The museum is at 205 West State Street.

WARM WELCOME FOR MAY

The Montclair Art Museum is ushering in May today with an afternoon of programs
that include a nature walk, a gallery talke and a concert by George Shirley, the
Metropolitan Opera tenor, in addition to its normal exhibits.

At 2 P.M., Howard Van Vleck, a landscape consultant, will lead an arboretum walk
on the museum's grounds; he will discuss the more than 50 types of trees and
shrubs, including a rare Dawn Redwood.

The "Simple Pleasures" exhibition-with furniture, toys, household objects,
needlework and paintings from 1790 to 1920-will be the subject of a gallery talk
at 3 P.M.  And at 4, Mr. Shirley will sing, accompanied by Robert Hammond.

In keeping with the season, the museum will feature floral arrangements executed
by area garden clubs.

The museum is at 3 South Mountain Avenue, at Bloomfield Avenue, and admission is
free.  Hourse at 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., Tuesday through Saturday, and 2 to 5 p.M. on
Sundays.  The museum is closed Mondays.  Information: (20l) 746-5555.

SHANKAR IN ENGLEWOOD

Ravi Shankar, the Indian sitarist who achieved instant popularity in the late
1960's, courtesy of the Beatles and Woodstock, is still very much on the scene.
His "Concerto No. 2 for Sitar and Orchestra" was given its world premiere by the
New York Philharmonic just over a week ago, and at the end of this month he will
give his annual New York sitar recital at Carnegie Hall.

In the meantime, Mr. Shankar, who has been called "not only the greatest living
master of the sitar, but also one of the most masterly instrumentalists of any
sort in the world today," will perform at 8:30 P.M. tomorrow at John Harms
Englewood Plaza, 30 North Van Brunt Street, Englewood.  Tickets are $7.
Reservations: (20l) 567-5797.

ANIMAL KINGDOM

Animals from mutts to exotic birds and ferrets will have their day today at "All
About Pets," the second annual Animal Welfare and Care Fair at the Trailside
Nature and Science Center in Mountainside.

From 1 to 5 P.M., the public can see demonstrations, films and displays on
various types of pets.  Care and adoption also are on the agenda.  Booths will
supply information and literature.

Entertainment will include a Frisbee-catching doo at 1:15.  Dog grooming will be
demonstrated all afternoon, and dog obedience and and training will be the topie
from 2:30 to 4.

The fair is free, and refreshments will be available.  The center is at Coles
Avenue and New Providence Road, in the Watchung Reservation.  Information: (201)
232-5930.

AGENT ORANGE SEMINAR

It is estimated that 280,000 of the 2,300.00 Americans who served in Vietman
were exposed to Agent Orange, or dioxin, the toxic herbicide whose residual
effects on physical and mental health are just beginning to be recognized and
understood.

It is an area of much confusion, but a seminar at Rutgers-Camden Wednesday night
will focus on the effect of Agent Orange, problems of Vietnam veterans and
delayed stress syndrome.

The speakers will include Hy Mayerson, a lawyer who is handling a class-action
Agent Orange suit; Frank McCarthy, president of Agent Orange Victims
International; William K. Starrett, director of research and evaluation for the
Community Mental Health Center of Gloucester County, Barry Bell, chief medical
director of three Veterans Administration hospitals and Senator John Heinze,
Republican of Pennsylvania.

The three-hour seminar, which will begin at 7 P.M., will be held at the
Rutgers-Camden Theater, Fourth and Linden Streets.  It is sponsored by the
Rutgers-Camden Veterans Affairs Club.  Information: (609) 757-6045.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S.S. NEW JERSEY MAY GO SEAWARD

BYLINE: By GENE RONDINARO

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 28, Column 3; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 516 words


JERSEY CITY NOT unlike an old sailor who keeps re-enlisting long after his
shipmates have retired, the U.S.S. New Jersey, the 45,000-ton battlewagon
launched on Dec. 7, 1942, may be rearmed and made ready for action.

The ship, whose 16-inch guns can fire a 2,700-pound shell more than 23 miles,
served for a time as the command post of Adm. William F.  (Bull) Halsey's
armada, which virtually swept the Pacific of the Imperial Japanese Fleet in the
closing stages of World War II. Later, she saw action off Korea and Vietnam.

And now the Reagan Administration has recommended, as part of its defense plans
in the face of the steady naval buildup by the Soviet Union, that four World War
II battleships be reactivated. One of them is the New Jersey, which would be
modernized and refitted with cruise missiles.

''Of course, the plan to reactivate the New Jersey is one that leaves us with
mixed feelings,'' said Col. Jerry McCabe, executive director of Liberty State
Park in Jersey City. ''We had planned to bring the ship home and moor it in the
park as a museum under the raised arm of the Statue of Liberty.

''We remain convinced that the ship - a floating symbol of our resolve to remain
free - will one day return home to the state she was named for.''

Recommissioning the New Jersey would cost more than $200 million over two years.
She would join the Missouri, the Iowa and the Wisconsin, sister Iowa-class
battleships, which also served in the Pacific in World War II.

Of the four, only the New Jersey -known to her crews as the ''Big J'' -has
served in all three major conflicts involving United States naval forces since
1942. Furthermore, she is the most-decorated ship in American naval history.

The New Jersey is moored in Bremerton, Wash., where she has been in mothballs
since 1969, a few months after engaging North Vietnamese coastal batteries.

Since then, in anticipation of her release by the Navy, communities throughout
the state, including Jersey City, Hoboken, Atlantic City, Asbury Park, Palmyra,
Long Branch and Sandy Hook, have at one time or another submitted bids to aquire
the 887-foot-long vessel as a museum.

In 1978, after years of bickering, Governor Byrne appointed a commission that
selected Caven Point, near Liberty State Park in Jersey City, as the eventual
site for the battleship.

Although the New Jersey never faced the guns of another battleship or major
surface elements of the Japanese fleet, she ften was under heavy attack by
Japanese aircraft.

''Of course, we would have loved to have the New Jersey home sooner, but the
fact that she may be reactivated may eventually make it easier to obtain her,
once she is finally retired,'' said Capt.  Joseph Azzolina, chairman of the
recently formed New Jersey Battleship Commission.

The commission hopes to raise enough money to obtain the vessel from the Navy
once the ship is finally retired.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 4, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CAPITAL RALLY ASSAILS ARMS TO SALVADOR

BYLINE: By JUAN de ONIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 699 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 3


At least 20,000 demonstrators marched on the Pentagon today to protest United
States military aid to El Salvador, proposed increases in arms spending and
budget cuts in social programs.

The rally, organized by a coalition of religious, student, labor and black
activists, was the largest antiwar protest seen here since the demonstrations
for peace in Vietnam in the early 1970's.

The marchers, carrying banners and posters, stretched at one point from the
Lincoln Memorial, across the Memorial Bridge over the Potomac River, to the
Pentagon's mall entrance, where speakers addressed the crowd from an elevated
stand.

''This is the first national act of resistance to Reagan's repression, racism
and militarism,'' shouted Laurie Fierstein of the People's Anti-War
Mobilization, which organized the rally.

Larry Holmes, co-chairman of the organizing committee, took the microphone and
announced to cheers from the crowd that ''officially, over 100,000'' people took
part in the rally.

500 Demonstrate Against Rally

James H. Jones, Washington's deputy police chief and head of the antiriot police
force at the scene, estimated that there were 20,000 participants.

''That's our count based on helicopters that are covering the route,'' he said,
adding that he was in radio contact with two helicopters that circled overhead
constantly.

There were no incidents, despite a counterdemonstration by about 500 people
organized by a right-wing group, the Collegiate Association for the Research of
Principles.

The counterdemonstrators, from universities that included Harvard, Michigan and
Columbia, carried American flags and posters denouncing Cuban and Soviet
involvement in Afghanistan, Angola and El Salvador.  At one point, they
exchanged insults and slogans nose-to-nose with participants in the rally, but
there were no blows and the police did not intervene.

Speakers Attack Administration

The decision of the Reagan Administration to increase United States military aid
to El Salvador, where left-wing guerrillas are trying to overthrow the
military-backed Government of President Jose Napoleon Duarte, came under attack
from speakers, who alternated with folk-rock groups singing political verses.

Arnaldo Ramos, speaking for the Salvador opposition's Revolutionary Democratic
Front, said the demonstration showed the degree of opposition by the American
people to continuing military aid.

''The people of El Salvador and the United States are fighting together against
a regime that murders American nuns and newspapermen,'' he said.

Mr. Ramos said he had studied history at Stanford University and was teaching at
the University of San Salvador when it was closed last year.

Many of the demonstrators who came here by bus from as far away as Wisconsin and
Florida were university students who belonged to committees of solidarity with
El Salvador. Others were members of religious groups with ties to American
missionaries working in El Salvador.

Heidi Tarver, a former Los Angeles teacher who heads a national coalition of
solidarity groups, said 120 committees were members with more joining every
week.

The rally's participants were drawn from a wide range of protest groups that saw
El Salvador as a symbol of United States military activism.

Bella S. Abzug, the former Democratic Representative from Manhattan, complained
in her speech about the Administration's proposals to increase military spending
and cut back social programs.

''Money for jobs, not for war,'' many of the demonstrators chanted. ''Keep U.S.
out of El Salvador.''

----

5,000 March in San Francisco

Special to the New York Times

SAN FRANCISCO, May 3 - A crowd of about 5,000 people representing labor unions,
religious organizations and peace groups in California held a three-hour march
here today to protest United States involvement in El Salvador.

The marchers gathered at San Francisco's Federal Courthouse and walked a mile to
a park in the Mission district, a predominantly Mexican neighborhood. In the
park, they lounged on the grass and listened to a succession of speakers
protesting American foreign policy and discussing the prospect of a military
draft.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of protesters

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 4, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CHAPLAIN IS REVEALED AS AUTHOR OF BOOK ON VIETNAM

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 658 words


The name of the Reserve lieutenant colonel who used the pseudonym Cincinnatus
when he wrote the book ''Self-Destruction: The Disintegration and Decay of the
United States Army During the Vietnam Era'' has been revealed to be Dr. Cecil B.
Currey, a professor of American military history at the University of South
Florida in Tampa who never served in Vietnam.

Professor Currey, 48 years old, remains in the Army Reserve, attached to the
Office of Chief of Chaplains.  Capt. Margaret Lamax, an Army spokesman,
confirmed over the weekend that Professor Currey has had a Pentagon assignment
since October 1979, but she said that no formal statement either about the
disclosure of his authorship or about his future status could be made until
higher-ranking officers discussed the matter this week.

'Failure of Military Mind'

The disclosure of the book's contents first appeared in The New York Times of
Dec. 30. The author maintained that Vietnam was ''a failure of the American
military mind.'' He blamed both the American generals in Saigon, particularly
William C. Westmoreland, and the Pentagon officers who ''thought and fought like
corporate executives.''

The book was published by W.W. Norton & Company in January. In the initial
manuscript the author's real name was used. But the publisher, the author said,
decided to use a pseudonym because Professor Currey's service as a chaplain and
lack of experience in Vietnam might harm the book's credibility. Also, and not
incidentally, it was felt that the pseudonym might help the book gain greater
attention in the marketplace.

The book received favorable notices in most publications and gained wider
attention when Professor Currey appeared as Cincinnatus on the NBC News program
''Today'' on Feb. 2, his face in silhouette and his voice electronically
altered.

Eric P. Swenson, Norton's vice chairman and executive editor, said Saturday that
the facts in The Times's original article about the book and the author were
accurate. Mr. Swenson also said that the assertions made by Professor Currey in
the book were documented; that he had met with the author several times in New
York; that he had independently checked sections of the book with military
authorities, and that the disclosure of the author's real name should not
mitigate the significance of the book's contents.

The reason that Professor Currey's name was revealed, according to Mr. Swenson,
was that anonymous letters disclosing his identity and background were sent to
The Christian Science Moniter and The Washington Post last week. Mr. Swenson
said he had reason to believe that those letters originated in the Pentagon.

Professor Currey said he believed that the letters were written by a civilian
employed at the Pentagon, whose name he would not disclose. The thrust of the
letters was that a chaplain who had not served in Vietnam would not be qualified
to write on the subject.

The Military Club Book, which made ''Self-Destruction'' its choice for April,
exaggerated the credentials of the author in a brochure that described the book
as ''a scathing critique of the U.S. military by an officer who was there'' and
said that the book was based on ''his own 30 years of military experience.''

Professor Currey, who is an ordained Protestant minister, was commissioned as a
lieutenant in 1965 in the Nebraska National Guard and later served in the
Florida National Guard. He o holds a Ph.D.  from the University of Kansas and is
a graduate of the Army's Command and General Staff College.

He said that he had never asserted that he had been on duty in Vietnam. But he
said that he had interviewed many officers who had served there.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 4, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

INDIAN OCEAN BASES MAY COST TOO MUCH

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 302 words


To the Editor:

It seems a weakness of our democratic form of government that the United States
executive can decide upon a costly and volatile policy of military expansion in
the Indian Ocean without legislative debate. Of course, Congressional agreement
with the executive decision can be claimed, as in the days of the Viet-nam
venture, because few or no objections have come from legislative quarters.

Grounds for questioning a United States policy of basing forces all over the
peripheries of the Indian Ocean, include the following:

* The cost is admittedly high. For some fraction of that, much might be done to
develop more fossil, solar or other sources of energy domestically, to say
nothing of conservation. It would be better to discipline ourselves, as far as
energy is concerned, than to carry potentials of war to innocents overseas.

* Conventional forces of the United States could never match those of the Soviet
Union in the oil-rich lands north of the Indian Ocean.  All the U.S.S.R. has to
do is occupy Iran and Pakistan, and thereafter control the skies over Arabia
from the air. The only and ultimate arbitrament possible to us in that part of
the world is nuclear, which would call all the more for national debate.

* As for the fear that the U.S.S.R., absent U.S. forces in the Indian Ocean,
will ''get'' African and other states, that depends a good deal on the
reluctance of native peoples to be taken over, which could be costly for the
Soviet Union. If the United States were to feed the starving refugees in Somalia
and the Ogaden, our mounting outlays for nearby naval facilities in Kenya and
Somalia would not seem by contrast so insensitive as they do. We have means
other than gunboats to win friendships among native peoples.
JOHN G. DOW, Albany, N.Y., April 20, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 4, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

VETERANS CALL CUTBACKS 'ANOTHER BETRAYAL'

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 11, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 896 words

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO


Shortly after 7:30 on Tuesday evenings, the men gather in the first-floor office
of a deserted building near downtown San Diego. They pull up chairs in a circle
and speak quietly.

''I'm making money now - I'm very successful but I just don't sleep at night,''
said Lou Barrier, a onetime Navy medical corpsman who served with the Marines in
Vietnam. ''When I close my eyes I see things I want to forget.''

Dan Foster, a 33-year-old Vietnam veteran who works for an employment counseling
concern, said tensely: ''I've had 20 jobs in the last 10 years. I'm divorced.
Got two kids. Last month I had half my stomach removed for a bleeding ulcer. I'm
trying to get some doors unlocked. Something's wrong.''

''Another betrayal,'' said Steven DeBreau, a former marine. Shaking his head, he
added, ''They want to close this place down - the one place we have. Another
betrayal.''

Survivors of a Divisive War

The men who come to the San Diego Vet Center, like the 40,000 other veterans who
have used the nation's 91 federally aided counseling centers, are the survivors
of a divisive war that has never quite ended for many former servicemen.

Beyond the common link of Vietnam, what binds the men now is a sense of fury at
the Reagan Administration's plans to close a $20 million outreach program that
took 10 years to get through Congress, a program designed to deal with stress
disorders frequently associated with the Vietnam War.

''Because Vietnam was only a one-year tour,'' said William P.  Mahedy, a social
worker and former Roman Catholic chaplain who served with the Army in Vietnam,
''the military managed to keep psychological casualties down but set the stage,
unknowingly, for a delayed reaction that has just begun to surface in the last
few years.''

''Emotions like grief were repressed,'' added Mr. Mahedy, who now runs the San
Diego center. ''The average age of the Vietnam veteran was 19. He flew back
alone, and it took as little as 48 hours to go, literally, from foxhole to
fireside. There was no time to grieve, no time for emotion.

''Guys were ridiculed when they got back. Some were spit on, they were ashamed
of serving in Vietnam, made to feel humiliated, so feelings got repressed even
deeper. Vietnam became a major undigested bit of life for many guys who bottled
up their feelings and drank too much, couldn't hold jobs, couldn't keep their
marriages together.''

Government Study Cited

Echoing Mr. Mahedy's comments was a recent Government study of the war's impact
on the lives on Vietnam veterans. The study concluded that they had paid a heavy
social price for their experience. While 70 percent of the veterans went back to
school, relatively few finished. Twenty-four percent of the veterans who saw
heavy combat were later arrested for criminal offenses.

''Most of these guys believed in the American dream,'' said Mr.  Mahedy. ''They
went over to Vietnam and found that they were lied to, betrayed. These vet
centers were the first visible and, in a sense, symbolic move by the Government
to deal with the problems of Vietnam vets. And now, with the Administration
pulling the rug out from under these people, there's a sense of rage and
betrayal.''

Since opening in January 1980, the San Diego center has counseled about 650
people. One veteran walked in and confessed that he was seized with murderous
feelings and wanted to kill. He was taken to a Veterans Administration hospital
and was given psychiatric help.

Others seek help from the three counselors - two from the Veterans'
Administration and one from the Disabled American Veterans - for anguish that
they find difficult to define.

Ridiculed for Vietnam Service

''I was going to San Diego Mesa College and came under a lot of ridicule for
being in Vietnam,'' said Mr. Barrier, a recreation therapist. ''Something
happened to me. The anger in me was uncontrolled. I realized I needed help.''

''I refused to admit the war changed me,'' said Paul Grasso, 32, an infantryman
in 1967-68 with the First Air Cavalry Division in Vietnam. ''I didn't get into
drugs or alcohol. First I just traveled -all through Europe. I couldn't settle
down. I had no focus. It took me 11 years to get a B.A.''

At a recent interview for a job in a bank, Mr. Grasso was told that he was too
old to apply. ''Here are all these guys who avoided the draft, went to college,
went to Canada and they're sailing along,'' he said. ''There's this incredible
pent-up sense of injustice and betrayal I have.''

Once a week, on Tuesday nights, veterans gather informally in the center to sip
coffee and talk to one another - about the link between their experiences in
Vietnam and the personal and professional difficulties they have endured in the
last 10 years.

''It's the one chance we have to relate the past to the present, to talk about
Vietnam and what it means to our lives,'' said Mr.  Grasso, who is now planning
to enter law school. ''It's the one chance to let off steam, and if they close
places like this it'll show that the lack of compassion by those people in
Washington is incredible, just incredible.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photos of veterans Steven DeBreau, Dan Foster and Lou
Barrier

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 4, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS DIGEST;
MONDAY, MAY 4, 1981;
Companies

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 400 words


Europe's auto makers are encouraged by Japan's moves to cut car exports to the
U.S.: They think this will make it easier or their governments to extract
similar concessions from Japan. (Page D1.)

Utilities are rapidly expanding into nonutility ventures to broaden their
earnings base. But diversification raises questions about regulation of the
subsidiaries and whether their earnings should be applied toward lower bills for
utility customers. (D1.)

Pontiac will use its new models in a bid to regain its image as a builder of
high-performance cars for younger buyers. The General Motors unit will stress
ride, handling, styling flair and technical sophistication rather than just
acceleration. (D1.)

Dow Jones is moving toward electronic journalism through a variety of systems.
Its aim is to prepare itself for what it believes will be a new age in the
distribution of information. (D4.)

The Economy

A rise in defense spending will not exacerbate inflation, as did the outlays in
Vietnam, says Murray L. Weidenbaum, the President's chief economic advisor. But
this is disputed by many who view high defense spending and low taxes as
inflationary. (D1.)

The economy continued to improve in April, according to a survey of purchasing
agents. Production, new orders and employment all showed gains. (D1.)

International

Argentina is completing a record harvest of grain that was planted during
Washington's curtailment of shipments to the Soviet Union.  Whether Moscow will
continue to take the bulk of Argentina's grain or return to the United States
market will affect the farmers and economies of both food-exporting countries.
(D1.)

The Asian Development Bank is encouraging ''co-financing'' of member nations'
projects, even if some co-financers, such as the OPEC Fund, threaten its
position. The A.D.B. simply can't meet the demand by itself. (D6.)

Today's Columns

Domestic airlines are attacking subsidized foreign carriers as well as the
mounting restrictions in many overseas nations. They plan to open their battle
against the foreign competition in Washington this week. Washington Watch. (D2.)

Copper futures are again depressed by rising interest rates, at a time when
supply and demand are coming into balance. The surge in the cost of money has
upset trading strategies. Commodities. (D10.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 4, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SPENDING BY MILITARY IS DEFENDED

BYLINE: By EDWARD COWAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1001 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 3


President Reagan's chief economic adviser, Murray L. Weidenbaum, says there is
no reason to expect the planned build-up of military spending in the next
several years to cause a new surge of inflation.

This assertion by the chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, in an
interview earlier last week, is part of what appears to be a widening debate
about the Reagan proposition that Congress can pass a three-year tax cut, vote
for bigger defense appropriations and still be confident that inflation will
slow appreciably in the next few years.

So far, the debate has been couched largely in terms of aggregates such as total
spending, the size of a tax cut and the size of the economy. But a second line
of criticism is also emerging: that any shift of resources from civilian to
military use tends to drive up costs and the general price level. Some Reagan
economists heatedly dispute this view.

The Situation Then and Now

Mr. Weidenbaum, citing his analysis of inflation during the Vietnam War, took
issue with critics who have charged that the Reagan Administration's plans for
more ships, aircraft and other materiel - and for a higher state of military
readiness - are likely to touch off a rerun of the late 1960's, when the current
inflation took root.

Circumstances then and now are markedly different, according to Mr. Weidenbaum.
The military build-up will be slower this time and the defense budget will
account for a smaller fraction of the economy, an economy the White House
assumes will be growing rapidly, he said.

Among the critics have been two economists, Lester Thurow of the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology and Henry Kaufman of Salomon Brothers, the Wall Street
investment banking house. They contend that the Reagan policy, overall, is too
stimulative for an economy already experiencing a persistent 10 percent
inflation.

Two officials of the Carter Administration, W. Bowman Cutter, an economist who
had a senior job at the Office of Management and Budget, and R. James Woolsey, a
lawyer who was Under Secretary of the Navy, have joined the debate. Both agree
with the Congressional budget office that the Reagan Administration has
understated probable future military spending, especially in the fiscal year
1984, the target for balancing the budget.

Comments From Economist

''When you build up procurement fast, you tend to build up a huge backlog of
obligated but unspent funds that actually get spent at times that you can't
predict,'' Mr. Cutter said in an interview.  ''It adds a factor of
uncontrollability to the entire budget.''

Mr. Cutter said Mr. Weidenbaum was right in arguing that fiscal and monetary
policy are more restrained now than during Vietnam. But, he said, ''Where you
could get into trouble is in particular industries.'' For example, he said,
construction of the MX missile system ''could drive up the price of cement -
almost certainly would.''

The proposition that price surges in particular industries will bring about a
rise in the overall level of prices is heatedly rejected by those Administration
economists who take a monetarist view of inflation. ''If you restrain growth of
the money supply and some individual prices go up, other individual prices have
to come down,'' said Lawrence A. Kudlow, chief economist of the Office of
Management and Budget.

This view, that inflation is caused only by excessive expansion of the money
supply, is an overarching principle of Reagan economic policies but is much
debated within the economics profession.

Pattern Over the Years

In an analysis done in mid-April, Mr. Kudlow examined the growth of military
spending and inflation in the years 1962-80. ''Overall, no direct association
was found'' between military spending and two broad measures of inflation, the
Consumer Price Index and the deflator for the gross national product, he
concluded.

Seymour Melman, professor of industrial engineering at Columbia University and a
long-time critic of military spending under several Presidents, argues that the
Reagan military budget would claim the very resources needed for an expansion of
private investment in machines and plants, which is also a Reagan policy goal.

''You cannot do both,'' Mr. Melman said in a telephone interview, ''It is out of
the question.'' This view is diametrically opposed to the White House's
prediction that Reagan supply-side policies would lead to major increases in
labor supply, the quality of work, savings, investment, productivity and the
economy's capacity to product.

Mr. Melman also argues that military procurement is inflationary because it
encourages the use of high-cost production techniques and that such methods
become widespread and entrenched. For example, he said, American producers of
numerically controlled machine tools are stuck with a high-cost technology that
they developed for the Air Force.

Response by Weidenbaum

Mr. Weidenbaum, replying to Mr. Kaufman and Mr. Thurow, made these points:

- The build-up of military spending will lift the total to 6 percent of the
G.N.P. by 1984, still below the 8.9 percent during the Vietnam War. Moreover,
the rise from 1980 will amount to only one percentage point, against a rise of
1.8 points in 1965-67. Mr.  Weidenbaum said these ratios assumed the strong
economic expansion predicted in the Reagan budget.

- In constant dollars, the 1965-67 rise in defense spending was 36 percent. The
rise projected for 1980-84 is the same.

- There is more unused manufacturing capacity and more unemployed labor now than
in 1965-67. That means less risk of bottlenecks that drive up costs. In
aerospace, backlogs of unfilled orders have been dropping.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 5, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SYRIA IS RESISTING PRESSURE TO REMOVE MISSILES IN LEBANON

BYLINE: By JOHN KIFNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1016 words

DATELINE: BEIRUT, Lebanon, May 4


Syria reportedly resisted diplomatic pressure to pull its antiaircraft missiles
out of Lebanon's Bekaa Valley today, seeming to dare a showdown with Israel.

In Jerusalem, the American Ambassador to Israel, Samuel W. Lewis, delivered a
note to Prime Minister Menachem Begin saying that the diplomatic efforts to get
Syria to remove the Soviet-built surfaceto-air missiles had thus far failed. It
asked the Israelis to hold off any military action against the missiles to allow
for more time to win Syrian agreement. Officials there said that Israel was
expected to agree.

Mr. Begin, well-informed sources here said, had earlier delivered an
''ultimatum'' to American and Soviet intermediaries who are seeking to calm the
dispute between Israel and Syria. The ultimatum reportedly said that if the
missiles were not removed by a specified hour, Israel would strike at them
militarily. The time was believed to have been today.

In Washington, Reagan Administration officials said they feared that a situation
was developing in which a military confronation between Israel and Syria was
becoming inevitable. (Page A11.)

Syrian Official Begins Talks

Meanwhile, Foreign Minister Abdel Halim Khaddam of Syria arrived in Beirut to
begin talks with leaders of most of the warring Lebanese factions and government
officials in an effort to end the civil strife in Lebanon, which took some 500
lives last month.

There were various expressions of hope that Mr. Khaddam's talks could lead to a
permanent solution to the crisis in this battered land.

The Syrians moved their missiles in last Tuesday, setting them up openly near a
main highway and allowing photographs to be taken, after Israeli helicopters
shot down two Syrian helicopters involved in fighting against Christian
militiamen.  Israel supports the Lebanese Christian forces.

Officially, Syrian forces are in Lebanon to keep peace between the Christian and
Moslem factions. But the Israelis charge that the Syrians are trying to
annihilate the Christians and annex the country, posing a threat to Israel
itself.

The current round of fighting broke out when Syrian troops attacked the Maronite
Christian militiamen of the Phalangist Party who were building a road to their
positions in the Greek Catholic town of Zahle, which the Maronites had taken
over. The Syrians contended that the Phalangist moves in the Bekaa Valley could
open a strategic corridor to the Israeli-backed militia of Maj. Saad Haddad on
Lebanon's southern border.

Violation of 'Red Line' Charged

In Israel, Shimon Peres, the opposition leader, said that the installation of
the Syrian missiles was a violation of what Israel calls its ''red line,''
beyond which it does not allow Syrian action in southern Lebanon. Israel
frequently attacks Palestinian guerrilla bases in the area.

Revealing for the first time the elements of a supposed understanding about the
red line, Mr. Peres said that the Syrians were not to deploy their ground forces
in a zone north of the Litani River, could not use their air force in Lebanon
and could not bring in antiaircraft missiles.

But the Damascus radio, in a commentary, rejected any notion of a ''red line.''
''This, of course, is part of the conspiracy against the Arab nation in general
and Syria and Lebanon in particular,'' the official radio said.

The broadcast was part of a series of pronouncements from Damascus on the
situation. The Government newspaper Tishrin said today that Syria would not
allow Lebanon to be ''open ground to American imperialists and Zionists for the
partition of Lebanon.''

The talk in Israel was equally uncompromising, with Mr. Begin and others
insisting that the missiles were a threat to Israel's security.

''Syria must stop its creeping annexation of Lebanon and end its attempts to
annihilate the Christians in Lebanon,'' said Yitzhak Shamir, the Israeli Foreign
Minister. Asked about the chances of war, he replied, ''All possibilities must
be taken into account.''

But one diplomat here, close to the international efforts going on behind the
scenes to calm the crisis, said that President Hafez al-Assad of Syria, a
stubborn and frequently wily man, had little to lose and much to gain by
refusing to move the missiles.

Even if Israel attacks the weapons, this diplomat maintained, Mr.  Assad will be
a winner because the other Arab states will be forced to rally to his side, thus
ending his current isolation in the region. Any missiles that may be lost would
presumably be replaced eventually by the Russians.

If Israel should back down, Mr. Assad could gain considerable prestige among the
Arabs.

Talks Begin at Palace

Mr. Khaddam, the Syrian Foreign Minister, arrived at the presidential palace in
the foothills just east of Beirut this afternoon for his attempt to end the
current violence and solve Lebanon's political problems.

One potentially critical sticking point was the Syrians' insistance that the
Maronite Catholics must make a statement renouncing their ties with Israel as
part of any agreement.

Mr. Khaddam began his talks with perhaps the least powerful force in Lebanon -
the Government. His discussions with President Elias Sarkis and Prime Minister
Shafik al-Wazzan went on into the night. He is to begin meeting with other
elements tomorrow, beginning with the Armenian members of Parliament.

''We now have a golden opportunity to resolve the Lebanese crisis and if we
don't capitalize on it, and if certain elements continue to depend on certain
external powers,'' said Marwan Hamadeh, a young member of the six-man
ministerial committee that drew up the working papers for the meeting, ''a
catastrophe will befall us and Lebanon will become another Vietnam.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 5, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. Ship Saves 55 Vietnamese

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 55 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, May 4


A United States Navy vessel reached Hong Kong today with 55 Vietnamese refugees
it rescued from boats in the South China Sea. A government spokesman said that
the U.S.S. Hepburn picked up 33 refugees off Thailand last week and 22 near Hong
Kong yesterday.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 5, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THAI PREMIER IS SLOW TO CONSOLIDATE HIS POSITION AFTER FENDING OFF COUP

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 647 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 4


The month that began with what is now called the ''April fool's coup'' has
elapsed, and the Government of Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanonda has returned to
the state of immobility and internal political bickering that provoked the
attempted coup, according to Thais and Asian and Western diplomats.

To the surprise of Western diplomats, General Prem has failed to make political
capital of the fact that he upset well-established precedent in Thailand by
standing firm and facing down the plotters.  What is more, the Prime Minister
rebuffed the attempt with the extraordinary and active support of the royal
palace and without bloodshed.

But other than occasional items in the press announcing the transfer of officers
of medium rank to less active assignments, as well as reports on the continued
detention of a dozen or so of the principal plotters, little news related to the
uprising is being heard.

A Western ambassador with close contacts in the Prem Cabinet reported that
ministers believed special efforts were being made in Cabinet meetings to make
no allusion to the coup. As far as official Government pronouncements go, the
nearly successful putsch might never have happened.

Soldiers Were Taken From Border

Thai and diplomatic sources reported that a major purge was under way in the
military, particularly in the First Army region, centered on Bangkok and
stretching eastward to the Cambodian border. Colonels commanding combat troops
in this region were the principal leaders of the coup.

Although little is made of it in the press, Thai officers and diplomats of
countries allied with Thailand in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
remain deeply disturbed over the fact that ground forces guarding the tense
frontier with Vietnamese-controlled Cambodia were withdrawn and moved toward
Bangkok by the coup commanders.

The other association members -Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia and the
Philippines - regard Thailand as the pivotal nation in the confrontation with
Vietnam and its backer, the Soviet Union. Their strong diplomatic support of
Thailand's adamant stand against recognition of the Vietnamese-supported regime
in Cambodia is anchored in Thailand's determination to defend its borders.

While General Prem is believed to feel that leniency toward the insurgents is
the best policy, his Government may find it hard to explain why officers who
left border regions undefended should not receive exemplary punishment.

Leader Remains in Hiding

The man considered the mastermind of the coup attempt, Col. Manoon Roobkhachorn,
a regimental tank commander, remains in hiding. His principal associate and most
public figure among the rebel leaders, Col. Prachak Sawangchit, is in detention.
The man who the colonels chose as the nominal coup leader, Gen. Sant Chitpatima,
deputy commander in chief of the army, has found asylum in Burma, and Thailand
has made no attempt to bring about his return for trial.

The most significant new element in the coup, in addition to the fact that it
was resisted, is the fact that King Phumiphol Aduldet and Queen Sirikit
intervened strongly in the coup, casting aside the tradition of this
constitutional monarchy of letting the military and civilian elite of the
kingdom compose and overthrow governments.

The King, and even more firmly the Queen, are said to have called on General
Prem not to accept his overthrow. In an unusual departure from tradition, they
accompanied the Prime Minister to a loyal military base 130 miles from here, and
a message in the Queen's name calling for resistance was broadcast. Crown Prince
Vijaralongkorn was photographed inspecting loyal troops.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 5, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

STRENGTHENING THE ARMY;
by Cecil B. Currey (''Cincinnatus'')

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 907 words

DATELINE: TAMPA, Fla.


Lost wars are redeemed in the lessons that armies learned from them. And cavil
as we will whether or not the Army suffered ''defeat'' in Vietnam, few would
insist that we emerged ''victorious.'' What is the situation in the Army today?
Has it banished the problems that plagued it in Vietnam? Has it become a more
effective fighting force? Are its leaders less concerned with managing a
bureaucracy and more interested in functioning as military leaders?

Item: The Rapid Deployment Force continues to be ineffective because of
political and military squabbles over its mission, command structure, and
location. It is unlikely to become a capable fighting forces in the near future.

Item: The latest of a series of Army War College studies on military leadership
contained such dismal findings about the officer corps that it was locked away
upon completion rather than released for study and appraisal.

Item: Gen. E.C. Meyer, the Army chief of staff, speaks of our forces as a
''hollow Army,'' and grades forward-deployed elements at only a B or B+ while
combat-support units get only a C or D. He wants his officer corps to think
about the problems besetting the Army, and has asked its members to engage in
comprehensive study of long-range planning, innovative tactics, and strategy.
The corps should, he believes, offer thoughts for publication so that others may
benefit, and he notes that, unfortunately, most military strategy since the end
of World War II has been conceived by civilians rather than military men.

Item: In 1979, more than 50 percent of the new recruits were drawn from the
lowest mental-ability category acceptable to the Army; in 1980, that figure
dropped to 32 percent; thus far in 1981, it hovers around 25 percent, and some
75 percent of the recent enlistees are high school graduates.

Item: The Army plans to extend basic training from seven to eight weeks (it was
13 weeks during World War II). The program of instruction will be increased from
308 to 405 hours and will include more physical conditioning, communications
training, map reading, and succesful completion of an obstacle course.

Item: The Army is moving to reduce personnel turbulence. Plans are to recruit
companies that will receive basic training together and, for the first three
years of service, be deployed as units in an attempt to build cohesion and
esprit de corps. Likewise, command tours for officers have been increased to 30
months (plus or minus six months) as the Army has belatedly realized that
fighting units have had no chance to develop cohesion under policies of rapid
command rotation.

Much still remains to be done.  Despite calls for reimposition of the draft, it
is unnecessary if the Army makes service more attractive. More-honest
recruiting, with those assigned that duty rewarded for the staying power of
those they enlist rather than for their number, would be an improvement. Better
use of soldier talents would raise morale of those who feel bored and
dissatisfied. Olympian efforts must be mounted to reduce still further
unnecessary turbulence caused by constant changes of duty station.
More-challenging basic training is needed. Bonuses, educational opportunities,
and pay raises must be retained and expanded.

The Army must be willing to use reserve component forces in case of conflict: 58
percent of the field artillery, 65 percent of the combat-engineer battalions, 52
percent of the infantry and armor battalions, 45 percent of the aviation forces,
and 65 percent of the tactical support units are maintained in the Army Reserve
and National Guard. Despite regularly publicized warnings about low manpower
strengths in the reserve components, more-rigorous and dedicated recruiting can
work. The National Guard of six states, for example, is at present over 100
percent strength. What six can achieve, others can emulate.

Part of the strength problem in the volunteer Army can be corrected by
addressing the ratio of support troops and combat troops. In 1968, when we had
543,000 troops in Vietnam, only some 80,000 were combat soldiers. The rest
served in supply and service functions. By contrast, recent figures indicate
that the Soviet Union allots only some 580 men as support troops for every 1,000
combat troops.

A large-scale effort is needed to assemble, to study, to extrapolate from, and
to codify the real lessons of Vietnam, and earlier conflicts as well.

The Army must continue to move away from the Vietnam-era concept of officers as
''war managers'' more interested in systems analysis, cost effectiveness, and
bureaucratic manipulations than in becoming good leaders of troops. Armies must
be led, not managed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Cecil B. Currey, using the pseudonym ''Cincinnatus'' (after the Roman general
Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus) wrote ''Self-Destruction: The Disintegration and
Decay of the United States Army During the Vietnam Era.'' He is professor of
American military history at the University of South Florida and a chaplain in
the Army Reserve.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 5, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TV: MOVIE ABOUT ABANDONED CHILDREN ON CBS

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 792 words


TONIGHT at 9 o'clock on CBS-TV, still another movie opens with the tired gimmick
of a distant car approaching the camera along a rural highway.
Country-and-western music can be heard on the car radio.  Then a news report
says something about President Johnson and Vietnam, and the viewer knows that
the time must be somewhere in the mid-1960's. The viewer also might guess that
imagination will be at a premium for the next two hours. As far as ''Broken
Promise'' is concerned, it is.

The social problem being mined this time is abandoned children.  Squeezed
together in that car are five children, ranging in age from 12 to 3; a worried
mother and a nervous father who has just spent eight years in prison. Not happy
with the bothersome kids, especially the two who aren't even his, the husband
convinces the wife that they will be better off alone in their new life in
California. Sending the youngsters to buy hamburgers at a roadside diner, the
miserable couple simply ride off without them. Patty, the oldest, simply
announces to the others, ''We've been dumped.''

Patty has long been playing the role of mother anyway to her brothers and
sisters. There have been other, temporary separations.  This time, though, she
is determined that the family will not be broken up by government agencies
responsible for adoption programs.  She and the other children head into the
woods. When a frightened resident calls the police about poachers, they are
discovered and appear headed for the dreaded separation.

Enter Bud Griggs, the sincere, kind, sensitive county director of Juvenile Court
Services. Bud is impressed with Patty's battle to hold the family together.
Promising to help, he wears down her automatic resistance to authority. He has
underestimated, however, the opposition of the county welfare department, the
head of which becomes the nasty villain of the piece for reasons that are
somewhat less than convincing. The saga of Patty goes through numerous twists
and turns before grinding to a halt on Christmas Eve.

As Patty, Melissa Michaelson, who played opposite O.J. Simpson in ''Goldie and
the Boxer,'' drops many of her cute mannerisms for a tough, gritty performance.
Her presence and manner suggest a young Rachel Roberts. Chris Sarandon,
grappling with the role of Bud, really has little more to do than look terribly
concerned. Stephen Kandel's script hews closely to superficialities, buttressed
occasionally by a statistic. It's estimated, for example, that 7,000 children
are abandoned in the United States every year. More on the upbeat side, the film
notes that a national network of centers has now been designed to keep brothers
and sisters together.

A new series, ''Other Visions, Other Voices,'' gets under way tonight at 8
o'clock on WNYC-TV. Produced by the Global Village in association with the
station and the Synapse Video Center in Syracuse, four weekly programs will
present the works of producers based in New York. The project was started with a
grant from the State Council on the Arts.

The featured work this evening is ''Einstein's Children: Five Portraits About
Living in the Nuclear Age.'' Judy Graf Klein and June Manton have compiled an
album of attitudes toward the existence of nuclear technology and weapons. The
first family, living close to a nuclear-power plant, is not convinced of the
dangers that some critics talk about. Two young members of the Hare Krishna
movement defer to their spiritual masters, believing that ''anything can be used
for Krishna, even nuclear energy.''

A woman working for a nuclear plant being built in New Hampshire articulately
makes the case that ''we wouldn't be able to support a world of four billion
people without technology.'' Young people tired of working for assorted past
causes have reverted to the total escape of roller skating. And a mother whose
daughter contracted leukemia at age 19 is suing the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission to shut down all nuclear-power plants.

This is a measured, intelligent video portrait, zeroing in on the people behind
the rhetoric that surrounds some highly emotional questions. The producers had
the assistance of Julie Gustafson, director of the Global Village.

This collaboration is one of the more significant aspects of the series. Few
opportunities exist for a seasoned video group such as the Global Village to
work with other producers in developing works for broadcast. ''Einstein's
Children'' indicates the effort is worth making.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Chris Sarandon and Melissa Michaelson

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 6, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

IMMIGRANTS REVITALIZE CITY, BUT STRAIN ITS RESOURCES

BYLINE: By MICHAEL GOODWIN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2101 words


Immigrants are coming to New York City from virtually every country, territory
and island on the globe, creating a city more diverse in race, language and
ethnicity than it was at the turn of the century when immigrants from Europe
poured through Ellis Island.

The new influx, ranging from Europeans to Orientals and including Indians, South
Americans and natives of the Caribbean, has brought vitality and a new
entrepreneurial spirit to the streets of New York and new strength to its
neighborhoods. But the surge of immigrants has also put a strain on the city,
particularly its educational, health and police services.

The 800,000 aliens who registered in New York State last year listed 164
different countries and dependencies as their places of birth, the Federal
Immigration and Naturalization Service reported.  While the Immigration Service
does not keep separate statistics for New York City, other estimates for the
total number of foreign-born people who have come to the city in recent years
range as high as two million.

''Certainly the notion that New York is a melting pot is more true now than ever
before,'' said William F. Hill, regional director of the Bureau of the Census.
''People are coming here from every corner of the globe. Everywhere you go, you
see it. In the streets, on the subways.''

The growing diversity has come about in two basic ways. First, groups that had
almost no presence here - such as the Indochinese, of whom there are now about
5,000 in the city - have gained a foothold in the last 10 years and appear to be
establishing substantial, tightly knit communities.

Second, other groups, such as people of Hispanic descent from numerous
countries, Orientals, Indians and Caribbean blacks, have grown dramatically from
scattered small communities to a point where whole neighborhoods are becoming
ethnic enclaves.

In something of a change from previous patterns of immigration, the new arrivals
have included substantial numbers of rich and highly skilled or educated
immigrants, such as fashionable and privileged Europeans seeking opportunities
for investment and entertainment.

At the same time, many immigrants are impoverished. Among them, for example, are
many Salvadoran and Haitian families fleeing repression and war.

Others have come to New York for the time-honored reason: to make a new start in
the land of opportunity. These include a substantial merchant class, especially
among Koreans, Indians, Greeks and Albanians, many of whom can be found owning
and operating businesses from fruit and vegetable stands and newsstands to
coffee shops and apartment buildings.

While the city profits from the hard work of many immigrants, it also suffers
because of them.  City schools are particularly strained. For example, there are
70,000 students in city schools whose first language is not English.  Most of
these students are being taught in their own languages by 3,500 teachers at a
cost of $48 million a year, $40 million of which comes from the Federal
Government. The city expects to lose some of that money because of budget cuts
by the Reagan Administration.

Growing Backlash Is Seen

And a report issued in the mid-1970's said that 25 percent of those in custody
of the Department of Corrections were of Hispanic descent. Hospital emergency
rooms serve virtually the same function for the poor, many of them immigrants,
that private doctors do for the middle class.

''There is a growing backlash against immigration in this country,'' warned
Auxiliary Bishop Anthony J. Bevilacqua of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn
yesterday at a conference called by Mayor Koch to discuss the problems of
immigrants. He and others asserted that this backlash had led to a reduction in
services to immigrants.

Despite these concerns, however, Joseph Fitzpatrick, a professor of sociology at
Fordham University, echoed a commonly expressed idea that the positive
contribution of the immigrants outweighed the problems they caused. ''Just look
at the intensity and character of street life throughout the city,'' he said.
''It's like an open bazaar everywhere. The tremendous number of people are
providing a new vitality on the streets, which is traditionally characteristic
of immigrant populations.''

An Inexact Accounting

Exactly how many foreign-born people are in the city, either permanently or on
extended stays - attending school, for instance - is the subject of considerable
debate among Federal and city officials and private researchers. It is generally
agreed that many are here illegally. The Census Bureau put the city's 1980
population at slightly more than seven million. However, the city is challenging
the count in court, saying the bureau missed upward of 750,000 people.

And a spokesman for the Immigration Service said it assumed that many legal
aliens ignored the requirement that they register annually. The service also
assumes that illegal aliens do not register.

Nonetheless, even if there were as many as two million foreign-born people now
in the city, the total still would not rival the records set near the turn of
the century, when millions of Irish, Italians, Germans and Poles passed through
the immigration office at Ellis Island.

From 1901 through 1910, for example, more than seven million immigrants entered
New York through Ellis Island. In 1907 alone, more than one million came.

Differences Within Groups

Those who have worked with immigrant groups say that outsiders tend to
categorize the groups along broad racial and ethnic lines, but that there are
often great differences within those groups.

Mr. Fitzpatrick, who has extensively studied Hispanic culture and influence in
the Eastern United States, said: ''To outsiders, all Hispanics may appear the
same. But within the Hispanic community, there are great differences among the
groups.''

He and others cited the city's Hispanic population, which the Census Bureau has
put at about 1.4 million, as perhaps the clearest example of the growing
diversity in the city. A decade or so ago, virtually all city residents of
Hispanic descent were Puerto Ricans.  Now, greatly increasing numbers are
arriving from abroad, especially from Santo Domingo, Colombia, Ecuador and Cuba.

At the same time, some observers believe that more Puerto Ricans are leaving the
mainland than are arriving, and that they number about 900,000, as they did in
1970.

Thus, if there are at least 1.4 million people of Hispanic origin in the city,
the official increase of 500,000 in the last 10 years has come from groups other
than Puerto Rican.

Dominicans Becoming Dominant

''There are about 12,000 to 15,000 Dominicans coming here legally each year
alone,'' said Douglas Gurak, a researcher at the Hispanic Research Center at
Fordham University. He said there were 300,000 Dominicans in the city, ''give or
take 100,000.''

It is widely believed that many Dominicans are here illegally. Jim Sleeper, an
aide to Carol Bellamy, the City Council president, said that Dominicans had
replaced Puerto Ricans as the dominant Hispanic group in some areas, including
the south Williamsburg section of Brooklyn. Nearly half of the Dominicans there,
he said, are in the United States illegally.

The situation is similar among the city's Chinese population. In the past, most
Chinese immigrants came primarily from Canton, but many of those rapidly
swelling the New York community - estimated to include 100,000 who were born
outside the United States - now come from Taiwan and Hong Kong. In addition,
Charles Wang of the Chinatown Planning Council said, ''In the last year and a
half, since the U.S.  and China resumed diplomatic relations, we've been getting
a lot of people from the mainland.''

A More Difficult Adjustment

Before that, several thousand ''boat people,'' ethnic Chinese expelled from
Vietnam, came to New York. In addition to language, culture and finances, they
had the added burdens of the ordeal they endured. This, along with the fact that
they were immigrants for a second time, has made their adjustment much more
difficult than most, according to Paul Martin, director of the Indochinese
resettlement program at the Catholic Charities.

''Some had relatives from China living here, and they reverted to the Chinese
spelling of their names,'' Mr. Martin said. ''But they didn't exactly fit in
with either the Vietnamese or the Chinese community.''

James Haggerty, an official with the United States Catholic Conference, said he
was amazed at the constant variety of immigrants he dealt with.

'The List Goes On'

''Recently we've been getting a lot of Egyptians,'' Mr. Haggerty said. ''We've
had about 4,000 Salvadorans register with us in recent months. And we've had
refugees from Afghanistan, Ethiopia, Uganda, Poland, Hungary, Chile, Guatemala.
The list goes on.''

One result of the increasing diversity of points of immigration is that there
are many groups with communities roughly similar in size, at least by official

The Immigration Service estimates that New York State at present contains 81,000
Dominicans, 59,000 Italians, 44,000 from the United Kingdom, 40,000 Jamaicans,
30,000 Chinese. Scores of other groups are thought to range from 5,000 to
20,000. But city officials are also skeptical about the accuracy of any numbers.

''You have the problem of how many are here legally and how many are here
illegally,'' said Evelyn Mann, director of the the city's office of population
research and the city's census coordinator. ''It would be futile to try to
attempt to quantify any group too accurately.''

The Census Bureau, which asks for country of birth, has not yet compiled its
1980 answers to that question.

Visible Changes in City

The obvious evidence of the city's changing character includes a proliferation
of Indian restaurants on the Lower East Side, the takeover of large segments of
Brooklyn by immigrants from numerous islands in the West Indies, and the brisk
business many newsstands are doing in Spanish-language and African publications.
Many Israelis, estimated four years ago to number 150,000 in the metropolitan
region, have taken to driving taxicabs.

Also, New York, apparently cured of its most serious fiscal ills, has become
more than ever a mecca for international business. There are about 150
foreign-owned banks in the city and trendy Italian and French boutiques
increasingly dot midtown streets.

There are less visible effects as well.  ''A sub-marginal garment industry has
sprung up'' using undocumented immigrants, according to Victor Gotbaum,
executive director of District Council 37 of the American Federation of State,
County and Municipal Employees. ''Nobody has ever made a serious study of what
these immigrants have meant to marginal and service industries,'' he said.

Last month, an investigation by the United States Department of Labor found that
many sweatshops were operating in Chinatown and that some employed children as
young as 10 years old, in violation of labor laws.

Crime Also Affected

That many immigrants are involved in crime, either as victims or those who
commit crime, comes as no surprise to many sociologists.  Dr. Marvin Wolfgang, a
professor of sociology and law at the University of Pennsylvania, said that the
city's growing mix could mean even higher crime rates. He said the fact that
many immigrants are poor could be an obvious contributor to crime, especially
with the cost of essentials such as food and shelter being so high.

Also, Dr. Wolfgang said, the diversity could make it difficult for ethnic groups
to establish tightly knit neighborhoods that are essential havens of support for
those having troubles with language, culture and money.

''As you increase the diversity in small spaces, the informal social networks
begin to break down and disappear,'' Dr. Wolfgang said. ''When that happens,
relationships break down and alienation sets in. Then the crime rates will be
higher.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: 2 photos of immigrants (Page B4) 3 photos of immigrants

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 6, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE WHO SUPPORTS HANOI ANGERS REFUGEES

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 618 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass., May 5


When Ngo Vinh Long emerged on the evening of April 23 from a heated panel
discussion at Harvard University on conditions in Vietnam, a gasoline bomb
hurled from across the street narrowly missed him and shattered on the
windshield of a car.

It did not explode, but it slightly injured two policemen who had been called to
escort Mr. Long from a lecture hall filled with angry Vietnamese refugees. The
police charged a 28-year-old Vietnamese with assault and battery with a
dangerous weapon.

Generally supportive statements about Vietnam's Government by Mr.  Long, who has
a Ph.D. from Harvard and identifies himself as an ''independent scholar,'' have
angered many refugees.

In articles and lectures, Mr. Long, who is completing a book about Vietnam for
Random House, has advocated a more conciliatory American attitude toward
Vietnam. He said that at Harvard, ''I said the U.S.  should not push the
Vietnamese so hard by aiding China and Pol Pot,'' the Cambodian leader who was
ousted when invading Vietnamese forces installed the Heng Samrin Government in
January 1979. He said, ''I think the Vietnamese would be willing to talk and
have peace in the region.''

Similar comments, some of which scholars and Vietnamese in this country call
inaccurate, have provoked other angry responses. In November 1978, several of
Mr. Long's colleagues whisked him out of a meeting of the Association for Asian
Studies at Georgetown University when refugees heckled and threatened him.

Two months ago, Vietnamese interrupted a lecture by Mr. Long at the University
of Michigan. And on April 9, the Harvard police were called to escort Mr. Long
from a slide presentation he was giving on a seven-month trip to Vietnam.

''These are organized efforts,'' Mr. Long charged yesterday.  ''People want me
to shut up so that they can tell lies.'' The most heated confrontation was at
the April 23 discussion. The other members of the panel were highly critical of
Vietnam's Government and had suggested Mr. Long as an articulate spokesman for
the opposing view.

About 90 Vietnamese refugees attended after having been notified of the event in
a letter that circulated among refugees. The letter said Mr. Long was an agent
of the Hanoi Government. Mr. Long has denied this.

Hue-Tam Tai, an assistant professor of Chinese-Vietnamese history at Harvard and
a member of the panel, said that Mr. Long ''made the general statement that
refugee accounts should not be taken seriously because they are very biased.''
He added, ''It was clear that many of the refugees were very angry at Long.''

The anger increased when Mr. Long said Vietnam's ''re-education camps'' held
primarily criminals, agents of the former South Vietnamese Government or former
officers in the South Vietnamese Army. Several refugees said they had been held
in the camps and fit none of those categories.

''I told them that my father died in a re-education camp last year,'' Professor
Tai said, recalling her response that evening. ''He was slowly murdered by
starvation because he advocated the observance of human rights in Vietnam.''

Dang Phan of Boston's Vietnamese Refugee Association and Stephen B. Young, a
research associate at Harvard Law School and a member of the panel, said the man
charged with throwing the gasoline bomb had also been tortured in such a camp
and had escaped the day he was to be executed.

Although most Vietnamese in Boston who were asked said they deplored the attack
on Mr. Long, they said protests would continue at his lectures.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 6, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

U.C.L.A. Researchers Given Pact For V.A. Study of Agent Orange

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 128 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 5


The Veterans Administration today opened a multimillion-dollar study to
determine whether Vietnam veterans were harmed by Agent Orange defoliant.

Dr. Matthew Kinnard of the V.A. told a quarterly meeting of the agency's
Advisory Committee on Health-Related Effects of Herbicides that a University of
California-Los Angeles research team had been awarded $114,288 to design the
long-awaited study.

Congress ordered the study so it could evaluate the complaints of Vietnam
veterans that they fathered stillborn or deformed children as a result of their
combat exposure to the defoliant. Some veterans have also complained of mental
and physical impairments as a result of contact with the plant-killing chemical
combination.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 6, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1179 words


Labor storms blight Bermuda's season A2
India decides not to buy wheat from abroad A5
Excerpts from communique of NATO foreign ministers A7
Around the World A8
Suzuki told submarine didn't realize Japanese ship sank A9
Weinberger explains new strategy for U.S. conventional forces A10
Giscard and Mitterrand meet in crucial debate A10
U.N aide clears accused agency of impropriety A12
Sadat plans to continue state subsidies on food for poor A13
On Third Avenue, 1,500 protest Sands' death A15
Berliners fear that Sunday's voting will end in stalemate A17

Government/Politics
San Diego ''workfare'' program maybe preview of Reagan plan A20
Moderate Republicans find pressure is on as budget vote nears A26
No significant changes planned in New York City budget B3

General
Refugees harass Vietnamese who backs Hanoi Government A19
Around the Nation A20
A.T.& T. seeks to allay publishers fears of competition A21
Drought forces water rationing in Florida A22
Study shows decline in percentage of U.S. adults who smoke A28
Detective describes interrogation of Crimmins in August B3
New president named for Educational Testing Service B4

Obituaries
Paul Green, Pulitzer Prize-winning playwright D23
Robert McNeill Jr., ex-chief of <

Living Section
Food The varied surprises of Filipino food C1

Wine Talk: Finding the components for a Kir C1

Le croissant goes American C1

The 60-Minute Gourmet C3

From a pot-au-feu, many happy returns C3

How doughnuts won America C4
Living At a Carnegie Hall celebration, the tune is 'Happy Birthday' C1

Metropolitan Diary C2

Kitchen Equipment C2

Personal Health C10

Best Buys C13

Umbrellas: Drenched in history C16

Wholesale butchers end strike, resume talks C20

Arts/Entertainment
City Ballet offers Jerome Robbins's ''In G Major'' C21
The film ''Black and White Like Day and Night'' opens C22
Elizabeth Taylor, ill, still plans to appear in ''Little Foxes'' C23
Papp and Pressman to film ''Pirates of Penzance'' C23
The Philharmonic at Carnegie Hall's 90th birthday C23
The Mercury Ballet presents three revivals C23
The Israel Ballet displays an international accent C23
Opera Ensemble presents Britten's ''Albert Herring'' C27
Pennsylvania Ballet at Brooklyn-Academy of Music C27
''Twelve Years,'' memoir by Joel Agee, reviewed C28

Sports
City University plans review of athletic policies B8
McEnroe and Gerulaitis ousted in Forest Hills tennis B9
Celtics beat Rockets, 98-85, and take 1-0 lead in final B9
Brewers executive fined $50,000 for labor dispute remarks B9
Yanks' Davis modest despite record performance B11
Red Smith on Fernando Valenzuela B11
Mets bow to Giants, 9-7, despite seven runs in 9th B11
Phils score two runs in 9th to beat Dodgers, 8-7 B11

Features/Notes
About New York B3
Notes on People B8
Woman in the News: Carol S.  Greenwald, economist D6

News Analysis
David K. Shipler assesses Israeli posture in Lebanon A3
Drew Middleton assesses French nuclear strategy A16
Michael Quint discusses Federal Reserve policy D7

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A30

''Yes, but'' to Reaganomics Desegregation by carrot The triumph of Billie Jean
If Mrs. Thatcher were Sadat Letters A30
James Reston: the end of the rainbow A31
Russell Baker: the unwelcome wagon A31
Jorge Pinto: in El Salvador, nooseprint A31
Graham Allison and Paul Zig- man: the U.S.-Japan 'pie' A31

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 6, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE VARIED SURPRISES OF FILIPINO FOOD

BYLINE: By CRAIG CLAIBORNE

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 5; Living Desk

LENGTH: 3600 words


THE first time I sampled the cooking of the Philippines was more than 30 years
ago, during World War II. My ship had docked briefly in Manila Harbor, and I
wandered ashore one day and seated myself at a small restaurant with counter
service. I sampled an egg roll called lumpia, which was crackling and crisp on
the ouside and stuffed with an assortment of good things like shrimp, pork and
peanuts.

It was not until I dined recently with Reynaldo Alejandro in his small, compact
apartment dazzlingly cluttered with Philippine books and artifacts, statues of
18th-century saints, shell lights, hanging plants, Indonesian puppets, hanging
butterflies and musical instruments from Mindanao, that I realized that my
conversance with the cooking of Philippines was exceedingly limited.

Mr. Alejandro is a young man of many talents: dancer, choreographer, the author
of numerous articles on the dances of his country and a book titled ''Philippine
Dance'' (Vera-Reyes Inc., Manila 1978) with an introduction by Margot Fonteyn.

He is also an excellent and dedicated cook. I had been invited to join him at a
feast on the premise that I had written numerous articles on Asian cooking -
Vietnamese, Thai and Indian - but had largely ignored that of his native land.
As he went about the making of a veritable regale of tasty Philippine dishes -
food with names such as apritadang manok, abodong karne sa gata and pinakbet -
he conceded that more countries had fashioned the cooking of his native land
than you would have found in ancient Macedonia.

''The ties have mostly been Western,'' he explained. ''There were more than 300
years of the Spanish or Iberian influence, and then we were showered with more
than half a century of American and Japanese imprints. But basically our food
was Malayan with a strong Chinese influence.''

Mr. Alejandro poured a couple of piping hot cups of gin-ger ''tea'' called
salabat, a wonderfully restorative beverage made simply with fresh ginger root,
water and brown sugar.

''Most Americans, if they think of Philippine cooking,'' ''think as you do of
egg rolls or lumpia, and I will make these for you Shanghai-style, although I
put raisins in my filling.

''Egg rolls or spring rolls, of course, represent the Chinese influence. It is
not our national dish, however. That is adobo, which is also the most popular
dish. You'll find it all over the country in one form or another.''

Adobo, he said, is a generic term for foods cooked in vinegar and garlic and soy
sauce. ''Basically, it is a stew of pork and/or chicken or beef cooked in those
flavors,'' Mr. Alejandro said.

''There are countless dishes that are easy to detect because of their Spanish
origin, foods like cocido, a boiled stew of meats and vegetables, and leche flan
or caramel custard.''

He grinned and said, ''Today's meal is like a turo-turo. In our street festivals
in each city, you'll always come across food stalls where passers-by can sample
a variety of foods turo-turo style. The words mean 'point out your dish.' ''

Mr. Alejandro removed the plastic wrap from a dish called bistek, a blend of
thinly sliced sirloin that had been marinated in soy sauce, lemon juice and
sugar. This was obviously named after ''beef steak'' and seemed to be a blend of
American and Oriental cultures.

''You won't be surprised,'' he said, ''at the vast impression that America has
had on our culture where food is concerned. The most common are salads and pies,
hamburgers and fried chicken.

He laughed. ''Do you know that in the Philippines we have a version of
ratatouille? The vegetables are different than those you find in France,
however. At home we use eggplant, tomatoes, garlic and onion. But we also add
bittermelon, okra and lima beans.'' He brought forth his version, which had been
simmering on a back burner. It smacked lightly of fish and was excellent.

''That flavor,'' he declared, ''comes from two of our staple seasonings, bagoong
and patis. There are dozens of sources in Manhattan, incidentally, where you can
find Philippine produce, on Ninth Avenue and in Chinatown and the Village.
Bagoong is a pungent sauce made from tiny fermented shrimp or fish in brine. A
similar shrimp paste is used a lot in Chinese cookery.''

Patis, he noted, is known to most Americans in its Vietnamese or Thai versions.
The Philippine version is a very salty thin liquid fish or shrimp sauce. In
Vietnam it is called nuoc mam and in Thailand it is known as nam pla.

Before he offered an assortment of fresh fruits for dessert, those who were
gathered for Mr. Alejandro's turo-turo had sampled egg rolls, Cantonese-inspired
noodles with chicken and pork, braised chicken in tomato sauce, a delectable
bowl of shrimp cooked in sour broth, the bistek, which had been cooked with its
marinade in a skillet, and a beef stew in coconut milk.

''The Philippines,'' the young host continued, ''is the crossroad of Asia and
our cooking is a potpourri of various cultural influences. When you dine in a
Philippine home, you will sample what has tempted the palates and whetted the
appetites of almost all of Asia.''

Interestingly enough, Mr. Alejandro said he had never cooked a day in his life
until he came to America. ''In my home, males never cooked,'' he said, ''but I
spent a lot of time watching my grandma and the maids cook. I was raised by my
grandmother and when I moved here, she kept me supplied with the recipes of my
childhood.''

His reputation today as a cook is such that when he went to China in 1966 as a
member of an All-China Youth Association, he was chosen to prepare his native
adobo for all the young people in his group.

Before that dinner in his apartment, Mr. Alejandro, the soul of hospitality, had
explained that when a Philippine has guests at his home, the food must be
prepared in abundance. As those of us who had been gathered for this turo-turo
started to take our leave, there was a knock on the door. A few more guests had
arrived, this time for the second sitting.

Sinigang Na Hipon (Shrimp cooked in sour broth)

6 cups rice water (see note) 1/2 cup lemon juice 1 cup finely chopped onion 3
cups diced, ripe tomatoes 2 cups daikon (Japanese white radish), peeled and cut
into half-inch-thick rounds or use 15 small red radishes cut into thin slices

1 pound unpeeled small shrimp, preferably fresh with heads 2 long, fresh hot
green peppers 1 or 2 bunches of well-trimmed watercress, about 3/4 pound 3
tablespoons Philippine fish sauce (patis) (see note).

1. Combine the rice water, lemon juice, onion and tomatoes in a saucepan and
bring to a boil. Let simmer 20 minutes.  2. Add the daikon and shrimp and bring
to a boil. Let simmer until the daikon is tender yet crisp. Add the hot peppers,
watercress and fish sauce. Simmer three minutes longer.

Yield: 4 servings.  Note: Since rice is almost invariably served with Filipino
foods, simply soak the rice to be cooked in cold water and drain, reserving the
water for cooking.

Patis, the fish sauce, is available where Oriental foods are sold.

Apritadang Manok (Braised chicken in tomato sauce)

2 tablespoons peanut, vegetable or corn oil 4 cloves garlic, crushed 1 cup
finely chopped onion 1 chicken, 2 1/2 to 3 pounds, cut into serving pieces Salt
to taste 1 cup fresh or canned tomato sauce 2 bay leaves 1/2 tablespoon freshly
ground pepper 1/2 teaspoon oregano 1/2 cup stuffed Spanish olives 1/2 cup plus 3
tablespoons water 2 cups potatoes peeled and cut into 1 1/2-inch cubes 1
tablespoon Philippine fish sauce (see note) or salt to taste 2 tablespoons
cornstarch 1 cup fresh or frozen sweet peas 1 sweet green pepper, cored and cut
into half-inch strips 1 sweet red pepper, cored and cut into halfinch strips.

1. Heat the oil in a casserole and add the garlic. Cook until browned. Add the
onion and brown lightly. Add the chicken and salt to taste. Cook, stirring
often, about 15 minutes.

2. Add the tomato sauce, bay leaf, ground pepper, oregano, olives and one-half
cup water. Cover and simmer about 10 minutes. Stir occasionally.

3. Add the potatoes and fish sauce. Blend the cornstarch with remaining water
and stir it in. Simmer 10 minutes. Add the peas, sweet red and green pepper
strips. Cook 10 minutes longer.

Yield: Four servings.  Note: Vietnamese nuoc nam or Thai nam pla may be
substituted.

Bistek (Steak marinated in soy sauce)

2 pounds sirloin of beef, cut into slices 1/4 inch or less 2 tablespoons lemon
juice 3 tablespoons soy sauce 1/2 tablespoon freshly ground pepper 1 tablespoon
sugar Salt to taste 1/4 cup peanut, vegetable or corn oil 1 cup thinly sliced
onion rings 1/2 cup water.

1. Put the meat in a bowl and add the lemon juice, soy sauce, pepper, sugar and
salt. Let stand two hours or longer.  2. Heat the oil in a small skillet and add
the onion rings. Cook until lightly browned. Using a slotted spoon, transfer the
onion rings to a serving dish. Leave the oil in the skillet.

3. Drain the meat but reserve both the meat and the marinade.  4. Add the meat
to the skillet and cook over high heat, stirring often, until nicely browned.
Transfer the meat to the onions.  5. Add reserved marinade and water to the
skillet. Let simmer about five minutes and add meat and onions.  Yield: 4
servings.

Salabat (Fresh ginger tea)

6 half-inch-thick slices fresh, unpeeled ginger root, about 1/4 cup 6 cups cold
water 6 to 8 tablespoons brown sugar.

1. Combine the ginger, water and sugar in a saucepan. Bring to a boil and let
simmer about 10 minutes. Taste the liquid and add more sugar as desired.

2. Strain into hot cups and serve.  Yield: 6 cups.

Pinakbet (Stewed vegetables with meat and shrimp paste)

1 tablespoon peanut, vegetable or corn oil 3 cloves garlic, finely minced 1 1/2
cups finely chopped onion 1/2 pound pork, in one-inch cubes 4 half-inch-thick
slices fresh ginger 2 1/2 cups cubed red, ripe tomatoes 1/2 cup shrimp paste
(see note) 1/4 cup water 3 cups eggplant cut into 2-inch cubes and loosely
packed 2 cups bittermelon cut into 2-inch lengths (see note) 1 10-ounce package
frozen okra 1 10-ounce package frozen lima beans.

1. Heat the oil in a saucepan and add the garlic and onion. Cook briefly,
stirring, and add the pork. Stir. Cover and cook about 20 minutes. Add the
ginger and tomatoes and cook about five minutes, stirring. Add the shrimp paste
and cook about one minute.

2. Add the water, bring to a boil. Simmer until the pork is tender, about 15
minutes or longer.  3. Add the eggplant, bittermelon, okra and lima beans. Stir
to break up the frozen vegetables. Cook about 15 minutes, stirring often from
the bottom to prevent sticking.

Yield: 4 servings.  Note: Shrimp paste, Philippine bagoong, is available in
Oriental markets and wherever Philippine produce is sold. Cut the bittermelon in
half, scrape out the soft center portion and the seeds and cut the halves into
quarters; cut the quarters into two-inch lengths.

Abodong Karne Sa Gata (Beef stewed in coconut milk)

3 pounds chuck steak, cut in 1 1/2-inch cubes 3/4 cup cider vinegar 10 cloves
garlic, peeled and crushed 1/2 cup soy sauce 4 bay leaves 1 1/2 tablespoons
peppercorns 1 tablespoon freshly ground black pepper 1 tablespoon brown sugar
1/4 cup peanut, vegetable or corn oil Salt to taste 1 12-ounce can (1 1/2 cups)
coconut milk (see note).

1. Combine the chuck steak, vinegar, garlic, soy sauce, bay leaves, peppercorns,
ground pepper and sugar in a saucepan. Let stand two hours.

2. Bring the mixture to a boil and simmer about an hour or until the meat is
tender.  3. Drain the mixture, but save meat, garlic and sauce.  4. Heat the oil
in a skillet and add the reserved garlic. Cook until browned. Add the meat and
cook, stirring, until browned on all sides. Add salt to taste and the coconut
milk and the strained sauce and let simmer about five minutes.

Yield: 4 servings.  Note: Canned coconut milk is available from sources where
Oriental foods are sold, including Mabuhay International Corporation, 524 Ninth
Avenue.

Limpiang Shanghai (Philippine egg rolls Shanghai-style)

8 to 10 dried Chinese mushrooms 1/2 pound ground pork 1/2 pound shrimp, shelled,
deveined and chopped 1/2 cup raisins 1/2 cup finely chopped scallions 1/2 cup
finely chopped drained water chestnuts 3 egg yolks, lightly beaten 3 tablespoons
soy sauce 1/2 tablespoon sesame oil 1 tablespoon freshly ground pepper Salt to
taste 20 egg roll wrappers (available in Chinese markets) Beaten egg Peanut,
vegetable or corn oil for deep frying Sweet and sour sauce (see recipe).

1. Soak the mushrooms in warm water to cover 30 minutes or longer.  Drain well
and squeeze to extract most of the excess moisture. Chop the mushrooms and put
them in a bowl.

2. Add the pork, shrimp, raisins, scallions, water chestnuts, egg yolks, soy
sauce, sesame oil, pepper and salt. Blend well.  3. Lay out the egg roll skins
one at a time on a flat surface. Add equal portions of the filling. Fold over
the egg roll skins, envelope fashion, and roll to enclose the filling, sealing
the edges with beaten egg as you work.

4. Heat the oil in a wok or other utensil and fry the egg rolls until golden
brown on all sides and cooked through. Serve with sweet and sour sauce.

Yield: 20 egg rolls.

Agre-Dulce (Sweet and sour sauce)

2 tablespoons cider vinegar 1/2 cup plus 3 tablespoons water 6 tablespoons sugar
Salt to taste 1 tablespoon ketchup 1 tablespoon cornstarch.

1. Combine the vinegar, half a cup of water, sugar, salt and ketchup in a small
saucepan. Bring to a simmer.2. Blend the cornstarch with the remaining water and
stir it into the sauce.  3. Cook until thickened.  Yield: About 3/4 cup.

Pancit Canton (Sauteed Philippine noodles Cantonese-style)

1/2 pound pork cut in one-inch cubes 1 chicken breast, 3/4 pound 4 cups water
Salt to taste 1/4 cup peanut, vegetable or corn oil 1 1/2 tablespoons finely
minced garlic 1/2 cup finely chopped onion 1/2 pound small shrimp, shelled but
with last tail segment intact, deveined 1/2 cup diced Chinese sausages,
available in Chinese markets 1/2 tablespoon freshly ground pepper 1 tablespoon
fish sauce (patis) 2 cups trimmed snowpeas 2 cups loosely packed, thinly sliced
cabbage 2 cups cauliflower broken into small flowerettes 1 cup carrot cut into
very fine julienne strips 2 ribs celery, cut into very fine julienne strips 1/4
cup chopped fresh coriander or scallions 2 tablespoons soy sauce 1 tablespoon
sesame oil 3/4 pound (12 ounces) Cantonese egg noodles, available in Chinese
markets.

1. Put the pork and chicken breast in a saucepan and add the water. Add salt to
taste and bring to a boil. Let simmer until tender, about 20 minutes. Set aside.
When cool, drain but reserve the pork, chicken and cooking liquid.

2. Cut the pork into 1/4-inch cubes. Remove the meat from the chicken. Discard
the skin and bones and cut the meat into 1/4-inch cubes.

3. Heat the oil in a wok or skillet and add the garlic and onion.  Cook,
stirring, until wilted. Add the pork and chicken pieces, the shrimp, sausage,
salt, pepper and fish sauce. Cook, stirring occasionally, about five minutes.

4. Add the reserved broth, snowpeas, cabbage, cauliflower, carrot, celery,
coriander, soy sauce and sesame oil. Bring to a boil.  5. Add the noodles and
stir. Cook, stirring the noodles down, until they are tender. Do not overcook.
Season the mixture to taste and serve piping hot in soup bowls.

Yield: 4 to 8 servings.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of food (Page C6) Photo of Reynaldo Alejandro

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 7, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SENATORS SLASH REAGAN'S REQUEST FOR FOREIGN AID BY $949 MILLION

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 507 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 6


The Senate Foreign Relations Committee voted today to reduce President Reagan's
foreign aid budget for fiscal year 1982 by $948.6 million, including $300
million for a contingency fund that the Administration had sought for response
to foreign crises.

The committee, bowing to the Senate's mandate to cut the $6.6 billion foreign
assistance request by $900 million, also reduced by $490.9 million the $1.5
billion that the Administration had sought for low-interest loans to countries
that purchase American arms.

Instead, the committee allocated the $490.9 million to guarantees for military
credit sales overseas at prevailing interest rates rather than the 3 percent
loans that would be available under the low-interest, ''direct credit'' program.

The two reductions mean that the committee has rejected in large part budget
initiatives that would have provided the Administration with new discretionary
funds to be spent quickly, without Congressional approval.

A Separate Peace Corps Backed

In a separate action, the committee approved an amendment offered by Senator
Alan Cranston of California, the Democratic whip, to reestablish the Peace Corps
as a separate agency.

The 5-to-0 vote, with the committee's chairman, Senator Charles H.  Percy of
Illinois, voting present, reflected bipartisan concern that the Peace Corps's
reputation and performance might be impaired by the impending Senate
confirmation of Thomas Pauken, a Texas Republican who served in military
intelligence in Vietnam, to head Action, the Federal agency that oversees the
Peace Corps. Present or former intelligence officers are barred by law from
serving as Peace Corps officials.

Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., Democrat of Delaware and a member of the Senate
Budget Committee, raised questions about another of the Administration's
initiatives: a proposal to establish a $342 million weapons fund meant to speed
delivery of weapons purchased by allies.  Noting that the fund was not included
in the Budget Committee's resolution, Mr. Biden warned that the fund would
therefore be easy prey on the Senate floor..

The committee also voted to lift restrictions that tie aid to Nicaragua to
certification by the President that Nicaragua is not aiding leftist insurgents
in neighboring countries, that it is observing human rights standards, and that
it is maintaining political pluralism. Mr. Percy said that the restrictions were
no longer needed since the Reagan Administration would insist on the same
conditions before seeking aid for Nicaragua.

Despite the cuts, the committee approved several amendments to increase funding
for certain programs. For example, the senators added $10 million for the Peace
Corps, bringing its funding for the next fiscal year to $105 million.

Most of the committee actions today were decided by voice votes or a show of
hands by the few members who attended.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 7, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

STUDENT WINS WAR MEMORIAL CONTEST

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 373 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 6


A Yale University architecture student has won the competition to design a
national memorial to Vietnam War veterans, the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund
announced today.

The design of Maya Ying Lin, a 21-year-old woman from Athens, Ohio, was picked
over those submitted by 1,420 others, many of them noted architects, sculptors
and landscape architects.

Miss Lin's design consists of two elongated reposing walls meeting to form an
open V. The back of the black granite memorial will be level with the ground,
and the front will gradually slope down to a depth of 10 feet where the walls
meet.

''Of all the proposals submitted,'' said the judges, ''this most clearly meets
the spirit and formal requirements of the program. It is contemplative and
reflective. It is superbly harmonious with its site and yet frees the visitors
from the noise and traffic of the surrounding city.''

57,692 Names to Be on Memorial

The names of the 57,692 men and women who died in the war will be inscribed on
the memorial in chronological order, beginning with the first fatality and
ending with the last.

Congress authorized the memorial last year, and it is expected to be finished by
Veterans Day 1982. Officials of the fund, which was formed in 1979, estimate
that it will take $7 million to complete the project on a plot of land adjacent
to Constitution Avenue between the Lincoln Memorial and the Washington Monument.

Miss Lin entered the competition after being assigned the memorial as a project
by a professor, who also entered the contest.  Miss Linn entered Yale in 1977
and is now a senior majoring in architecture. After her graduation this month,
she will serve as an adviser on the project and plans to work for a year before
studying architecture in graduate school.

Of the sloping walls that will appear to recede into the earth at each end, she
said, the names will trace the war from beginning to end, starting at one end
and ending at the other.

''Thus the war's beginning and end meet; the war is 'complete,' coming full
circle,'' she wrote in a statement for the competition.  She will receive
$20,000 for winning the competition.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Maya Ying Lin with her winning design

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 7, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Garwood Charged in Sex Case

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 29, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 54 words

DATELINE: JACKSONVILLE, N.C., May 6


Pfc. Robert R. Garwood, who was convicted of collaborating with the enemy in
Vietnam, has been formally charged with two counts of sexually molesting a
7-year-old girl. The marine was released on $10,000 bond. The trial is scheduled
for Monday. He says he is not guilty.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 7, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

GEN. MELVIN ZAIS, 64, FORMER NATO CHIEF FOR SOUTHEAST EUROPE

BYLINE: By JOSH BARBANEL

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 445 words


Gen. Melvin Zais, a retired combat officer and four-star general who commanded
North Atlantic Treaty Organization forces in Southeast Europe in the 1970's,
died of cancer Tuesday at his home in Beaufort, S.C. He was 64 years old.

General Zais commanded a paratroop battalion in World War II and the 101st
Airborne Division and the 24th Corps in Vietnam. He later served as commander of
the Third Army, based in Georgia. He also held high-level staff assignments,
including that of director of operations in the office of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff. He was the highest ranking military officer to graduate from a university
Reserve Officers Training Corps program.

He was born in Fall River, Mass., on May 8, 1916. He entered the Army in 1937
after graduating from the University of New Hampshire with a bachelor's degree
in political science. He served a year as a second lieutenant and became a
civilian professsor of military tactics at the Tennessee Military Institute in
Sweetwater.

He was recalled to active duty in 1940, serving with the 501st Parachute
Infantry Battalion, the Army's first paratroop battalion.  After attending staff
college, he led the Third Battalion of the 517th Parachute Infantry Regiment
into combat in Italy and France.

Took Charge of Regiment

At the war's end he assumed command of the 517th Regiment, and after teaching at
the Command and General Staff College at Leavenworth, Kan., he became an adviser
to a Turkish brigade and accompanied the unit to Korea.

He held various staff positions at the Pentagon and in West Germany, and was
promoted to brigadier general. He became director of enlisted personnel for the
Army in 1964 and after a tour in Vietnam became director of individual training.

In 1968, after he was promoted to major general, he returned to Vietnam as
commander of the 101st Airborne Division. The next year he became commanding
general of 24th Corps.

After returning to the Pentagon in 1970 as director for operations, he was named
commander of the Third Army. He was promoted to fourstar general in 1973 and
assumed command of Allied Land Forces, Southeastern Europe in Izmir, Turkey. He
retired in 1976.

He is survived by his wife, Peggy Light; two sons, Maj. Mitchell M. Zais and
Lieut. Col. Barrie E. Zais, both of West Point; two stepsons, John Peter Light
of Beaufort, and David Robert Light of Reynoldsville, Ohio, and six
grandchildren.

A memorial service was held yesterday at Parris Island, S.C. Burial will be
tomorrow at Arlington National Cemetery.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 7, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
THURSDAY, MAY 7, 1981

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 933 words


International
A U.S. mission will go to Guatemala next week, according to State Department
officials. They said that a special envoy, retired Gen.  Vernon A. Walters,
would discuss American conditions for restoring military aid to the Guatemalan
Government to combat leftist insurgents. International organizations have
accused Guatemala's security forces of widespread killing of political
dissidents. (Page A1, Columns 1-2.)
El Salvador has rejected mediation in its conflict with leftist guerrillas. The
offer to help the combatants try to reach a political settlement was made by the
Socialist International, the worldwide Social Democratic organization.
(A13:1-3.)
The closing of Libya's mission in Washington and the expulsion of the mission
staff was ordered by the United States because of ''a wide range of Libyan
provocations and misconduct.'' Reagan Administration officials cited alleged
efforts by Libyans to murder opponents of Libya's revolutionary regime and
Libyan activities in Chad, the Sudan and Egypt. (A1:3.)
National
Two liberal budget plans were rejected in the House in lopsided votes that
underscored the liberals' loss of power. Sponsors of the two alternatives
conceded the measures were foredoomed, but insisted on introducing them as
symbolic gestures. The votes were a prelude to the scheduled adoption of a $689
billion budget endorsed by President Reagan. (A1:6.)
Higher interest rates were predicted by Treasury Secretary Donald T.  Regan. He
also said he expected the rates to remain high for ''several months'' and added
that the increases since March had added $2 billion to $5 billion to the deficit
in the fiscal year ending Sept. 30. Mr. Regan termed this year's budget ''a
disaster'' and predicted that the Treasury's overall borrowing needs this year
would total $75 billion to $80 billion. (A1:4-5.)
A military crash killed all 21 persons aboard. The Maryland police said that an
Air Force tracking plane had exploded and plummeted into a field 45 miles west
of Baltimore. The plane was on a training mission. (A20:1.)
A memorial to Vietnam War veterans has been designed by Maya Ying Lin, a
21-year-old Yale University architecture student. The Vietnam Veterans Memorial
Fund announced that her design had been chosen over those submitted by 1,420
others, many of them noted architects, sculptors and landscape architects.
(A20:1-3.)
Advocates of the Voting Rights Act urged Congress to extend the 1965 law for 10
years in its present form. The appeals were made by civil rights and labor
leaders in testimony before a House subcommittee.  The ranking Republican on the
panel challenged all the witnesses, saying they failed to give the Southern
states credit for progress made since 1965. (A24:1-4.)
Frank E. Fitzsimmons died of cancer in a San Diego hospital at the age of 73.
Mr. Fitzsimmons, president of the teamsters' union, had been ill for more than a
year. The former truck driver rose through the ranks of his union as a
quintessential loyalist. (B14:1-3.)
Metropolitan
A harbor collision injured more than 60 passengers aboard a Staten Island
ferryboat. The ferry, carrying 2,340 passengers, and a Norwegian freighter
collided in a heavy fog near the Statue of Liberty in Upper New York Bay. After
separating, the two vessels moved off under their own power. The Coast Guard
said that visibility was about zero. (B1:3.)
A detective quoted Craig S. Crimmins as having admitted that he tried to rape
Helen Hagnes and had later ''killed the lady'' by kicking her off the roof of
the Metropolitan Opera House last summer. The detective, Gennaro Giorgio,
testified at the Manhattan trial of the former stagehand for the murder of the
violinist. (A1:2-4.)
A soldier implicated in the slayings of four black men in the Buffalo area told
Army nurses at Fort Benning, Ga., that he had also killed black men in New York
City, according to law enforcement officials.  They said that Joseph G.
Christopher, an Army private who is white, had given no motive for the New York
City murders, except to say, ''I had to.'' (A1:5-6.)
The new president of Barnard College is Ellen V. Futter, a 31-yearold lawyer who
has been acting president of Barnard for a year. Miss Futter is the youngest
president of a major United States college. (A1:1.)
The Unification Church lost a tax suit in a state appellate court in Manhattan.
The tribunal ruled that the ''primary purpose'' of the church, headed by the
Rev. Sun Myung Moon, was not religious and that it was not entitled to have
three buildings it owns in New York City exempted from city property taxes.
(B1:6.)
A phone rate increase was sought by the New York Telephone Company.  It applied
for a rise of $889 million, or 15 percent, effective next April. The company
said that the average residential bill in the state would rise 8.4 percent and
that the average increase in New York City would be 9.7 percent, to $39.12 a
month. (B1:1.)
Water rationing ended in 40 more towns in New Jersey, bringing the number of
municipalities freed from the state's mandatory controls since mid-April to 96.
Ninety-six other municipalities remain rationed. About 11 inches of rain since
early February, together with the spring runoffs and conservation, have pushed
reservoir levels in North Jersey to 76.5 percent of capacity. (B8:4-6.)

Business Digest, Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 7, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT WASHINGTON;
ECHO OF A PAST WAR PROTEST

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 861 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 6


The Congressman stood on the east steps of the Capitol, bypassed by tourists
yesterday as he insisted that this was the worst of times.

For all their bravado and relentless optimism, politicians really do have
miserable days, and the pending budget vote over a new direction in national
policy was, by his own accounting, the worst moment thus far in Representative
Ronald V. Dellums's 10-year career in the Congress.

''This is a horrible time,'' he said in tight summary. ''No idealism. No more
talk of the disadvantaged. All we talk about are the Soviets and the
taxpayers.''

The California Democrat squinted out from the steps as if searching for a time
remembered.  There was a time, 10 years ago and a day, when mass protesters were
arrested on the very same Capitol steps as Congressman Dellums spoke to them
about military spending and the Vietnam War. Now, as the military budget is
about to grow measurably again with bipartisan fervor, the Congressman finds
himself delivering the same warning against militarism with no basic changes, he
says, except the numbers are verging toward the trillions of dollars and there
are fewer people listening.

''The question is what really has happened in 10 years,'' the Congressman
declared, noting that under either major budget measure before the House, the
President's or the Democrats', military spending will increase by more than 20
percent in a year to the same $226 billion level. ''We've come 180 degrees, and
it is a sad time, a frightening time.''

As he stood speaking on the steps yesterday, comparing data and emphasizing that
the new Administration's plan for the decade would consume more than twice the
military outlays of the 1970's, he had an audience that totaled two reporters, a
few staff people and a small band of lawyers from the American Civil Liberties
Union marking the outcome of the arrests 10 years ago.

Tourists wandered past, eavesdropping for a moment on the group and the tall,
deep-voiced lawmaker speaking so gravely about something.  But there was no
audience to rival the thousand people arrested there in 1971 during the ''May
Day'' protests.

''The checks will soon be in the mail,'' a civil liberties lawyer announced,
explaining that the arrests, later judged by the courts to be an illegal abuse
by Government, had been reversed with awards of $3 million in damage judgments.
The price of free speech would soon be postscripted with individual bonuses of
$1,500 to $4,000, a circumstance that seemed to border on irony as Congressman
Dellums returned to the Capitol steps, wondering where his audience had gone 10
years later.

In political biographies, Mr. Dellums is still described as the Congressman from
Berkeley with the ''explicitly radical stance'' that first attracted attention
and votes in 1970, in Ronald Reagan's mid-years as Governor of California. For
whatever ''radical'' might mean these days after 10 years in the Congress,
however, Mr. Dellums concedes that even the alternative budget position he
favors as a member of the Black Caucus includes over a $20 billion increase in
military spending.

''Reagan is projecting $367 billion by fiscal year '86,'' the Congressman said
to his tiny audience.  ''We're talking something like two and a half trillion
dollars in military spending in 10 years,'' he continued as a group of tourists
headed past into the Capitol clutching cameras and guide books.

''These are astronomical figures,'' he said with an oratorical pause as if the
thousand people 10 years gone were still within hearing. ''When the people grasp
these figures and the implcations, all hell is going to break loose.''

For the moment, the serene spring of a new year and a fresh Administration was
greening and twittering all about him on a fine day for tourists, crisp and
blue, a day that seemed to deny the lone Congressman's thesis and daub the white
buildings of Government with optimism.

He, too, is an optimist, the Congressman insisted, despite his tone of elegy.
''The problems of the world are social, political and economic,'' he declared
from the steps. ''The problems are not military. We are one of 160 nations in
the world.''

The day seemed heady with this one nation, though, as the people peeled out of
tourmobiles and buses and went into the Capitol to stroll through the reputed
corridors of power and sample from the visitors gallery the budget debate in
which military spending is not at all endangered.

''In the long run, the American people will begin to understand,'' Congressman
Dellums contended. ''I've got to believe that. When they finally get the right
information, they act.''

''If I didn't believe that, then I have to pack up and go home,'' said the
Congressman, his remarks bordering to soliloquy as the tourists went by.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 8, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

China Reports Killing 100 Vietnam Soldiers

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 163 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Friday, May 8


China said today that its frontier guards killed more than 100 Vietnamese troops
yesterday after they had attacked a Chinese border commune, laid mines and
looted property.

The official New China News Agency said the guards captured a large quantity of
arms and ammunition from the Vietnamese, including mortars, machine guns and
rocket launchers.

It was one of the most serious border clashes reported since the two countries
fought a monthlong border war in early 1979, when China launched a punitive
invasion after Vietnamese-led forces toppled the Chinese-backed Government in
Cambodia.

The battle, at the Mengdong commune in Yunnan Province, broke out two days after
China lodged a formal protest at the Vietnamese Embassy in Peking, accusing
Hanoi of launching more than 240 ''provocations and intrusions'' this year in
which 60 Chinese had been killed or wounded.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 9, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ANSWERS TO QUIZ

SECTION: Section 2; Page 38, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 356 words


Questions appear on page 14.  1. A contest to design a national memorial to
Vietnam War veterans.  2. That the British Government treat imprisoned members
of the Irish Republican Army as political prisoners.  3. An amendment to the
housing bill that would cause cities with rent control to lose Federal funds for
housing.  4. The 90th anniversary of Carnegie Hall.  5. Cure the Blues and Proud
Appeal.  6. Libya.  7. Cardin enterprises has acquired Maxim's.  8. United
States military aid to El Salvador.  9. The fifth annual Citibank-American Youth
Hostels Five Boro Bike Tour.  10. True. They are optimistic that Japan will
agree to similar pacts with their governments.  11. The Prime Minister of Japan.
12. That the State of Missouri offer college tuition incentives to pupils who
voluntarily switch elementary or secondary schools to advance integregation.

13. A Norwegian freighter and a Staten Island ferry. They collided in Upper New
York Bay in a dense fog.  14. Team owners said he had violated a management
agreement not to talk publicly about the labor negotiations that were under way
with the players.

15. The first has been dispatched to the Middle East. The other is going to
Guatemala.  16. Tightened.  17. The parting of the sea during the Exodus.  18.
Conrail.  19. President of Barnard College.  20. The 190th anniversary of the
short-lived Polish constitution, a symbol of Polish independence.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 10, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONGRESS ACTING TO EXTEND V.A. COUNSELING CENTERS

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 29, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 581 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 9


Terming the Reagan Administration's plan to abolish 91 storefront counseling
centers for Vietnam veterans ''disgraceful'' and ''devastating,'' Congressmen
have quietly moved to restore funds for the outreach program.

A key Congressional panel, the House Veterans' Affairs Committee on Hospital and
Health Care, recently voted, 13 to 0, to extend funds for the centers for three
years. The Republican-controlled Senate Veterans Committee is expected to vote
Wednesday for at least a oneyear extension of the program, according to
Republican members of the panel's staff.

Congressional aides say that a two-year compromise could result when House and
Senate committee members meet in conference this summer.

The factors that have apparently fueled support for the program, over the
objections of the Reagan Administration, are its relatively low cost of $21
million a year and the conclusions of studies indicating that many veterans
still suffer ''Vietnam syndrome,'' or rage, depression, guilt and emotional
numbing, 10 and even 15 years after their return home.

''While insignificant to the President's plans to control the budget, cutting
these programs is devastating to Vietnam veterans,'' said Representative David
E. Bonior, Democrat of Michigan, and one of the leaders of a bipartisan
Congressional group, Vietnam-era Veterans in Congress.

Mr. Bonior, 35 years old, who served as an Air Force enlisted man in the United
States in the Vietnam war, said that he was ''astonished'' to learn that several
''tiny'' Veterans Administration programs for Vietnam veterans, which cost $67
million, were to be eliminated.

Praise for Centers

He praised the services offered at the 91 readjustment counseling centers that
were opened around the country last year after nearly a decade of Congressional
resistance. ''I do not feel that there has been a V.A. program which has done so
much for so many for so little cost,'' he said.

Nearly 55,000 Vietnam veterans have participated in the counseling program,
which offers therapy sessions and vocational and educational guidance. The
centers are operated in cities and are largely staffed by Vietnam veterans
working for the Veterans Administration.

Robert O. Muller, executive director of the Vietnam Veterans of America, said he
was ''delighted'' that Congress seemed to be on the verge of extending the
centers but added that the entire program remained nonetheless ''in great
jeopardy.''

He said the administration had consistently fought the outreach program had
supported the elimination of the storefront program in favor of having
counseling programs in hospitals. Such a move, Mr.  Muller said, would not
appeal to Vietnam veterans.

''Vietnam veterans have been turned off to the established bureaucracy of the
V.A.,'' Mr. Muller said in an interview. ''You need an innovative approach to
reach them.''

$12 Million Diverted

Mr. Muller said that a Senate hearing on April 30 established that a substantial
amount, $12 million of the $30 million appropriated for the storefront centers,
had been diverted to hospitals for ''direct patient care of veterans referred
from the outreach vet centers.'' The amount was confirmed for the senators by
Dr. Turner Camp, an associate medical director of the V.A.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 10, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER: 'THE CAT WALK'

BYLINE: By MEL GUSSOW

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 44, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 578 words


For 15 years, Roger Furman, as founder and artistic director of the New Heritage
Repertory Theater in Harlem, has been stimulating a theatrical community with
plays by himself and other dramatists. It was clear from a recent performance of
Mr. Furman's current effort, ''The Cat Walk,'' a new play by Allison West, that
the New Heritage is conducting a responsive dialogue with its audience.

''The Cat Walk'' is a drama about a fragmenting black family in Youngstown,
Ohio, a family polarized by fear. The father, a stern patriarchal figure, was
terrified by an incident in the steel mill where he worked, and his son, a
returning veteran, was terrorized by the Vietnam War. The themes of the play are
as basic as they are disturbing, but the play is an awkward and obvious piece of
work, telegraphing every predictable turn of the plot.

There are, however, occasional encounters that reveal a playwright's incipient
talent. For example, the son has a vivid memory of his father holding him in
front of an open furnace door in the mill - a hot blast of air striking him in
the face - in order to test his manliness. It is an image that repeatedly
returns; clearly, it has scorched his mind, along with his nightmarish ordeal in
battle.

In his production, Mr. Furman has tried to stress the reality of the situation
even as the play embraces melodrama. Mr. Furman's set design looks lived-in, and
for the most part, his actors treat the scene with familiarity. Sydney Best
plays the father with a perpetual scowl of disapproval on his face. His
neighbors consider the apartment as a place for party - all that is needed to
begin merriment is a bottle of wine in a paper bag - but Mr. Best is unable to
unbend.

When his son, Maurice Carlton, enters, we realize that the paternal coldness has
already had a damaging effect on the family - on the son and also on Mr. Best's
wife, who has fled to New York.  Wearing fatigues and a wary battlefield
expression, Mr. Carlton compares his upbringing to his military service: ''I was
not raised.  I was processed.''

Conflict arises over the father's pregnant mistress, Phyllis Yvonne Stickney,
who, not surprisingly, once was the son's girlfriend. Neglected by the father,
who greets her maternal condition with repugnance, and scorned by the son, Miss
Stickney manages to touch us with her womanly confusion. The heavy-handed
evening ends in an outbreak of domestic violence that unintentionally proves to
be laughable.

The Cast
THE CAT WALK, by Allison West; directed by Roger Furman; set designer, Mr.
Furman; light desinger, Melody Beal; costumes by Edde Moore; illustration by
George Ford. Presented by Roger Furman, in association with the New Heritage
Repertory Theater Inc. At 43 East 125th Street.  Pat
...........................Phyllis Yvonne Stickney Bart
......................................Sydney Best Valerie
.................................Gaye Saunders Mike
.....................................Roger Parris Anthony
...............................Maurice Carlton Inez
......................................Louise Mike

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 10, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Headliners Off With His Headset!

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 309 words


Royalty once had real power, and knavery such as Britain's Prince Charles
suffered from last week would have cost some rascal his life. During his recent
visit to Australia, it was reported, someone bugged the Prince's telephone,
recorded his conversations with his mother, Queen Elizabeth, and his fiancee,
Lady Diana Spencer, and sold transcripts to a journalist. Last week, the Prince
took the only recourse available to modern royalty: a court injunction barring
publication in Britain. But that couldn't stop the editors of the West German
weekly Die Aktuelle, who reportedly obtained and printed several transcripts in
their issue to be distributed today.

Self-Help in Washington

Carol Greenwald may be what people have in mind when they speak of fighting the
system from the inside. Appointed by President Carter last year as the first
president of the National Consumer Cooperative Bank, Mrs. Greenwald thought her
agency was being buried prematurely when the Reagan budget office ''impounded''
60 million of its Congressionally appropriated dollars. So she obtained a check
for that amount from the Treasury and put it into an agency account at a Chicago
bank. Last week the Administration cried ''Thief!'' But Mrs.  Greenwald stood
her ground, saying she would return the money only if Congress itself rescinds
the appropriation.

Monument of Youth

Somehow it was appropriate, involving as it did a war that youth led their
elders, including many of their teachers, to oppose. Maya Ying Lin, a Yale
University architecture student, last week was named the winner of a competition
to design a national memorial to Vietnam War veterans. Miss Lin, a 21-year-old
senior, won over 1,420 other entrants, including many noted architects and
sculptors and one of her professors, who had assigned the memorial design as a
class project.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Prince Charles photo of Carol Greenwald Maya
Ying Lin

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 10, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TOWARDS A NEW DEFENSE STRATEGY

SECTION: Section 6; Page 15, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4767 words


Admiral Stansfield Turner, U.S.N.(Ret) is a former director of the Central
Intelligence Agency. Capt. George Thibault, U.S.N. assisted him in the
preparation of this article. By Stansfield Turner When the coming version of any
weapons system appears to be virtually the ultimate in cost and sophistication,
like our new tanks and aircraft carriers, one can safely assume that the
evolution of that system is well past its peak. The best battleships, for
example, were built during World War II, well after their usefulness had been
eclipsed by the airplane and the submarine.

Since the end of World War II, the United States has designed and trained its
military forces almost exclusively to defend Western Europe. Concentration on
this single threat has produced military equipment that is large and complex. It
is not likely that it could be shifted quickly enough to other vital regions,
such as the Persian Gulf.

When military forces are designed for only one kind of battle, a nation becomes
vulnerable to other kinds of battle. There will be more areas of concern to the
United States in the years ahead than just the Persian Gulf and Europe. If we
want to be ready to play our role in them, we need forces that are strong and
are useful in many different applications.  We should design and build equipment
and train our troops both to satisfy NATO's requirements to sustain combat with
traditional, heavy forces and to have the flexibility, lightness and mobility
that we would need for contingencies elsewhere. We need to rethink our overall
strategy and, capitalizing on the innovative and technological genius of
American industry, we need to shift from building weapons systems that are
useful only in traditional, major continental warfare to systems that will serve
a wider range of needs.

The potential for conflict in the Persian Gulf today is a good example.
President Carter asserted in January 1980 that the United States would protect
its interests in the Persian Gulf with military force if necessary. The Reagan
Administration has confirmed that commitment.

To strengthen our preparedness in the Persian Gulf, we are working to acquire
rights to military bases in the Middle East; we are negotiating with governments
in the region for permission to keep American forces there, and we are trying to
persuade our principal allies to play a role alongside us. These responses to
the problem simply perpetuate the same approach we have followed in Europe for
the last 36 years. But the Persian Gulf is not Europe. In Europe, it is clear
that the threat is from the Warsaw Pact forces positioned across the border
between West Germany and its eastern neighbors. Our allies do not question the
need to have bases for American forces on their soil; nor is there any doubt
that they will be in it with us if a war starts. In the Persian Gulf, however,
we do not know exactly who the enemy may be or where he may attack. Perhaps we
may face a massive Soviet attack to capture Iran's oil fields, or perhaps an
internal rebellion in some key oil-producing area, or perhaps a thrust by one
Arab country into another that would jeopardize our oil supplies.

Acquiring the rights to use and occupy military bases in the Middle East is not
the solution to the problem. First, it would be unwise to mortgage vital
American interests to the political judgment of another nation. We certainly
should not consider intervening anywhere, unless a vital national interest is at
stake. But should that occasion arise, the host country might simply appraise
the situation differently, and not permit us to engage in combat from its soil.
Second, once we do establish some set of bases, the chances are very high that
they will not be well enough placed for the crises that actually arise. To be
operationally useful, bases have to be very close to the area of action. For
combat aircraft, this would be within 300 to 400 miles. For ground combat
forces, it could not be much more than 100 miles if they were to be introduced
in a timely manner. Likely scenarios in the Persian Gulf demonstrate the problem
well, but they are by no means the only scenarios that may concern us.

To begin with, the most demanding need for military force in this region would
be to oppose a direct thrust by the Soviets into Iran. A Soviet conquest of Iran
would change the political complexion of the Persian Gulf overnight. With the
Soviets adjacent to the oil fields of Iraq and Kuwait, they would be only a
short distance from the oil of Saudi Arabia and would be able to command the
north shore of the Strait of Hormuz through which all oil flows out of the gulf.
The free world's energy supply would soon be hostage to the Soviet Union, giving
Moscow a degree of leverage over us attainable in no other way short of all-out
war.

A Soviet attempt at the conquest of Iran could not go unchallenged by the United
States and its allies. After considering all other alternatives to arrest such a
move by the Soviets, we might decide that the stakes were high enough to warrant
the use of force. Our objective in intervening would not be to defeat a full and
sustained Soviet drive to capture all of Iran - that would probably be
impossible on the Soviets' back doorstep - but to seize quickly the southern
oil-producing portion of Iran before the Soviets could establish a viable
military presence there.

We would be gambling that our decisive response and our willingness to confront
the Russians directly would convince them that it would be in their best
interest to stop at some point short of the oil fields. This deterrent, like any
deterrent, might not work. But if our interest there is vital, as we now
consider it to be, we must be prepared to take this kind of action.

There are 700 rugged miles separating the Soviet Union from Iran's oil fields.
To be in position before the Soviets could arrive in strength, we would have to
move into place in just a few days. This would necessitate staging through an
airfield in southern Iran itself, because Oman, Saudi Arabia and Egypt are all
too far away.  Tanks introduced into the nearest airfield in Saudi Arabia, for
instance, would be 400 miles away and would take hopelessly long to get into
action. In short, for this scenario we cannot count on prearranged bases being
close enough; and there is no present possibility of negotiating for base rights
in Iran.

A second situation that might endanger vital American interests would be a
rebellion or a terrorist action that threatened oil supplies. Such a possibility
is not unlikely in Middle Eastern nations that are undergoing rapid cultural and
economic change and are exposed to subversive actions by both Soviet clients in
the area, such as South Yemen, and radical Arab groups, such as the Palestine
Liberation Organization. A rebellion, if not suppressed in its incipient stages,
could get out of hand easily, acquire a momentum of its own and then probably
not be controlled. If we were asked to help, we would have to move in very
quickly to do any good. Since we cannot predict where such a disturbance might
arise, prearranged bases are not likely to be right at hand, or if they are,
they might fall under the control of the revolutionaries and we would have to
fight our way into them.

In a third type of situation, an intraregional war that threatened to disrupt
oil supplies, local bases presumably would be made available to us by the
country we were defending. Still, if better ones were to be had, we might want
to be able to acquire facilities that we had not anticipated or could not have
arranged in advance.  All this is not to say that advance arrangements for bases
to store supplies of fuel, or to refuel transport aircraft, or to prepare forces
for combat, would not be useful. We must recognize, however, that such
arrangements are unlikely to satisfy our key operational combat requirements in
a time of crisis. We are going to have to obtain locally what we require for
operations when we are ready to move, and be prepared to sustain ourselves and
effect any needed buildup in force from at least as far away as Europe. An even
more fundamental consideration regarding the utility of bases is, as mentioned
above, that the Persian Gulf will not be our only area of concern in the years
ahead.

If we look back at the record since World War II, the United States has been
repeatedly surprised at where its vital national interests seemed to be: We
hardly anticipated Korea in 1950. Our inability quickly to move sufficient force
there led to our being pushed back to the edge of the sea before we could
struggle back, many bloody and costly battles later.  After Korea, we never
thought we would place military forces onto the Asian mainland again. Then came
Vietnam. Again, we were slow off the mark, largely because our training,
organization and equipment were tailored to a traditional European war, not an
Asian guerrilla war.  After Vietnam, we virtually eschewed the idea that we had
any vital interests abroad, except in Western Europe. Yet less than seven years
later, President Carter spelled out our vital interests in the Persian Gulf.

If we look ahead, we can see there are numerous dangerous situations in which
our economic or political concerns might lead to a decision that vital national
interests are involved: Thailand is currently threatened at its Cambodian border
by 200,000 troops of the Soviet Union's surrogate, Vietnam.  Pakistan is under
increasing threat and pressure from the Soviet Union as a result of its alleged
support for the Afghan freedom fighters.  Our supply of a number of critical
minerals is today already at risk as tensions mount between the black nations of
Southern Africa and the white Union of South Africa.  Our own economic and
political involvement with the rest of the world has increased, making us more
vulnerable to cartels like the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries and
extortionists like Iran - concerns we were hardly aware of 10 years ago.  In the
future, we may judge some situation in the third world to involve a vital
interest other than essential resources, such as oil. Between 1975 and 1980, the
Soviets intervened in Angola, Ethiopia, Cambodia and Afghanistan. In retrospect,
it might have been in our interest to have attempted to arrest their movements
into those areas.

It is shortsighted to believe that we can predict today any better than we have
in the past where our future vital interests will lie.  Those judgments will
continue to evolve and change. It is precisely for this reason that our military
preparations must be more flexible than fixed bases, such as those in Europe.

Similarly, the concept of prepositioning American forces in the Middle East, as
is currently being discussed, is a knee-jerk reversion to the European strategy.
We could not possibly station enough forces permanently in the area to stand off
a Soviet invasion of Iran, or even a lesser military assault by indigenous
forces.  Certainly it would help to have some American troops in the Middle
East, if we could be sure they would not be held hostage at the moment of need
by a disapproving host country. But we can neither solve our problem this way
nor should we pay a high price to try to do so. (There would be a very high
price throughout the Arab world if we pressured Egypt into permitting us to
station a few troops at bases in Sinai.)

Another approach to the problem, that of relying on our allies to share this
burden, is to be desired but not counted on. We should encourage them to
contribute to a quick-reaction force, especially in its naval elements, because
this would be relatively easy for them to do. Some of our allies, like France,
already have a standing naval presence in the Indian Ocean. It is logical and
has the appeal of internationalizing whatever action might be taken. But there
are severe limitations on what other forces the allies could provide.  Only the
United Kingdom, France, Italy and West Germany have the capability to provide
modest mobile forces and, in the case of West Germany, there is a constitutional
question as to whether German forces can be sent outside the Federal Republic.
And, as with basing rights, there will always be the question of whether our
allies will agree with us that the time has come to use military force.
Coalitions are fine in wartime when there is no question that the interests of
all the allies coincide, but are not often effective in deciding whether or not
to go to war.

If we cannot count on prearranged bases, or on prepositioned forces, or on
prenegotiated support from our allies, what should we do? We should agree on a
new three-part strategy. First, we need a capability to move in quickly and with
force to airfields that are close enough to the action and that may be
endangered by rebellious or hostile forces. Second, we need an immediate
follow-on airlift capability to reinforce that seizure. And, last, we need to be
able to dispatch supporting logistics by sea quickly. We are not now adequately
prepared for any of these tasks. Having tailored our military forces to the
European scenario, we have failed to provide the flexibility and mobility that
are indispensible for an interventionist role in other areas of the world.
However, we can immediately improve each of these capabilities by reorienting in
fundamental ways our approach to the building and training of forces.

For seizing airfields, we can turn either to the Army's airborne forces or
Navy-Marine Corps amphibious forces. For initial intervention in areas remote
from major American bases, it would be risky to count on airborne forces. Their
limitation to a radius of about 500 miles from a jumping-off base would tie us
to the need for a friendly base in the immediate area. The role of airborne
forces is more to reach out in advance of a sizeable, ongoing ground operation,
not to be the spearhead for initiating a seizure, but we still should keep them
in mind and well trained in case circumstances happen to be just right.

Seizure operations - the assault landing by boat and helicopter - are the forte
and the raison d'etre of Navy-Marine Corps amphibious forces. Their equipment is
designed for mobility and surprise and they are trained for the initial seizure
of a limited piece of hostile territory, like an airfield or coastal foothold.
However, they have two key limitations. First, their ability to seize an initial
objective that is more than 50 miles inland is questionable.  Fortunately, most
of the countries of likely concern to us have a coastline. Second, the ships of
an amphibious force are slow. Good intelligence is essential for the timely
dispatch of an amphibious force to a trouble area in time.

Once established ashore, an amphibious spearhead requires rapid reinforcement if
it is to hang onto its toehold. This means rapid follow-on by airlift, not by
the traditional follow-on waves of amphibious shipping. Today, quick seizure by
forward-deployed forces and immediate follow-up by airlift best meets our needs
for rapid response. The Marines should keep their large-scale assault plans
dusted off but they should be truly ready to move fast and travel light.

To be ready for their seizure role in remote areas, the Marines also need to
change the way they deploy forward in peacetime. For years, they have kept about
1,500 to 1,800 troops forward in the Mediterranean and a like number in the
Western Pacific. Such forces are marginal in size by Marine Corps estimates for
any but the most elementary combat mission, such as a raid or a rescue mission.
If it came to securing even a lightly defended airfield, 1,800 troops would more
than have their hands full. A meaningful combat assault in the Mediterranean or
Pacific, then, by these deployed forces would have to await reinforcement from
the United States.

Today, we have shifted those deployed forces one at a time to the Indian Ocean
to be ready for contingencies. In today's unsettled Persian Gulf, it would be
better to deploy them both to the Indian Ocean permanently, doubling the number
readily available. Since meaningful amphibious operations in the Mediterranean
or the Western Pacific would have to await reinforcing forces from the United
States anyway, our readiness for significant amphibious assaults in those areas
would not drop. We would, though, be ready for an assault in the Indian Ocean
area with 3,600 Marines. If 1,800 Marines can't do the job, could 3,600? Without
a specific situation in mind, it is impossible to say. But the Marine Corps has
traditionally held that a Marine amphibious brigade of about that size is the
smallest tactical unit for sustained combat. Certainly, 3,600 would have at
least twice the probability of success of the present 1,800.

For the Marines, a continuous life aboard ship with little opportunity to train
and exercise ashore, as is the case in the Indian Ocean, could lead to their
capability deteriorating. One solution would be a rotation system that took
advantage of the fact that airlift can move troops, but not equipment, very
rapidly. Once deployed, two-thirds of these 3,000 to 4,000 Marines could be
airlifted back to the United States from our island base at Diego Garcia, but
they would leave all of their equipment on board their ships. At intervals of
several months, the one-third left on the ships would rotate with one of the
two-thirds that had gone home.  This rotation scheme would permit regular
training and reduce family separations. It would reduce our response time in an
emergency by only a few days, since the equipment would all remain in the
deployed ships.

Some may assume that the much advertised Rapid Deployment Force is moving us
toward the capability to seize advance airfields. It is hard to know whether it
is or not. The force is simply a headquarters command that would draw upon the
existing forces of all four services if it had to go to war. We can hope that
the force commander is developing his plans along lines similar to those
proposed here.

Another essential capability for seizure of an advance airfield is enough air
power to keep enemy air forces from attacking our amphibious forces and to
attack opposing ground forces. Unless we can count on base rights within 300 to
400 miles, this can come only from aircraft carriers. An enlarged ampibious
capability would certainly require the air support of the two aircraft carriers
that have been in the Indian Ocean area since the hostage crisis. With only 12
carriers in the Navy, and allowing for repairs, overhaul and training,
sustaining two in the Indian Ocean precludes maintaining the Navy's normal
positioning of two in the Mediterranean and two in the Western Pacific at the
same time. Having not enough to go around is the price we are paying for a
policy of procuring a few giant carriers rather than many small ones.

Even more serious, with American naval power built around only 12 aircraft
carriers, we are reluctant to risk them in combat. This was dramatically
demonstrated during last year's hostage-rescue effort.  When air support was
needed well inside the Persian Gulf, the Navy insisted on keeping its carriers
outside - though the potential opposition was only the enfeebled Iranian Air
Force and Navy. The capability to intervene in remote areas requires aircraft
carriers that can be placed in harm's way like all other implements of war.
That will be possible only when carriers are made smaller, simpler and in larger
numbers.

Until such a new fleet comes into being, we can, with imagination, stretch our
present capabilities. The Navy has small flight decks in its amphibious force
and the Marine Corps has vertical take-off (VSTOL) aircraft. By placing VSTOL's
on all of the amphibious ships that can accommodate them, the amphibious ships
that go right up to the area of the attack would carry some of the air power
they need with them. American air power could be increased substantially in
areas like the Persian Gulf where vulnerability may hold aircraft carriers at
long range. In effect, we could develop a plan in which the large carriers in
the rear provide the high-performance aircraft to protect the amphibious
carriers in the forward area which, in turn, provide direct air support to the
troops.Unfortunately it is more difficult to make immediate improvements to
rapid airlift, the second element of an intervention capability. The fundamental
problem is the size and weight of our weapons systems. The new M-1 tank weighs
more than 50 tons. Even our largest transport aircraft will be able to carry
only one for any meaningful distance. The highly sophisticated F-15 fighter
aircraft requires an immense amount of maintenance support to keep it running.
Until we are willing to build light, fast tanks relying more on movement than
mass, and simple aircraft with high-performance weapons relying more on new
technologies than on traditional air combat, the load will not lighten much.

In the meantime, we can at least reduce the flying time needed to transport our
heavy equipment to the scene. The way to do this is to tap our army and air
forces in Europe first in an emergency, in the Persian Gulf, for example, rather
than bringing units from the United States, as is now planned. The traditional
arguments against this are understandable, but the simple fact is that flying
time can be cut by a factor of three because Europe is three times closer to the
Gulf. In addition, our European forces are those in the highest state of
readiness.

Some have predicted that NATO will ''Finlandize'' (accede to Soviet pressure) if
the United States diverts its attention and strength from Europe. There is no
reason why this should happen. Our NATO partners would prefer that we take on
the Persian Gulf responsibility as an addition to our European posture rather
than reducing our forces in Europe. But we cannot increase the numbers of
American forces enough to do that. Consequently, concessions must be made in
NATO to permit adequate United States coverage of the Middle East, which is as
much in Europe's vital interest as it is in ours. We and our allies must also
recognize that the United States is essentially a maritime, not a continental,
power. Thirty years of playing the role of a continental power in Europe have
left us with equipment and a strategy which do not serve us, or them, adequately
in other vital regions like the Persian Gulf.

This brings us to the $64 question. How can we afford ''heavy'' forces to meet
our European responsibilities and ''light'' forces for other contingencies? The
simple answer is that we cannot. The reason is not financial alone. If we
continue to attempt to create one set of forces for the central front in Europe
and another for contingency areas like the Persian Gulf, the 50-ton tanks and
sophisticated aircraft for a traditional big-power war in Europe will dominate
military thinking and budgets, and contingency requirements will simply be
neglected, as they are now. The long-held premise that if we are prepared for a
NATO war, which is the most demanding, we can use those same types of forces to
handle less demanding contingencies is wrong. Vietnam illustrated that. The
Persian Gulf offers similar problems.

What we need is dual-capable equipments. They may seem less effective for
Europe, but most of the changes to satisfy contingency needs would incorporate
advantages of new technology that are neglected today on even our newest NATO
forces. Those technologies permit us to: Build lighter tanks and artillery.
Rely less on the high-performance characteristics of aircraft and more on
sophisticated weapons fired from them -reducing the aircraft's size and the
maintenance tail that must be airlifted to the scene.  Build smaller aircraft
carriers so that there will be more of them to spread over remote areas.  Build
more capable amphibious ships with VSTOL's.  Build more data-processing and
data-transmission capability for reconnaissance and ''smart'' weapons.

Emphasis on using these technologies, along with the accompanying changes in
tactics, could create forces for NATO that are more flexible, more difficult to
target and more responsive to changing battlefield conditions. Overall, this
would lead the Department of Defense to spend its money quite differently from
the way it does now. The budget amendments of this fiscal year and the next,
submitted to the Congress by the Reagan Administration, do not face the issue
squarely. In all fairness, it is a bit much to expect the Administration to
change directions quickly. The emphasis in those amendments, however, is still
on the second half of the problem - airlifting our forces to new trouble spots.
Despite that, the Administration still opts for procurement of the XM-1 tank and
the F-15 aircraft, which will not help at all. The first half of a sound Persian
Gulf strategy, improved amphibious lift and carrier air support, is not helped
by the amendments. There is a down payment on a new large aircraft carrier, but
that is a mistake. The Department of Defense simply must let go of some of the
traditional weapons, such as large carriers, that are clearly becoming obsolete.
Seriously questioning traditional systems will also mean withstanding the
enormous institutional pressures within the Defense Department and the pressures
from the defense industry to perpetuate what is known and understood. Both
usually want to pursue the same weapons systems relentlessly, regardless of
changes of strategy or technology.

The United States is the only member of the NATO alliance that can shoulder the
burden of defending the Persian Gulf as well as other worldwide
responsibilities, so it is vital that we accept it.  Increasingly, as our
undiminished dependence on third-world nations coincides with Moscow's increased
assertiveness in the same regions, we will find that our vital interests are at
stake in other remote areas. Our defense establishment had best be prepared to
support the more assertive rhetoric of this Administration to protect those
interests with effective military power. We can do that only if we realize that
we are a maritime-airlift power whose military strategy must have the mobility
and flexibility to meet wide-ranging and uncertain demands. Surely, we have the
wisdom to recognize that our responsibilities are too broad to be fulfilled by a
new ''Maginot line.'' We have the industrial ingenuity to utilize our advanced
technology to build weapons systems that can protect all of our national
interests. We must start now, however, in this new direction.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of helicopters flying over Egypt's pyramids photo
of XM-1 tank photo of Harrier attack jet

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 10, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Crime;
by Newgate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7; Page 45, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1156 words


Arthur Lyons's first powerful private-eye book, ''The Dead Are Discreet,''
introduced Jacob Asch, a West Coast operator, very much in the style of
creations by Hammett and Ross Macdonald. Since his debut in 1974 Asch has
remained an exemplar of the private eye: motivated by a quest for the truth, he
is sensitive and compassionate, but tough when necessary. The gallant knight who
assists the needy or the stricken, he is a loner who occasionally feels sorry
for himself.

His sixth exploit, HARD TRADE (Holt, Rinehart & Winston, $10.95), finds him as
quixotic as ever. His would-be client is killed in front of his very eyes.
Naturally he has to follow through, even though there's no prospect of money.
The trail gets him mixed up with politicians in high office, homosexuals,
crooked land dealers and organized crime.

At the end poor Asch is more disillusioned than ever: ''Picking up other
people's dirty leavings, following pedophiles around until all hours of the
morning, fried out of my skull on speed, snooping around in other people's
apartments sorting through their underwear - I was in a character-building
profession, all right.'' But the author does not belabor the point; Asch is more
than a symbol. He is one of the more convincing private eyes in the business,
thanks to Mr. Lyons's skill at characterization. Nor are the other amenities
neglected. Mr. Lyons can create a plot with the best of them, and one wonders if
the California governor in ''Hard Trade'' has a counterpart in real life.

In recent years Arthur Maling has been writing mysteries involving Brock Potter,
a New York stockbroker. But in FROM THUNDER BAY (Harper & Row, $11.95) he tries
something different. It is the story of two brothers. One is a successful pop
singer. The other, who deserted from the army during the Vietnam War and fled to
Canada, gets involved in a shady operation and kills a cop in his panic.

There is plenty of action in ''From Thunder Bay,'' though Mr.  Maling allows
some curious plot threads to hang loose. The criminal brother is a woodsman, and
much is made of his ability to survive in the Canadian wilderness. But after
preparing the reader for a survival story, the plot veers off into a different
direction. The book, however, is a strong psychological study of two brothers
who are wildly different but yet need each other. And there is built-in suspense
as the American and Canadian cops close the net.

Though Richard North Patterson's THE OUTSIDE MAN (Little, Brown, $11.95) has a
crime in it, and ends up a classic detective story, the author seems much more
interested in the triangle of a husband, his wife and the wife's father. A kind
of reverse Oedipal streak runs through ''The Outside Man'': the father, a
successful lawyer, hates the young man (a lawyer in the father's firm) who has
married his daughter. Set among the rich society of Alabama, the book also
portrays their attitude toward the less fortunate - especially blacks.

Dell Shannon, in her MURDER MOST STRANGE (Morrow, $10.95), delivers her 32nd
procedural involving Lieutenant Mendoza and the Los Angeles Police Department.
The usual pattern is followed: multiple cases, each one of which is solved, and
a glimpse of the home life of Mendoza and his merry men - those nice,
understanding cops who never use a swear word. The formula does wear thin.

Colin Watson is not among the better-known British mystery writers, but he has
to his credit about 10 books featuring Inspector Purbright, all with one thing
in common - a wicked, often delicious sense of humor. The mysteries are
legitimate enough, often in the British classical tradition, but what makes Mr.
Watson's books different are his sharp observations about people, and the almost
Wodehousian glee with which he goes about deflating stuffed shirts, the decadent
aristocracy and other fair game.

There seldom is slapstick in Mr. Watson's books, and sometimes he actually seems
to be fond of the people he is satirizing. In his latest book, PLASTIC SINNERS
(Doubleday, $9.95), one of the characters, a formidable lady who is used to
having her own way, is a dowager who would have delighted Oscar Wilde. Inspector
Purbright has to make a call on her in the ancestral manor. Nobody offers him a
chair. They have a few words; she makes the best of it: ''Bruce, Mr.  Purbright
is looming. Kindly bring him a chair or something. I cannot see when people
loom.''

This redoubtable lady is up to her family jewels in a peculiar case involving
some junk sold at a local auction. It is indeed junk. Then why was there such
spirited bidding, and why was Sgt. Love knocked silly by a pair of doorknobs,
and why was one of the bidders murdered? It's a neat little mystery, told in an
urbane manner full of sharp psychological insights. In this case Purbright works
with a London cop, a quiet man who seems to know everything about everything.
His name is Bradley, and at one point he and Purbright are discussing the case.
Purbright says that it reminds him of a 1930's detective story. Bradley spreads
his hands: ''My dear friend, what is this but a thirties detective story? Why
else do you think I came here?''

In his 1971 study of the detective story, ''Snobbery With Violence,'' Mr. Watson
had a lot of fun with Agatha Christie and the conventions she used. It is almost
as though he has now wanted to show what a skillful writer and social
commentator can do with the same basic ingredients used by Christie and other
writers of the 30's.

In his first novel, CUT-OUT (Viking, $10.95), Colin Smith, the Middle East
correspondent for The Observer, turns to terrorism. A good deal of the action
takes place in the Middle East, with a final confrontation in Cyprus.

The plot is the old story of an amateur up against a professional - this time a
German terrorist. He booby-traps a car, intending to get rid of a journalist.
The blast kills an innocent passer-by, whose husband determines to avenge her.

There is more to ''Cut-Out'' than heroics, however. Mr. Smith has made an
honorable attempt to get into the mind of a terrorist. What really motivates
this bright, educated, lethal young man? Some of the psychological examination
is rather pat, but it rings true. Mr.  Smith is not making excuses; he is trying
to see the man and his world as a whole. And the ending is purposely
inconclusive. What has it all meant, those killings, those mistaken
interpretations of what actually had happened, this waste of intelligence and
dedication?  Mr. Smith offers no answers. He merely observes in this very
wellwritten, gripping book.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 10, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FEAR AS A FORM OF POLLUTION

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 17, Column 2; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 295 words


Three cheers for Morris Bruckman, who is fighting the battle against fear and
ignorance. Dioxin and nuclear radiation are the twin targets of the ignorance
lobby.

The fear of dioxin originated with the disclosure that it was a tiny contaminant
of Agent Orange, which was used to defoliate vegetation in Vietnam. The
connection between Agent Orange and dioxin with health problems has never been
established.

However, since the question has been raised, the Government is studying the
matter. In the absence of any real evidence at this time, it is surely
irresponsible to incite a dioxin panic, particularly in view of what we do know
about the subject.

The Baltimore Evening Sun Published a three-part series on Agent Orange in
February 1980. This study of 2.5 million Vietnam veterans could find no evidence
that they were less healthy than other Americans of similar age.

The 1,200 veterans who were directly involved in preparing Agent Orange for use
in Vietnam and had a particularly high exposure are in good health, except for
one. There is no evidence that the one instance is connected with Agent Orange
or dioxin. One in 1,200 is well within the limits of statistical probability for
a health population.

Neither of these studies is conclusive or definitive, but they would surely
indicate to any objective observer that the danger, if any danger exists at all,
is surely minuscule.

If the dioxin scare-mongers had any regard for their constituents, they would
circulate this information along with the fright stories.  HERBERT JAFFE
Freeport

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 10, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The Action Isn't Over When One Turns 50

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 17, Column 3; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 310 words


Brain death at 50? Judith Greene (in ''An Old Warrior' Seeks New Battles,''
Opinion Page) bemoans her fate that having reached her 50th birthday, she is no
longer ''received'' into the kind of hot debates that raged in the 1960's and
1970's - debates she seems to believe are the undisputed turf of the
under-30-year-olds.

Fortunately for civilization, countless women who made history never considered
they were subject to any mechanical stopwatch that clicks off the brain's
productivity the moment one reaches 50. Susan B. Anthony was 84 when she
climaxed a lifetime battle for women's suffrage by organizing the International
Women's Suffrage Alliance in Berlin. Margaret Mead remained a dynamic force in
society until her death more than two decades after she hit the 50th milestone.
Dr. Rosalyn Yalow was 56 when she won the Nobel Prize.

The list is admirably long and prestigious. But one need not be a potential
Nobel candidate to be part of the action today.  There seems little
justification for the ''graying'' alumni of the Vietnam-protest era to lament
that they feel relegated to waging intellectual battle with adolescent checkout
clerks and bank tellers. The issues in this country today call for action by
Americans, regardless of age or sex, who see the need to protest the threatened
elimination or reduction to utter impotence of the most crucial programs in
health, education and environment, while our Administration's leaders propose to
beef up our own military arsenal as well as those of countries whose aims for
peace are in question.

The age of protest against injustice is forever.  RIKI ENGLANDER KOSUT Astoria

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 12, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SENATE PANEL VOTES CURBS ON SALVADORAN ARMS AID

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 781 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 11


The Senate Foreign Relations Committee voted today to impose restrictions on
United States military aid to El Salvador that would require President Reagan to
certify that the Salvadoran Government was making ''significant progress'' in
implementing human rights, economic, and political changes.

The amendment, sponsored by Senator Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of
Connecticut, and approved by a vote of 11 to 1, was similar to a measure
approved 12 days ago by the House Foreign Affairs Committee, in a 26-to-7 vote.

The conditions were adopted over the objections of State Department officials,
including Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr., who argued in a letter to
the committee that placing restrictions on military aid in fiscal year 1982
''would encourage left-wing insurgents and other extremists in El Salvador to
create the very conditions that would require President Reagan to suspend
military aid.''

Alvin P. Drischler, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional
Relations, said, ''This sends the wrong signal.'' Republicans and Democrats,
however, argued that the conditions would strengthen the Government of President
Jose Napoleon Duarte and send a positive signal to other Latin American nations.

''It's very important for us to devise as strong a bipartisan foreign policy as
possible,'' said Senator Nancy Landon Kassebaum, Republican of Kansas, who
helped draft the measure.

Senator Alan Cranston, Democrat of California, said, ''This indicates that the
centrist Government needs to reach out and carry out reforms, and if it's
unwilling or unable to do so, then we have nothing to support.''

Senator Paul E. Tsongas, Democrat of Massachusetts, said that the move would
help Mr. Duarte ''strengthen his hand vis-a-vis the military.''

''Maybe I'm too tied up in the Vietnam experience,'' said Senator Larry
Press-ler, Republican of South Dakota, ''but this would be a positive step
forward.''

The initiative was supported by the committee chairman, Senator Charles H.
Percy, Republican of Illinois, and all the committee Democrats. Senator Richard
G. Lugar, Republican of Indiana, voted by proxy against the conditions.

El Salvador is scheduled to receive $26 million in United States aid this year.
The committee, moving toward approval of the overall $5.7 billion foreign-aid
bill, voted several amendments to tighten restrictions and to increase reporting
to Congress on the transfer abroad of American servicemen and weapons. The
Administration opposed nearly all of these measures.

However, the committee also adopted several initiatives that would provide the
Administration with greater flexibility in conducting foreign policy. In a
measure backed by the State Department, the committee voted to lift the existing
ban on military aid to Argentina, which was imposed in 1978 because of that
Government's human-rights record.

Unlike the House Foreign Affairs Committee, however, which has thus far resisted
any restrictions on aid, the Senate added a requirement that President Reagan
certify that ''significant progress'' was being made by Argentina in addressing
human-rights abuses.

In a move to speed the delivery of arms to foreign buyers. the panel authorized
$350 million to establish a defense fund for the advance purchase of weapons.
The Administration would be required to seek funding each year, but the
committee imposed no restrictions on the use of the fund.

In addition, the committee doubled from $50 million to $100 million the
President's authority to transfer military equipment from Pentagon stock to aid
allies in an emergency. It also lifted the ban on commercial sales of military
equipment of more than $100 million, and it loosened restrictions on the sale of
military equipment to North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies.

The committee adopted provisions, sponsored by Senator Edward Zorinsky, Democrat
of Nebraska, that would require the Administration to submit to Congress all
contracts with foreign governments that involve more than $14 million in arms
sales or leases and $50 million for a single piece of equipment, like an
airplane.

Senator John Glenn, Democrat of Ohio, won support for a measure that would
broaden the Administration's obligation to file reports to Congress on
situations abroad that might endanger American lives and property.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 12, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WHITE-VIETNAMESE SHRIMPING FEUD REPORTED TO EASE

BYLINE: By WILLIAM K. STEVENS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 709 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, May 11


Witnesses on both sides of the dispute between local and Vietnamese shrimp
fishermen on Galveston Bay testified in Federal court today that actions by the
Texas Legislature in the last few days had lessened the potential for violence
when the shrimping season opens on Friday.

For two years, the American shrimpers and the Vietnamese newcomers have been
engaged in a rancorous territorial competition over the limited resources of the
bay. More than 100 shrimp boats operated by Vietnamese refugees have begun
fishing the bay. They now outnumber the boats operated by native fishermen.

In the Federal court case, the American fishermen are accused of conspiring with
the Ku Klux Klan to frighten the Vietnamese into leaving the bay area. The
Vietnamese have asked Federal Judge Gabrielle McDonald to issue a preliminary
injunction against any further intimidation or harassment. She is expected to
rule on Thursday afternoon.

In the first day of hearings on the injunction request, David Collins, a leader
of the American shrimpers, was asked by his attorney whether ''there is any
reason to believe that there will be violence on May 15 if this injunction isn't
granted.''

''No, I don't believe so,'' Mr. Collins said. ''I can't see it,'' he added,
''because the state has faced up'' to the problem of fishing in the bay. He was
referring to a law, signed last week by Gov. William Clements, placing a
two-year moratorium on the licensing of new shrimp boats in the bay. In
addition, a bill requiring that shrimping operations be halted at 2 P.M. each
day is expected to pass the Legislature soon.

These two measures, Mr. Collins testified, should prevent Galveston Bay from
being overfished and maintain a large enough shrimp crop for all. Earlier in his
testimony, Mr. Collins acknowledged that some weeks ago he said publicly that he
would have an armed Klansman on his boat on May 15 if the problem of Vietnamese
competition had not been solved.

Boat-Burning Threat Reported

James M. Craig, who operates a wharf and seafood house in Kemah, which together
with Seabrook has been the center of the dispute, also testified that the new
legislation would help. Forty-two of the Vietnamese shrimp boats dock at Mr.
Craig's wharf, and he testified today that he had been threatened by a leader of
the American shrimpers.

Asked on the witness stand if he thought the new laws would relieve the problem,
Mr. Craig answered, ''Yes, sir, I believe it has to.'' But he said that he
believed that ''there are still going to be problems'' when both the Vietnamese
and the local fishermen take to the water on Friday.

Mr. Craig, who has been a consistent ally and defender of the Vietnamese who
supply his business, said that Eugene Fisher, another leader of the white
fishermen, had told him at one point in the dispute that ''I'd better watch my
boats, they could be burned.''

''I told him that if I caught him burning them, I'd shoot him,'' Mr. Craig said.
Three boats operated by Vietnamese were burned earlier this year, and Paul Gray,
a criminal investigator from the Houston Arson Bureau, testified today that all
three had been set intentionally. This comment was elicited by Morris Dees, the
chief attorney for the Vietnamese, as part of an attempt to show a pattern of
harassment and intimidation by the local fishermen.

The court was told that a shrimp boat operated by Mr. Collins, carrying about 20
people, sailed around the Kemah-Seabrook harbor last March 15. Aboard it were
robed and hooded Klansmen. Some of the riders were armed, at least one with a
shotgun and one with an AR-15 automatic rifle.

Mr. Collins said that no threats had been made by any of the boat riders and
that the incident had been designed as an attentiongetting device. The white
fishermen feared that the Legislature would fail to act before the end of its
session on June 1, he said. ''If you don't get their attention,'' he explained,
''they put you back in a corner and forget about you.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 12, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

,;
SETTINTHE V.A. RIGHT

BYLINE: By Robert Klein

SECTION: Section ZZZ; Page 2, Column A; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 878 words

DATELINE: ALBUQUERQUE, N.M.


Already into the second quarter of his first year in office, President Reagan
still has not filled the top slot in the Government's second-largest agency, the
Veterans Administration. The appointment of the V.A.'s 11th administrator, when
it occurs, may briefly and belatedly focus the public spotlight on an agency
that can ill afford exposure on center stage.

Mr. Reagan's inaction comes amid a battle between two major V.A.
constituencies: older, primarily World War II vets, whose particular needs are
reflected in the increasing numbers of those with infirmities associated with
aging, and a growing and vocal aggregate of Vietnam War veteran organizations
that contend that their needs were never satisfactorily treated in the first
place. Both factions, with a monetary and health-care stake in the outcome, are
lobbying furiously to influence the President's politically tough decision.

The new administrator will find the task of providing benefits and services to
30 million veterans while trying to set right a shaky, besieged bureaucracy a
test of immense proportions. Health-care costs at present amount to about 25
percent of the V.A.'s projected fiscal 1982 budget of $24.9 billion, which would
be a record. Only the Pentagon, which makes the V.A. necessary to begin, has
more Government employees.

The newcomer will inherit legacy of fraud, abusive medical treatment, and
questionable patient-care practices that date back to 1930, when President
Herbert Hoover created the V.A. as a separate independent agency. The problems
are widespread throughout the 172 hospitals, 200 outpatient clinics, and scores
of nursing homes and other facilities nationwide.

Of major concern to many veterans has been the ''guinea-pig syndrome'':
extensive use of sometimes unwitting patients as subjects in a variety of
experiments. Often, the vets complain, they are coerced into participating, with
devastating effects. In California, one veteran died after unknowingly
participating in an experiment for which he did not meet the criteria outlined
in a cardiac-research proposal. One World War II veteran, badgered into
continuing a painful stress experiment after having been inaccurately informed
about the research, swore in an affidavit for the Institute for the Study of
Medical Ethics, a national organization that monitors experimental research: ''I
queried the doctor extensively about the experiment. He appeared annoyed. . .and
all his answers were brief and not very informative. . .I saw my (private)
doctor the next morning. He was shocked at my appearance.I had suffered severe
dehydration. . .I required two days of heavy sedation.''

Some 70 percent of V.A. patients, aged and poor, have no health insurance and,
therefore, no alternative to V.A. care. They are thus left vulnerable to their
doctors' entreaties to take part in an experiment. ''The majority of research. .
.is done on precisely those individuals who have the least to say about their
destiny,'' testified Dr. Bernard Diamond, a University of California law school
professor, in 1974 at Senate committee hearings on human experimentation.
''(They) tend to be dependent individuals. . .in no position to protest or
complain.''

In Puerto Rico in 1979, the House Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and
Control discovered that the San Juan V.A.'s free-handed dispensing of a
tranquilizer, Valium, had turned the affected veterans into a significant addict
community second in number only to those using heroin. The pharmacy routinely
issued overdoses of prescribed Valium to veterans, who then had to return for
treatment for their new addiction.

Although the system's medical services are by no means uniformly subpar, the
V.A. nonetheless seems to act as a clearinghouse through which the former
soldier often does not get mandated and promised care, but is discarded, like a
spent shell.

Mr. Reagan is in a position to reverse that trend. The nominee could make a
quick, favorable impression on his boss, who has stoutly declared that waste and
fraud will be vigorously rooted out of Government. All he needs to do is act on
the first V.A. Inspector General's report. For a six-month period during the
Carter Administration, it lists a total of $7.1 million in fraud,
misappropriated and otherwise wasted funds, including a $100,000 respiratory
intensive-care unit in Michigan that was not equipped to treat critically ill
patients. Individual accountability for the abuses was never established.

In one of his first statements as President, Mr. Reagan fired all incumbent
inspectors general, including the V.A.'s. He vowed to replace them with I.G.'s
''meaner than a junkyard dog.'' There is no more appropriate place to begin than
at the Veterans Administration.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Robert Klein is author of ''Wounded Men, Broken Promises - How the Veterans
Administration Betrays Yesterday's Heroes.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Drawing

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 13, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Around the Nation;
Videotapes of Klan Leader Shown at Shrimper Hearing

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 165 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, May 12


The Grand Dragon of the Texas Ku Klux Klan was shown on videotape today as he
trained about two dozen men in guerrilla war tactics, telling them, ''We're
going to assume authority in this country.''

Two videotapes were played in Federal court at a hearing on a harassment suit
against the Klan and others filed by Vietnamese fishermen from Galveston Bay.

Lawyers for the Vietnamese say that several American shrimpers attended the
secret Klan training camps to learn tactics for possible use against the
immigrants in the crowded bay area. American fishermen and the Klan deny the
charge.

The first videotape was made by Wayne A. Derrick, a Rice University film
student, who documented the training camp as a class project.  The film showed
the Texas Klan leader, Louis Beam, addressing men dressed in camouflaged
fatigues.

The second tape shown today was filmed by Dan Molina of the television station
KPRC in Houston. It had been previously broadcast on the NBC ''Today'' program.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 13, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

House Panel Backs a Bill to Give Priority to Agent Orange Cases

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 29, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 119 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 12


The House Veterans Affairs Committee approved a bill today directing the
Veterans Administration to give priority medical treatment to veterans who
believe their ailments spring from exposure to Agent Orange in Vietnam. The
Reagan Administration opposes the legislation.

Because the Government has established no link between the herbicide and any
ailment, V.A. hospitals treat veterans complaining of diseases that they
attribute to Agent Orange as though their health problems did not originate
during their military service. Such complaints are given outpatient attention on
a lower priority than service-connected ailments.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 13, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

UNLIKELY CHAMPIONS OF LATINS' RIGHTS

SECTION: Section A; Page 34, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 249 words


To the Editor:

I have noted with interest the proliferation of organizations promoting human
rights in Latin America. The public should be warned that while some of these
groups do indeed care about such rights, others are fronts for the same old
cliques that would destabilize authoritarian regimes and replace them with
oppressive totalitarian regimes.

here is a litmus test to separate organizations genuinely committed to human
rights from those using the issue to promote Marxist-Leninism: Simply inquire
about a group's stand on Cuba - one of the most oppressive systems in Latin
American. Unconcern for human-rights violation in Cuba indicates unconcern for
human rights.  Also inquire about the group's definition of human rights. Does
it entail freedom of press, speech, assembly, religion, property, movement,
trade-union formation - all rights nonexistent in the Marxist-Leninist world?

Like ''peace,'' the term ''human rights'' can be employed to mobilize and
exploit the naive. Let us learn from the heroic Polish workers and the tragic
Vietnam and Cuban boat people that totalitarianism is more oppressive than
authoritarianism.

Brutal as is the situation in much of Latin America, unfortunately it could be
worse.  DANIEL J. O'NEIL Tucson, Ariz., May 5, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 13, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

The Pop Life;
RIDING THE COUNTRY'S WAVE OF PATRIOTISM?

BYLINE: By ROBERT PALMER

SECTION: Section C; Page 34, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1304 words


THE phenomenal popularity that country music has enjoyed recently - the success
of the movie ''Urban Cowboy'' and its soundtrack album, the No. 1 pop hits for
Dolly Parton, Eddie Rabbitt and others, at least nominally ''country'' singers -
may have something to do with the general resurgence of political conservatism
and patriotic fervor.

At least that is what a number of journalists and other trend watchers have been
saying. Merle Haggard, who will be performing tonight at the first Wild Turkey
Festival of Country Music in Carnegie Hall, agrees with them.

''I think we're experiencing a feeling of patriotism that hasn't surfaced for a
long time,'' the 44-year-old country singer and songwriter said recently, ''and
I'm glad to see it. We had dipped to an all-time low on the other side not too
long ago. But you have to remember that it's happened before. Every time
patriotism comes to the surface, you'll find country music, cowboys and so on
becoming popular.

''When the Lone Ranger was popular in the early 50's, so was patriotism and so
was country music. Pop singers like Tony Bennett and Jo Stafford had hits with
Hank Williams songs, and 'The Tennessee Waltz' was real big. Back during World
War II, Bob Wills was the highest-paid band leader in America. I've got clips
from that period of reporters' asking him to explain the popularity of country
music.''

'Laureate of the Hard Hats'

Mr. Haggard rose to prominence in the late 60's, when he wrote and sang ''Okie
From Muskogee'' and ''The Fightin' Side of Me.'' The songs were expressions of
patriotic sentiments at a time when protest against the war in Vietnam was at
its height, and they earned Mr.  Haggard a reputation as ''poet laureate of the
hard hats.'' But he is more complex than that, and so is country music.

Mr. Haggard's family migrated from Oklahoma to Bakersfield, Calif., during the
Depression, and Mr. Haggard was born in 1937 in Bakersfield, in a railroad car
his father had converted into a house. When he was a teen-ager, he was in and
out of jail for car theft, armed robbery and other offenses, and when he was in
his early 20's, he served time in San Quentin for burglary.

He is one country entertainer who has experienced at first hand the vicissitudes
of life on society's underside, and his alienation from conventional values was
reflected in the titles of some of his earliest hits - ''The Stranger'' and ''I
Am a Lonesome Fugitive.'' Musically, these records were pure country - simple
instrumentation, sashaying rhythms and straightforward, heartfelt singing.

He has studiously avoided the Nashville brand of glitter and cornpone, and he
continues to make hard-core country records when many of his fellow country
artists are singing pop tunes with elaborate orchestral backing in order to
reach a mass audience.

'It's Happened Before'

''I lived in Nashville for a couple of years,'' he said, ''and I ruined some
good songs with strings and all that. But I stick more with the traditional
country-music thing, and I try to do it well.  I'm turned off by that slick
production. I don't see the artistic value of it.

''But it's happened in country music before. Jimmy Wakely, Patsy Cline and a lot
of other country singers were making records with strings and big production
jobs back in the 50's. Bing Crosby was making pop versions of country songs in
1942-43.''

The references to country music's past are typical of Mr. Haggard.  He is
probably more aware of the music's traditions than any other country superstar,
and he has consistently won the grudging admiration of folk-music enthusiasts
whose politics were liberal or leftist by recording and performing loving
re-creations of early country-music styles. In the late 60's, he refused to
follow ''Okie From Muskogee'' and ''The Fightin' Side of Me'' with more
patriotic material.

From Before World War II

Instead, he recorded two albums that were tributes to the most influential
country artists of the pre-World War II period. The first, ''Same Train, a
Different Time,'' was devoted to the work of the country-blues singer and
yodeler Jimmie Rodgers.

The second, ''A Tribute to the Best Damn Fiddle Player in the World,'' recreated
the country jazz, or western swing, that Bob Wills and his Texas Playboys
pioneered in the 30's and early 40's. A later album by Mr. Haggard, ''The Way It
Was in '51,'' found him singing the early honky-tonk music of Mr. Williams and
Lefty Frizzell.

Mr. Haggard usually includes songs by these seminal country stars in his
performances, and he sings them with admirable fidelity to the original styles.
His loyalty to country's folk roots and his refusal to wear rhinestone-studded
cowboy suits or other flashy clothes when performing are unusual, especially
among country stars who have recorded as many hits as Mr. Haggard.

But tonight's country-music show in Carnegie Hall also includes another staunch
traditionalist, Roy Acuff, and as well as the fine Mississippi-born singer Tammy
Wynette.

A Radio Series

Tonight's show is not the only evidence of what seems to be a growing interest
in country music's roots. WKHK-FM is presenting a 10-week series, ''The History
of Country Music,'' Mondays through Fridays at 9:30 A.M., 12:30 P.M., 3:30,
6:30, 9:30 and 12:30 A.M.  The shows are brief, but they include recordings by
Mr. Rodgers, the Carter Family, Mr. Williams and other early country and folk
artists who are rarely if ever heard on today's ''countrypolitan'' stations.

The popularity of country music may be tied to burgeoning conservatism. But this
does not mean that country music itself is inherently conservative. The music's
core audience has always been white and working class, but in recent years black
singers have become country stars, and the country audience has expanded to
include listeners whose social and economic backgrounds and political beliefs
range across the spectrum.

During the last five years or so, a number of country hits have dealt explicitly
with changing social and sexual mores - more explicitly than older country
music, and often more explicitly than most contemporary rock and soul. If
country generally espouses traditional American values, they are values of the
most basic sort - self-reliance, the willingness to work hard, the importance of
trusting and acting on one's deepest feelings.

The Long-Term View

One wonders whether country's popularity will continue or whether it will wane
as new pop trends emerge. Mr. Haggard takes a long-term view:

''There's a great deal of interest in country music every five years or so. I've
seen it happen over and over during the last 20 years or so. It'll probably keep
on coming around like that.''

Mr. Haggard is often asked whether he regretted having written and recorded
''Okie From Muskogee,'' which, although reaffirming traditional values, also
made fun of hippies and other nonconformists.

''A lot of people seem to have a weird attitude about that song,'' he said,
''but I think it's mostly people in the media. It wasn't meant to be all that
serious, and I don't think very many people think of themselves as hippies,
whether they have long hair or not.

''I've only been heckled for that song once in all the years I've been doing it.
I'm not ashamed of it. Willie Nelson has pretty long hair, but he told me one
time that if I was ashamed of the song, I could give it to him.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Merle Haggard and Tammy Wynette

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 15, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Russian and Rumanian Are Launched Into Orbit

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 227 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, May 14


A Rumanian astronaut and his Soviet commander were launched into space today
aboard a Soyuz 40 spacecraft, Tass, the official press agency, announced.

Dumitru Prunariu, a 28-year-old senior lieutenant in the Rumanian Air Force, and
Lieut Col. Leonid Popov, 36, of the Soviet Air Force, were reported to be in
good condition after the launching at 1:17 P.M., New York time.

Mr. Popov set a world space endurance record of 185 days last year with Valery
Ryumin, a civilian Soviet astronaut.  The latest flight was the ninth involving
a Soviet astronaut and one from another country.  The last international flight
under the Soviet bloc's Intercosmos program, which carried a Soviet mission
commander and a Mongolian ''cosmonaut-researcher,'' ended in March.

Tass said that the astronauts would dock with the Salyut 6 space station, where
two astronauts, Col. Vladimir Kovalyonok of the Soviet Air Force and Viktor P.
Savinykh, a civilian engineer, have been working since March 14.

Today's launching completed the first round of flights in the Intercosmos
program, which since March 1978 also has orbited astronauts from Bulgaria, East
Germany, Poland, Cuba, Hungary, Vietnam and Czechoslovakia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 15, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

JUDGE ISSUES BAN ON KLAN THREAT TO VIETNAMESE

BYLINE: By WILLIAM K. STEVENS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 801 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, May 14


A Federal judge, acting on a complaint by Vietnamese shrimp fishermen that they
had been harassed, threatened and intimidated over a period of months by an
alliance of white shrimpers and Ku Klux Klan members, issued a preliminary
injunction tonight against such treatment.

The ruling came six hours before the official opening of the commercial
shrimping season on Galveston Bay. The Vietnamese feared they would be targets
of violence when they and the white shrimpers sail out on the bay before dawn
tomorrow.

In testimony this week before the Federal district judge, Gabrielle K. McDonald,
and in conversations outside the courtroom, law-enforcement officials and
parties on both sides of the sometimes bitter two-year dispute said they
believed the tensions had lessened considerably since the Vietnamese filed the
formal complaint and that all would go quietly tomorrow morning.

Judge McDonald seemed to acknowledge this by denying a request by the Vietnamese
that United States Marshals be sent into Seabrook and Kemah, the twin fishing
villages southeast of here, where the Vietnamese and American shrimpers have
been engaged in a territorial dispute over the limited resources of the bay. The
American shrimpers contend that the influx of Vietnamese fishermen has
overcrowded the bay, threatening both their livelihoods and the shrimp crop.

Judge Warns Klan

But the judge said that any leaders of the Klan or the fishermen who violated
her order would be held in contempt of court. And she assigned a Federal
magistrate to hear and investigate any further complaints against the white
fishermen or the Klan by the Vietnamese. Judge McDonald is to consider the
granting of a permanent injunction later.

The Vietnamese, mostly refugees from the Communist takeover of South Vietnam,
have settled along the bay in steadily increasing numbers and now outnumber the
native shrimp fishermen. More than 75 boats are registered to Vietnamese
shrimpers, many of them operating out of a Kemah cove nicknamed ''Saigon
Harbor.''

''The Vietnamese are here and they have a right to be here,'' Judge McDonald
told Joseph Collins, one of the leaders of the white faction, after issuing her
order. The judge said that she understood his frustrations, but advised him,
''Do not invite the forces of violence to help.''

Nguyen Van Nam, a former colonel in the South Vietnamese army who is the leader
of the Vietnamese fishermen, agrees that the bay is too crowded. He said that he
and others planned to sell their boats and move. But some who had previously
felt that way, he said, might now wait and see if the situation stabilizes.

Legislature Acts on Issue

A moratorium on the granting of new shrimp boat licenses on the bay was recently
passed by the Texas Legislature, and additional restrictions are being debated.
Spokesmen for the white fishermen said in court this week that this legislation
essentially solved the problem.

Nevertheless, Morris Dees, a lawyer with the Southern Poverty Law Center of
Birmingham, Ala., and the chief attorney for the Vietnamese, argued in court
today that the injunction was necessary because the real indication of the
intentions of the white fishermen and the Klan was their behavior before the
lawsuit was filed. Since the suit was filed a month ago, the defendants have
been more restrained and conciliatory in their public talk and behavior, and
attorneys on both sides of the issue believe this to be a factor in cooling off
the situation.

''They've changed their whole tune now,'' Mr. Dees said. He recounted several
incidents, statements and actions that he said represented ''only the tip of the
iceberg'' in a pattern of intimidation designed to drive the Vietnamese out of
the bay area.

Witnesses at the injunction hearing, which was held over the last four days,
testified that leaders of the white fishermen had vowed to drive the Vietnamese
off the coast; that they threatened several wholesale shrimp buyers who dealt
with the Vietnamese and who allowed Vietnamese boats to dock; that three boats
operated by Vietnamese were deliberately set on fire, and that crosses were
burned in the area on two occasions.

Sam Adamo, an attorney for the Klan and the white fishermen, said in final
arguments that while the arrival of the Klan heightened tensions between the two
sides, it was the kind of dramatization was often used to attract attention to a
public problem. He contended that this was protected by the First Amendment's
freedom of speech guarantees.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 15, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Around the Nation;
Garwood Reported on Trip During Alleged Molestation

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 121 words

DATELINE: JACKSONVILLE, N.C., May 14


A woman who says she plans to marry Robert R. Garwood testified today that the
Marine private was making a six-hour motorcycle trip to Charlottesville, Va., at
the time he is accused of sexually molesting a little girl in his car.

Donna Long's testimony came after the prosecution rested its case and the
defense lawyer, Vaughan Taylor, told jurors he would prove ''the incident could
not have happened with Bobby Garwood.''

Private Garwood, a 35-year-old Indiana native, was convicted by a military jury
in February of collaborating with the enemy while he was a prisoner of war in
Vietnam. If convicted on molestation charges, he could face life in prison.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 15, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. PARLEY ON YOUTH CANCELLED

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 655 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 14


The White House Conference on Children and Youth, a national assembly
traditionally held here once each decade since 1909, will be replaced this year
with smaller state conferences that will have little to do with the White House.

Richard S. Schweiker, Secretary of Health and Human Services, sent letters
yesterday inviting state governors to apply for $2.3 million in Federal funds
for conferences in their states. Mr. Schweiker said recently that the decision,
announced last month, to finance statelevel conferences, instead of the
traditional national conference in Washington, reflects the Reagan
Administration's commitment to federalism.

''These state and territorial conferences,'' Mr. Schweiker said in a prepared
statement recently, ''will be better equipped to focus on the most productive
steps that the governments as well as private agencies and individuals can take
with respect to significant matters involving children and youth.''

However, a spokesman for the department said that she knew of no plans to
decentralize any other White House conference, such as the conference on aging
to be held here in December.

Richard M. Eyre, the executive director of the conference on children, said he
had promoted the idea of state-level meetings in an effort to emphasize
participation by the private sector, as well as maintain consistency with the
Reagan philosophy.

Mr. Eyre said he had hoped to have 50 concurrent state meetings, linked to a
general session in Washington by closed-circuit television.

''They obviously went further than I had planned,'' said Mr. Eyre, referring to
the decision by Mr. Schweiker. Mr. Eyre said he had reservations about the
decision because by farming the conferences out to the states without any
Federal liaison, ''there's no control over what they do.''

''My concern,'' he said, ''is that in many states, the money will go to state
child welfare offices and will be used to attack the Reagan Administration.''

Mr. Eyre said that another, less important factor in the decision to move the
conference out of Washington was the controversy that surrounded the last such
event. The last youth conference was held during the Nixon Administration, a
time when the youth-countercultural movement was opposing many Government
policies, including the Vietnam war. At that time, the conference was divided
into two segments - a meeting on children, held in Washington in 1970, and one
on youth, held in Colorado the following year.

The youth conference prompted disagreement from the outset.  Conference planners
were said to have selected the site - Estes Park, a remote town in the Rocky
Mountains - in order to avoid confrontations in Washington. The tone of the
conference was distinctly anti-Administration and antiestablishment, and before
it ended, the 1,000 young people had issued a set of demands to the
Administration ranging from ending United States involvement in Vietnam to the
creation of a national health care service.

This year's conferences will be considerably smaller in scope.  Funds will be
allocated to states on the basis of youth population, with California getting
the largest sum ($120,000) and Wyoming the smallest ($27,122). American
terrorities will get $10,000 each.

Each state will be asked to submit a report on its conference to Mr. Schweiker's
office, which will compile a national report. But that will be the extent of
Federal involvement, and the conference office in Washington, which employs 20
or more people, will be disbanded.

After the White House Conference on Children and Youth was established in 1909,
it was subsequently held in 1919, 1930, 1939, 1950, 1960 and 1970-71.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 15, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TWO PAPERS IN TRENTON FIGHT IT OUT

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. GEIST, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1242 words

DATELINE: TRENTON


The Washington Post Company purchased The Trenton Times in 1974, and by all
accounts expected to cross the Delaware River and capture the city as quickly
and dramatically as General Washington had done two centuries before.

Seven years later, The Trenton Times is struggling with The Trentonian in a
fierce newspaper circulation war, something rare in an era of monopoly markets
and waning competition.

The struggle - which both papers regard as a battle for survival - has been one
in which news carriers for each paper have charged the opposition with making
threats and even hiding their vending machines. Four Trenton Times circulation
executives have been indicted, in part on charges of falsifying circulation
figures.

The battle pits the afternoon Times, with its cool, professional approach and
detached reporting, against the morning Trentonian, a lively newspaper that
rarely points out this aging industrial city's blemishes and cheers it with
photographs of children having birthday parties and the vacation snapshots of
anyone who sends them in.

Intense Competition for Stories

''The feud is amazing,'' said James Williams, a local resident.  ''If one of
them makes a mistake in an article or loses some circulation, you can be sure
the other one will tell you about it right away.''

''For reporters, it's a dogfight,'' said John Mintz, a Times staff writer,
referring to the intense competition for stories. ''You don't just want to beat
the other paper - you want to smash them.''

The genteel competition ended in 1975, when The Times resumed publishing a
Saturday paper, for many years the exclusive province of The Trentonian. The
Trentonian responded by challenging The Times on Sundays with a paper that has
gained continually in circulation while The Sunday Times's has fallen.

The situation is similar with the daily editions, and executives at The
Trentonian said they expected to surpass The Times in daily circulation for the
first time when statistics are released this month by the Audit Bureau of
Circulations. In the last 10 years, The Times has dropped about 15,000 in daily
circulation, to about 67,500, while The Trentonian has gained about 12,000, to
about 66,700.

Emphasis on Local News

Last year The Trentonian accused The Times of ''wholesale fraud'' in the
reporting of circulation figures. At The Trentonian's request, the Audit Bureau
of Circulations conducted a rare re-audit, which found the circulation figures
of The Times to be 3,361 less than originally reported.

''The most amusing part of this war,'' said Ralph Ingersoll 2d, president of
Ingersoll Publications of Sharon, Conn., owner of The Trentonian, ''is that the
people at The Times don't have the strength of character to admit that our
editor, Emil Slaboda, and Mr. Hoffman - people they look upon as yokels - are
whipping them.'' Edward L.  Hoffman is publisher of The Trentonian.

Though The Trentonian is also owned by an outside company, many view it as the
''local'' newspaper by virtue of a strong emphasis on local news and community
events and its homegrown management. Mr.  Hoffman has been with the newspaper
for 34 years; Mr. Slaboda, nicknamed ''the Bull,'' is a 30-year veteran of the
paper and a lifelong member of the community.

Mr. Slaboda affectionately refers to the material in his popular Neighbors
Magazine - the birthday and vacation photographs and stories about Mrs. Vinch's
first-grade class planting marigold seeds in milk cartons - as ''garbage,''
albeit ''garbage'' that sells newspapers. He said he confined this material to a
separate part of the newspaper, so as not to reflect on legitimate news
coverage.  Referring to the line he recently had placed on the front page -
''Trenton's Pulitzer Prize Winning Newspaper'' - he said with a smile: ''That
irritates the hell out of them.'' The Trentonian won the prize for editorial
writing in 1974.

Situation Called 'Hopeless'

The Washington Post Company has thrown three publishers, four editors and
several circulation managers into the path of The Trentonian's onrushing
circulation figures, but has been unable to slow them or reverse the slide of
The Times. Katharine Graham, chairman of the board of the Washington Post
Company, said she once referred to The Trenton Times as ''my Vietnam.''

She added, however, that The Times was not for sale, and that she was firmly
committed to winning the battle of Trenton - despite a consensus among
publishing analysts that The Times is in a ''hopeless'' situation and should be
sold.

''We made some mistakes,'' Mrs. Graham said, ''but there are finally encouraging
signs.'' One is staff morale, which seems to defy the gravity of the situation.
One Times reporter, who might sound as though he had just stepped out of a
General Custer-at-Little Big Horn joke, said, ''I think we have them on the run
now.''

Indeed, members of a management team dispatched from The Washington Post last
year say they believe they have put the worst behind them in recent months - the
indictment of the top four circulation department executives on charges of theft
from the company, bribery and falsifying records, as well as a strike by mailers
and drivers - and are on the verge of registering the first circulation gains
for The Times in years.

'Race Only Half Over'

''It is stretching things for analysts to call our situation hopeless when we
still lead the competition in daily and Sunday circulation and command a
substantial majority of advertising linage,'' said Edward Padilla, vice
president in charge of the Washington Post Newspaper Division, who has been in
Trenton for more than a year supervising the regrouping and counterattack. ''And
it would be premature for them to go to the winning window with the race only
half over.''

He added, ''We found out that we could not succeed as The Washington Post
North.'' Mr. Padilla said that The Times probably went overboard initially in
such things as clearing the newsroom of longtime Trenton reporters. He has seen
to it that those in management have joined civic organizations and that the
newspaper has become involved in local projects, such as the restoration of the
landmark sign on a Delaware River bridge ''Trenton Makes - The World Takes.''
But he said the most pressing problem was straightening out longstanding
distribution problems.

Morning Edition Started

Larry Kramer, 31 years old, who holds an M.B.A. from Harvard and was a business
writer at The Post, is the new executive editor and vice president of The Times.
Among other things, he has redesigned the newspaper, started several new
sections, obtained new comics and features and hired local workers, and is
examining the possibility of involving the paper in cable television news. He
also has started the paper's answer to The Trentonian's Neighbors Magazine, a
daily page called Making the Rounds.

''But no birthday pictures,'' Mr. Kramer asserted.  The most important change
Mr. Kramer said he planned began Monday, when The Times converted to a morning
newspaper in some outlying communities. Mr. Hoffman, publisher of The
Trentonian, believes it is The Times's final effort in a losing cause.

''What we want to do is deliver our paper to the door, on time, in the morning,
alongside The Trentonian and say, 'O.K., which is it, folks?' '' Mr. Kramer
said. ''If they don't want us then, perhaps we shouldn't be here. We're not
going to run birthday photos.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Edward L. Hoffman, publisher of Trentonian and
Emil Slaboda, editor photo of Edward Padilla, supervisor and Larry Kramer
executive editor of Trenton Times's

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 15, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

HISTORIAN SORTS OUT FACT IN DATA ON VIETNAM WAR

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES

SECTION: Section B; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1003 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 14


The puzzle of the Vietnam War may never really end for those like Vincent H.
Demma who have been hired to have the final word. He is one of eight historians
now on a long-term mission to write a 20-volume history of the war for the Army.
He is a historian who is particularly mindful of the profession's rule that
victory is always far easier to describe and document than defeat.

Recently, at a meeting of military historians, Mr. Demma asked whether they
agreed that it was even more difficult ''to write the history of a military
defeat when the official sources recount operations and programs that almost
universally appear successful.''

This is his task at the Center for Military History, an agency of the Army, to
thread the truth of defeat from the vast Panglossian wealth of documentation
left by the war. The documentation is some of the most extensive in the history
of warfare, ranging from generals' secret memoirs to oral histories from the
trenches, and it extends far beyond the basic act of war to the cultural,
psychological, social and political trackings of a people day by day, page by
page.

What is left for Mr. Demma is a welter of fact and fantasy describing the
involvement of one nation in the life and death of another.

At the Tet Offensive

''I'm at the Tet offensive right now, and I'm tired,'' said Mr.  Demma, who is
42 years old, a weary smile hardly masking his enthusiasm for a task that has
already received a decade of his attention and that now finds him on the 22d
chapter of a 30-chapter book, the first of three volumes about combat in a
series that will be unusual in the realm of military history writing.

Because of the special experience of Vietnam both in the war and at the American
homefront, separate volumes are planned on the news media and the war and on the
individual soldier and the war, topics never before handled this way in Army
histories, the center said.

The enormous task of collecting and organizing a version of truth is illustrated
by one small part of Mr. Demma's resources - the 60,000 cubic feet of records
shipped home by the 2,300 Army units that fought the war. These records now rest
in underground vaults outside the capital in Suitland, Md., waiting to be
penetrated like the war's final perplexing delta of paper. They begin with a
trickle of reports from adviser groups in the 1950's and continue with the great
flood of documents that ended with American withdrawal eight years ago.

''Just like the Nazis, for good or for evil, we have reported it all,'' said
John H. Hatcher, a retired military careerist and civilian historian who is
chief of records management for the Army's adjutant general's office. ''This is
the most exquisite documentation of a war in history.''

Built-In Documentation System

Mr. Demma and others involved in the project occasionally express doubts about
the value of the archives and the ability to master their sprawling mass. But
Mr. Hatcher says the archives are extraordinary, a product of a war waged as
much by battalions of Xerox machines near the front as by waves of helicopter
gunships above the jungle.

Mr. Hatcher can delve into the cavernous vault No. 6 at Suitland and pluck out
detailed expense accounts from a Special Forces operator who filed vouchers down
to the final piaster reported paid for a pig in the war to win a hamlet chief's
allegiance. Whether the vouchers are conscientious or merely artful is a
question for history, Mr. Hatcher comments, but the detail is undeniably there.

Mr. Demma's office on Pennsylvania Avenue, down from Union Station, resembles a
literary bunker. Books about Vietnam rise everywhere, stacked like sandbags,
flanked by combination-locked file cabinets containing secret reports. The sight
of all the words summons some of the wearying spirit of the war itself. He may
be one of the rare people in Washington working from a sense of context that
takes in decades. In retrospect, for example, he finds the Pentagon Papers
''interesting but flawed'' and he carefully differentiates among the several
versions he has assimilated.

Since the main audience for Mr. Demma and the other historians at the Army
center will ultimately be professional strategists and soldiers, Mr. Demma
sometimes asks whether he and the others are up to the task of ''transcending''
distorted sources and making sure the official version does not ''carry forward
the astigmatic vision of the war.''

Pressure From Military Officers

Interestingly enough, the greatest pressure for a version of history untainted
by the propaganda and controversies of 10 and 15 years ago is coming, according
to center historians, from professional military officers. The new generation of
officers is concerned that they not be memorizing future strategies rooted in
past fantasies.

''I find a tremendous interest in our work by the military,'' said William M.
Hammond, a colleague of Mr. Demma. ''The reason is plain - 50,000 of them got
killed in that war, and they don't like that.''

Lately, after a period of fallowness in the popular mind and with a new
President willing to defend the Vietnam venture, the war has re-emerged in
random questions put to the history center by the civilian world. The newly
portrayed threat to America in El Salvador, as outlined by the Reagan
Administration, has touched off a search for parallels. People call, for
example, wanting to know at what stage of incubation in the war the United
States might have sent ''54 advisers'' to Vietnam.

''Fifty-four, they ask, the same number used lately in terms of El Salvador,''
Mr. Demma said with a smile. ''That was probably some time around 1950, but I
tell them history never works that way.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of John H. Hatcher

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 15, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

At the Movies;
Good fortune has creator of 'Hand' nervous.

BYLINE: By Chris Chase

SECTION: Section C; Page 8, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1525 words

DATELINE: TODAY, Oliver Stone's thriller


horror movie, ''The Hand,'' which opened in New York and Los Angeles to many
enthusiastic reviews, is going national.

And on June 7, Oliver Stone is getting married to Elizabeth Cox of San Antonio,
who was his assistant on the movie.  His good fortune makes Oliver Stone, a
broad-shouldered, brownhaired, pleasant-looking man, a trifle nervous. ''From
here on, it's all downhill,'' he says, as though by avoiding hubris, he can ward
off the evil eye.

Mr. Stone was born in 1946, to parents who met cute, as they used to say in the
movie business. His father, an American G.I. in Paris, spotted his mother, a
French girl, on the street, and was struck by an astonishment of heart. ''He
crashed his bike into hers,'' Mr.  Stone says, ''so he would have an excuse to
say hello. She had a fiance at the time, and he talked her out of marrying him.
She was Catholic and he was Jewish, so her family was totally against their
marriage. He brought her back to New York.''

An idyllic childhood - the summers spent in France, with his grandparents - then
prep school and a year at Yale passed before restlessness propelled Mr. Stone
out into the world. He became a rolling stone. During the early days of the
Vietnam War, he went as a civilian to Saigon, where he taught English to
students. Later, he signed on an American merchant ship. The year he was 19, he
headed for Guadalajara, Mexico, where he finished a novel. After that, back to
Vietnam, this time in the army.

Two wounds to the bad, and a Bronze Star to the good, he came home to find that
his novel had been rejected by everybody ''and films seemed to be the most
exciting new thing.''

He signed up for courses at the N.Y.U. film school. ''It was a very hot time.
Martin Scorsese was teaching there. We used to make black and white
16-millimeter films. You learned a lot, but the cameras were always breaking
down.''

Mr. Stone kept writing screenplays, too, until a Canadian outfit finally bought
one titled ''Seizure'' and allowed him to direct it.  ''I was 25 years old, we
had a budget of $150,000. I had to try to keep everybody from going on strike.''

In 1976, Mr. Stone moved to Hollywood ''because that's where the factory is,''
and two years later, he had won an Academy Award for his screenplay of
''Midnight Express.''

Even so, he has not been able to put together the picture he most wants to do, a
screen version of Vietnam veteran Ron Kovic's ''Born on the Fourth of July,''
although he did come close. ''I'd gone through eight drafts,'' he says. ''Al
Pacino was going to star. We'd rehearsed. Then the German co-financing fell out,
and we had to cancel the movie. We just couldn't scramble up the rest of the
money.

''Orion - it's a good company, very supportive - wanted me to go on working with
them, and I said, 'Look, if I write for you, I want to direct what I write.' And
I took a pay cut on the writing, and on the directing, for the chance to make
'The Hand'.''

''The Hand,'' a psychological study of a man who has blackouts, and @doesn't
realize he's a murderer, stars Michael Caine, an actor Mr.  Stone esteems. ''He
did things in this movie he's never done.  Sweating, looking ugly, letting his
hair grow out bushy. He took my direction, even when he didn't agree with it.
And he played the longest death scene in history, five days, battling with this
hand.''

Now that he has been praised for ''The Hand,'' might not Mr. Stone get the
chance to resurrect ''Born on the Fourth of July''?  He's doubtful. ''It's been
turned down twice by every studio in town. But I'd still like to do it. I don't
think the Vietnam story's been told. Vietnam messed a lot of guys up cause it
put us out of step with our own generation. I still feel like a freak. When I
came back to N.Y.U., which was a hotbed of radicalism at the time, the other
students looked upon me as an assassin. It was never discussed, nobody would
talk about it, but I think all the vets felt that silence.

''About 1976, the whole thing started to surface, books were being written; but
there's still so much that hasn't come out. A third of the prison population are
Vietnam vets, so many are unemployed. So many psychologically disturbed. The
suicide rate is enormously high.  I've been lucky. I can write. But what about
the boys who couldn't express it? Couldn't get it out?

''Sometimes I feel like the bad luck will catch up. You look over your shoulder.
That's what 'The Hand' is about. That unconscious state, that time you do
something you're not even aware of. Who knows whether one day you'll pick up a
gun and blast your own brains out, without expecting to do it?''

In ''So Fine,'' a comedy about the garment district that recently finished 10
weeks of shooting around New York, the Italian actress Mariangela Melato, who
co-starred with Giancarlo Giannini in Lina Wertmuller's ''Swept Away,'' plays
the wife of a gangster.

As the gangster, 7-foot 2-inch-tall Richard Kiel (Jaws in the James Bond movies)
is, in Miss Melato's enchanting accent, ''inbelievable.  So huge. When I met him
the first time, I was shocked.''

She tries to explain why her character - called Lira - falls in love with a
character played by Ryan O'Neal. ''He is so little. So normal. And the husband
is so big, but no man. Ryan says, 'You mean he has problem?' And I say, 'He have
no problem. He no care. I have the problem.' ''

Miss Melato, a tiny woman with wild blond hair, loved working in ''So Fine''
(it's her first American film) but says she does not dream of being an American
movie star. ''If it happen, I'll be glad, but I think it is very difficult.
Maybe if I was younger, I can decide to stay here four years, and I can speak
better, and I can play a different part. Up to now, I can play just European
woman. But when you try too hard, it never happen. So I say to myself, I don't
care.''

All this is uttered in the bass voice that is one of Miss Melato's most striking
characteristics. She has always had the voice. ''When I start to school, I was
so skinny, little, and my voice so deep, people were surprise. I had operation
last year, nodes removed, and because I work in theater all the time, I was
afraid my voice will change, but it did not. Lina Wertmuller had that operation
and she changed. Before, she had terrible voice, worse than mine. She barked
like a bulldog. Now she speaks like a baby.''

Miss Melato coos, in imitation of Miss Wertmuller's new voice.  ''Every time
that she call me now, I say, 'Lina who?' '' Miss Wertmuller, says Miss Melato,
is wonderful, talented and difficult. ''She's lovely when you're not working
with her. When you are working with her, she can be terrible.''

Andrew Bergman, who directed ''So Fine,'' says Miss Melato, is wonderful,
talented, and not difficult. ''He's so young, and he has such a good sense of
irony.''

No matter how many movies she makes, Miss Melato thinks of herself as a stage
actress. ''You can play in a movie if you have the right face, and if you work
with a director who can help you. But to know if you are good or not, you have
to go back to the theater. I try to do both. For me, my work is the most
important thing that I have in my life.''

Because her work is the most important thing in her life, Miss Melato is
unmarried. ''Nobody wants to marry me,'' she says cheerfully. ''Sometimes I say,
'My God, maybe I'll be more comfortable if I have a man, if I have children.'
But you have to choose, I think. You can't have it all. It was my choice to be a
woman and to be alone. Sometimes is hard.''

And sometimes is not so hard. Thinking of the weekend just past, when she flew
through half a dozen discos, Miss Melato's green eyes sparkle. ''I dance with
everybody. That can happen only in New York.  In Rome, I cannot say to strange
people, 'Please dance with me,' because in Italy, you have to stay with the man
that you are coming with. But here is so free. I don't know who are the men, but
I dance with everyone.''

Starting next Tuesday, the Public Theater offers a one-week tribute to Saul
Bass. Mr. Bass is considered the inventor of the modern film title - he did
memorable titles for ''The Man With the Golden Arm,'' ''West Side Story,'' and
''A Walk on the Wild Side,'' among many others. On Thursday, May 21, and Friday,
May 22, he will be at the Public in person to conduct a program of titles and
clips... Bette Midler, Ken Wahl and Rip Torn have signed for ''Jinxed,'' to be
written by Frank Gilroy and David Newman, and released by United Artists... Paul
Winfield has been signed to star with Kristy McNichol in ''White Dog,'' a
thriller based on the late Romain Gary's novel, now shooting in Los Angeles
under the direction of Samuel Fuller for Paramount.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Oliver Stone photo of Mariangelo Melato

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 16, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Garwood Sex Offense Case Goes to North Carolina Jury

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 172 words

DATELINE: JACKSONVILLE, N.C., May 15


A Superior Court jury began deliberating today on charges against Pfc. Robert
Garwood of the Marine Corps after being told by his defense attorney that an
8-yearold girl whom Private Garwood is accused of sexually molesting might have
made up the incident.

''Maybe somebody did these things to her,'' Vaughn Taylor, Private Garwood's
attorney, said in closing arguments. ''Maybe she fantasized it. But it was not
done by Bobby Garwood.''

The 35-year-old defendant, convicted by a court-martial last February of
collaborating with his captors in Vietnam, is accused of molesting the daughter
of a couple who befriended him after his return in 1979 from almost 14 years in
Vietnam. He has denied the charges.

The jury of eight men and four women began deliberating the case late this
afternoon after 45 minutes of instructions from Judge Robert D. Rouse Jr. of
Superior Court. They deliberated until 7 P.M., then were sequestered for the
night at a nearby hotel.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 17, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Chinese Say They Killed 150 Vietnamese Troops

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 126 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Sunday, May 17


China said today that its forces killed more than 150 invading Vietnamese troops
yesterday. It was the largest number of casualties reported from one engagement
since the 1979 border war between the two countries.

The official New China News Agency said a Vietnamese force crossed the border
yesterday in the Faka Shan mountain range in the Guangxi Zhuang region, the
scene of several clashes between Chinese and Vietnamese troops in recent weeks.

The agency said the Vietnamese were repulsed, but it did not say if there were
Chinese casualties.  Yesterday Peking issued a formal protest for the second
time this month against ''Hanoi's organized military provocations.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 17, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PULLBACK BY HANOI IN CAMBODIA IS SEEN

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 807 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 16


With the onset of the monsoon rains, Vietnamese troops in Cambodia are
withdrawing from outlying regions, particularly near the Thai border, to
positions closer to their logistical bases, according to Western military and
diplomatic sources.

The tactical consolidation of the Vietnamese positions is accompanied, according
to the sources, by growing aggressiveness on the part of the troops commanded by
former Prime Minister Pol Pot.  These troops have the support of China with the
complaisance of Thailand, whose territory affords access to the border enclaves
in which the Pol Pot troops and their dependents are based.

Concurrently, international efforts initiated by China and supported by the
United States to put pressure on Prince Norodom Sihanouk and his former Prime
Minister, Son Sann, the two principal non-Communist foes of the Vietnamese
occupation, to form a ''united front'' with the Pol Pot forces were reported by
diplomats to be making no significant progress. Both leaders are reluctant to be
associated with the Pol Pot Communists, who decimated Cambodia's people in their
four years of rule, and the two men deeply dislike each other.

Unhappiness Over Any U.S. Role

In private conversations, American officials here have expressed unhappiness
over any United States role in the internal politics of Indochina and revulsion
about urging any Cambodian to join forces with Mr. Pol Pot. Neither Prince
Sihanouk nor Mr. Son Sann have the military strength to give them a significant
voice in an alliance with the Pol Pot forces.

A diplomat reported that since the Vietnamese withdrawals, Mr. Pol Pot's troops
have gained the upper hand in an area of well over 1,000 square miles of
forbidding terrain extending south from the Thai border town of Aranyaprathet.
The troops fight on behalf of the political entity known as Democratic
Kampuchea, which holds Cambodia's seat in the United Nations.

A diplomat estimated the population in this heartland of Pol Pot strength at
60,000 to 80,000. The estimate is presumably based on intelligence findings. The
total strength of the armed forces, which also control enclaves along the
largely unpopulated northern border with Thailand, is estimated at 30,000 to
40,000.

Most of the staple foods consist of international relief that the United Nations
Children's Fund and the World Food Program turn over to the Thai Army for
distribution. Unicef distributes some food directly to dependents of the Pol Pot
forces.

Stepping Up Spoiling Activities

Military sources reported that the Pol Pot troops were stepping up their
spoiling activities against the Vietnamese, whose strength was estimated at
150,000 to 200,000. They were said to be inflicting ''significant casualties,''
with negative effects on Vietnamese morale, according to deserters turned over
to the Thai military.

Ambushes by the Pol Pot forces were reported to have forced Vietnam to abandon
the use of Route 6, the main east-west highway north of the Great Lake in
western Cambodia, and to have necessitated cumbersome rerouting of military and
civilian supplies to the city of Siem Reap and to the northwest. Frequent
ambushes were also reported on the roads linking the second-largest city,
Battambang, with Pailin and Sisophon near the Thai border.

American specialists familiar with their country's involvement in Indochina's
wars consistently compared Vietnam's position in Cambodia to that of the United
States and the forces it supported.

''In the rainy season,'' a military analyst said, ''Vietnam becomes defensive
and the D.K. becomes offensive.'' D.K. stands for Democratic Kampuchea. ''They
have traded places with us,'' he added, ''but we had the advantage of
helicopters; they don't have enough.''

No End Seen to Warfare

Military analysts see no end to the guerrilla war. The consensus is that
Vietnam's determination is great enough to stay in Cambodia indefinitely, but
that China is equally determined to support Mr.  Pol Pot and to obtain continued
international recognition for his forces and Thai consent to maintaining them in
the field.

However determined the Pol Pot resistance, journalists and others who visited
Cambodia recently reported that Vietnam's hold over all population centers and a
rural population estimated at about six million appears unthreatened.

Representatives of international groups in Phnom Penh and specialists who
interviewed refugees along the Thai border reported that famine had ceased to be
a threat, although pockets of food shortages exist.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 17, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. AIDES' UNCERTAINTY ON RULES IS KEEPING THOUSANDS IN ASIA REFUGEE CAMPS

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1250 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 16


United States immigration officials, uncertain of the new legal standard for
identifying refugees, have held up the admission of 5,000 to 6,000 people from
Indochina who have been stranded for months in refugee camps in Southeast Asia.

The State Department insists that they are refugees because they have a
''well-founded fear'' of suffering persecution if they return to their homes in
Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos. Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. has written
to Attorney General William French Smith complaining that American Federal
immigration officers in Southeast Asia have deferred action on refugee
applications at a rate much higher than was justified.

Senior State Department officials, including Walter J. Stoessel Jr., the Under
Secretary for Political Affairs, and Morton I.  Abramowitz, the Ambassador to
Thailand, met Wednesday with Mr. Smith to emphasize their concern.

The Associate Attorney General, Rudolph W. Giuliani, who attended the meeting,
said yesterday that immigration officers had deferred action on 16 percent of
the Indochina refugee applicants interviewed since January. In recent months, he
said, the rate of deferrals was even higher, and since last October 5,000 to
6,000 applications, representing 8 percent of the people interviewed, had been
deferred.

The Obligation of the U.S.

These cases represent a small fraction of the 317,000 people living in the Asian
camps. The debate over them is part of a larger concern over what obligation the
United States has to the people of Indochina after two decades of American
involvement there. After Federal officials decide the cases now in dispute, they
will have to act on many thousands of similar matters involving refugees who
want to come to the United States.

Mr. Giuliani said that, on the basis of information provided by the State
Department, the ''vast majority'' of the 5,000 to 6,000 applicants were
legitimate refugees and should be recognized as such. Mr. Smith said he would
probably issue a directive to that effect next week.

Mr. Giuliani and other Justice Department officials said that immigration
officers in Southeast Asia had apparently changed the way they were applying the
law without going through the chain of command by checking with the State
Department or consulting Congress.

Questions and Problems Posed

The controversy illustrates some of the questions and problems that have arisen
in the Indochinese refugee program in its six years.  Among the questions are
these:

If the United States has a special responsibility to the people of Southeast
Asia arising from its involvement in the war there, how long does the
responsibility last?

Is it important for the United States to provide a non-Communist alternative to
the peoples of Indochina?  Do generous opportunities for resettlement stimulate
the exodus of people from Vietnam and other countries of Indochina?  At what
point does the flow of refugees become simply a stream of immigrants?  In the
past, Attorneys General admitted refugees on an ad hoc basis, and the definition
of ''refugee'' was limited to those fleeing Communist countries or the Middle
East. The Refugee Act of 1980 ended those restrictions, deleted the reference to
Communist countries and incorporated the broader United Nations definition,
under which a refugee is anyone outside his home country who will not return for
fear of persecution.

The law also required the Attorney General to consult with Congress at the
beginning of each fiscal year on the number of refugees to be admitted from each
country.

In recent months, immigration officers in Southeast Asia have reported that some
of the Asians they interviewed were apparently not political refugees or persons
of ''special concern'' to the United States. State Department officials contend
that last fall formal consultations with Congress established a presumption that
the Indochinese were refugees. As a result of those consultations, the United
States pledged to take 168,000 Indochina refugees this year, or 14,000 a month.

State Department officials said that hardly any refugees were escaping from
Cambodia but that ''boat people'' were still leaving Vietnam at a rate of 5,000
to 6,000 a month. Also, they said, the exodus from Laos continues at a rate of
4,500 a month. The officials estimated that of the 317,000 refugees in camps
throughout the region, 247,000 were in Thailand. They said that many of the
Khmer refugees from Cambodia had been in Thai camps for a year and a half.

'Blanket Assumption' Questioned

A study published last November by the Joint Economic Committee of Congress said
there was reason to question the ''blanket assumption'' that all those leaving
Laos and Vietnam were refugees. The study, written by Dr. Astri Suhrke of
American University here, said, ''Most recent arrivals are 'low-risk' refugees
that do not belong to harassed minority groups, do not have close family ties in
the United States and were not associated with American programs during the
war.''

Dr. Suhrke said that the policy of the United States toward persons fleeing such
non-Communist countries as Haiti was stricter than its policy toward Vietnamese
and Laotians. The Refugee Act was intended to curb such differentiating
treatment of would-be refugees.

The State Department, in a formal comment on Dr. Suhrke's study, said it was
flawed by a ''benign view'' of the Communist totalitarian governments in
Indochina.

To answer some of the questions raised by Dr. Suhrke and others, the United
States says it plans to send a fact-finding team to Southeast Asia to visit
refugee camps, interview refugees and talk to officials in the ''first-asylum''
countries, including Thailand and Malaysia.

Habib's Task Delaying Panel

Tentatively selected as members of the panel are Philip C. Habib, a former
Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs, and James F. Greene, former
Deputy Commissioner of the Immigration and Naturalization Service. The panel's
departure has been delayed by Mr. Habib's role as a special envoy assigned to
try to ease the crisis caused by Syria's deployment of missiles in Lebanon.

The first-asylum countries of Southeast Asia have provided a haven for Indochina
refugees on the assumption that most of them would ultimately be resettled
elsewhere. State Department officials say that if the United States and other
countries stopped taking refugees for resettlement, they fear that the
first-asylum countries might once more push refugees out to sea or back across
their borders.

State Department officials said immizration officers were not trained to
appreciate the political conditions in Southeast Asia.  They said that each of
the ethnic groups of Indochina, the Khmer, the Hmong and the Lao, had
distinctive problems that must be evaluated with care.

Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, proposed last year to let
State Department consular officers process refugee applications, as immigration
officers now do, but Congress did not accept the proposal.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 17, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

JURY FINDS GARWOOD NOT GUILTY OF CHARGES OF MOLESTING A GIRL, 7

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 28, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 509 words

DATELINE: JACKSONVILLE, N.C., May 16


A jury of eight men and four women found Pfc. Robert Garwood of the Marine Corps
not guilty today on all counts of sexually molesting a 7-year-old girl.

The jury returned its verdict at 10:07 A.M., after 35 minutes of deliberation.
The jurors, who had been sequestered for the night, deliberated for two hours
yesterday before telling Judge Robert Rouse Jr. of Superior Court that they were
a long way from a decision.

The jurors stood and faced the judge as William Hudson, the jury foreman,
announced the verdict. Private Garwood bit his lower lip as the decision was
announced, the only sign of emotion he displayed as he sat with his hands
folded.

Later, smiling for the first time in public since the trial began, the
35-year-old marine said, ''For the first time since I was 19 years old, I'm
free.''

Defendant's Fiancee Sobs

Donna Long, the woman who testified in defense of Private Garwood and whom she
says she plans to marry, sobbed loudly when the verdict was announced.

The parents of the young girl, sitting behind the prosecution table, stared
straight ahead. The girl's father said after the verdict was announced that he
would have ''plenty of comments later.''

The jury members were hustled out and were not available for comment. The
prosecutor declined to comment.  Private Garwood was charged with first-degree
sex offense, attempted rape, attempted first-degree sex offense and taking
indecent liberties with a child. Conviction for first-degree sex offense carries
a mandatory life sentence.

Last February Private Garwood became the first American convicted of
collaborating with the enemy in Vietnam, where he contends that he was held as a
prisoner of war for 14 years. A military jury sentenced the private to a
dishonorable discharge and forfeiture of all pay from the date of conviction,
but his conviction and sentence are being appealed and he is on leave.

13 Defense Witnesses Called

In the case decided today, Private Garwood was charged with sexually molesting
an Onslow County child after taking her to get an ice cream cone last Aug. 7.

A prosecutor maintained in closing arguments yesterday that the defense failed
in its attempt to show that the defendant was away from Jacksonville at the time
of the alleged offense.

Defense attorneys rested their case yesterday in the week-long trial after
calling 13 witnesses. Private Garwood's attorneys said their client could not
have molested the child on the evening of Aug. 7 because he was on his way to
Charlottesville, Va., to meet a psychiatrist.

In his closing statement William Andrews, the prosecutor, accused the defense of
''assassinating the character'' of the child's family. He noted that the family
had befriended Private Garwood, and asked: ''Why do you think these people would
turn around and make these charges? What did these people have to gain?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Robert Garwood and his girlfriend

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 17, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Ex-P.O.W. to Head Commission

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 49, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 43 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 16


President Reagan yesterday appointed James B. Stockdale as chairman of the
commission on White House Fellowships. Mr. Stockdale, who retired from the Navy
as a Vice Admiral in 1979, spent eight years as a prisoner of war in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 17, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The World;
Aid to Angola, Pakistan

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 214 words


In other foreign aid votes last week:

* The House committee retained the Clark amendment banning military assistance
to (South Africa-supported) guerrillas fighting Angola's Marxist Government. But
the ban, first adopted in 1976 when memories of the Vietnam war were fresh, had
rougher going in the Senate. Its supporters on the Foreign Relations Committee
settled for a compromise that would forbid aid to the rebels unless President
Reagan could report ''substantial progress, including a cease-fire and
preparations for internationally supervised elections'' in Angola's neighbor,
South-West Africa. Administration officials said they would fight for total
repeal on the Senate floor.

* The Senate committee lifted restrictions on aid to Pakistan imposed in 1975
after it refused to forswear development of nuclear weapons. Authorizing $100
million in economic aid, part of a $2.5 billion Administration package, the
committee directed President Reagan to inform Congress by Oct. 1 on specifics of
his Pakistan aid program and on the Administration's policy to halt spread of
nuclear weapons. Aid is to be cut off, it said, if Pakistan detonates a nuclear
device.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 17, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Honor Revisited

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 713 words


Save some time today for the review of the hostage affair in The Times's
Magazine. As Wordsworth said of a higher form of writing, it ''takes its origin
from emotion recollected in tranquillity.'' Whatever you felt and were made to
feel during those 444 days, did you understand the half of it?

Even familiar facts gain clarity in this narrative: Of course the Shah could
have been treated in other places. Of course those students never meant to hold
the embassy so long. Of course the President calculated the politics of every
move. And so, of course, did his campaign rivals and the Iranian mullahs and
moderns battling over the fruits of a revolution.

There's no point ruining a good yarn by summarizing here all its findings and
tantalizing holes. Reading this retrospective, without howling mobs on the
screen and yellow ribbons in the trees, is its own reward. It suggests which are
the really enduring questions.

The main question, surely, forms in the title of The Times's tale: ''America in
Captivity.'' Who is it that took 225 million of us prisoner?

Those students held first 66, finally 52 Americans. And as John Kifner writes in
the Magazine, they really were students who themselves became captives of their
caper. Ayatollah Khomeini might have released the hostages with a word, but he
was bound over to mullahs determined to exploit the affair to win control of
Iran's government.

President Carter might have written off the hostages and attacked Iran, but not
without risking its collapse or Soviet intervention.  He might have led the
nation to suffer the insult in quiet dignity - as it suffered North Korea's
seizure of the Pueblo crew - until economic pressure could take effect. But Mr.
Carter was the prisoner of opinion polls recording a hunger for strong
leadership, and so he chained himself to the Rose Garden.

Television has been called our jailer, for counting off the nights of national
shame and inventing programs, like ''America Held Hostage.'' But the public
sustained those television excitements with its response - far more intense than
the response to much worse blackmail, like the oil embargo.

Who then took all America hostage? The inescapable conclusion is that Americans
held themselves captive to the affair. Why?

''Honor'' may be the key. Recall Henry Kissinger invoking honor to demand more
forceful action against radicals. Or Jimmy Carter finding honor in concern for
the hostages' safety. Begin the tale in 1953, and support of the Shah is
depicted as honorable. Tune in a generation later, and it can be made to appear
dishonorable.

Admitting the Shah to the United States seemed honorable to those who saw a
fallen friend needing a place to die, dishonorable to those who saw an autocrat
plotting to regain his throne.

Thus debated, honor is a function of time and place. And when nations explode
with emotion about their honor, be assured that more than one episode sticks in
the craw. The hostage affair caught America still reeling from Vietnam and,
soon, Afghanistan, too.

It caught Iran in mid-revolution, with choices it has failed to resolve for
centuries.  Where questions of honor can so dominate politics, invariably there
exists a sense of vulnerability, even weakness. A truly confident America could
have seen the affair not as a challenge to honor but to conflicting interests:
fidelity to an old ally versus relations with the new Iran; the safety of the
hostages versus the principle of their immunity. In its fitful way, the Carter

Administration served all these interests. But it was too weak to prevent the
hostage seizure's becoming a metaphor for American decline.

Weary of constraints on their power and assaults on their motives, Americans
yearned for once to be innocent victims - and took themselves captive. How
remarkable then, that they finally wound up accepting, even cheering, not
honorable vengeance but an ambiguous accommodation of interests. That, too, may
be a metaphor, for new confidence and self-respect.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 17, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE TRIUMPH OF COGNITIVE DISSONANCE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 224 words


To the Editor:

Cognitive dissonance, which is the belief in two or more mutually exclusive
ideas, is not unusual. What is less common is a political philosophy based on
such logical contradictions. Today, American conservatives seem to believe that:

* In technology, America is falling behind the rest of the world; funding for
education and scientific research should be cut.

* Government should stay out of peoples' private lives; what is needed is a
constitutional amendment prohibiting abortion.

* Federal spending causes inflation because it is wasteful and inefficient;
military spending should be increased.

* The military cannot keep enough trained, dedicated people in service; resume
the draft (see also private lives, above).

* The free market should determine the worthiness of any product or service;
curtail Japanese imports.

* America needs efficient transportation; subsidize Lockheed and Chrysler.
Cancel Conrail.  Most serious is the belief that the way to reduce the
likelihood of nuclear war is to build more nuclear weapons. I realize that the
republic in which logic rules has yet to be founded. I hope that the republic in
which illogic rules is not upon us. One concern I have is whether, like the
village in Vietnam, America will be destroyed in order to be saved.
JOSEPH WALKER, Philadelphia, May 11, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 17, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICA IN CAPTIVITY

BYLINE: By A.M. Rosenthal

SECTION: Section 6; Page 33, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 2304 words


omehow, the country did not want to ask many questions. The homecoming seemed
enough -the joy of the return, the sense of relief, the pride in the conduct of
52 Americans, perhaps the expiation (well, we couldn't get you out but see how
happy we are to get you back), certainly the very act of touching hands in
celebration, the national sense of community - all that seemed quite enough. And
there was a reluctance to let go, even when the yellow ribbons began to look a
little dreary in the wintertime.

The new President had a message for the hostages -that's how they'll always be
known, even in freedom. Your jobs are waiting for you, he said, turn the page.
That's what the country wanted to do, too, to get on with it.

There were a few questions here and there, more like musings, touches of
embarrassment, asked mostly to get them off the chest rather than in expectation
of any real answer.

You mean that's all there is to it, the Iranians are going to get away with it?
And what happens if somebody grabs another embassy someplace? And what about the
boys who came back from Vietnam - where were their parades and yellow ribbons?
And what about the boys who didn't? And the eight who died in the raid?

It was rather strange that there were so few questions when it ended. For 444
days the country had been moved, angry, frustrated and quite full of questions
about what happened, what went wrong, what was going on. The taking of the
hostages had become not only a nagging part of everyday life but had helped
bring about the defeat of one President and the installation of another with a
very different view of society and government.

All during those days, the people of the country struggled with the meaning.
Some thought it was a national humiliation. Others thought it was about time we
found out we were weak and did something about it. There were some who had said,
during the captivity, that it showed we were powerless in a new world and others
who had insisted that the problem was not lack of power but a lack of guts in
the White House.

Nobody knew exactly what it all meant. But Americans told each other just to
wait until it was all over, then we'd find out why the helicopters crashed in
the desert, why we went in and failed or why we didn't go in earlier or why we
went in at all, why our friends didn't do more, who was to blame. There were
plenty of questions, but people seemed to agree that we couldn't talk about it
much until the hostages were freed - then we would demand and get answers.

But when it was over, in a country where words like ''full-scale inquiry,''
''smoking pistol,'' ''cover-up'' had become part of the national vocabulary,
there were few questions raised and no answers volunteered.

Almost nobody examined the points of decision or even asked what they were,
although they were plain enough to see. In the pages that follow, these points
of decision will be explored.

The decision to support, over decades, a man who turned out to be detested by
his people, or really caring that he might be. The decision to let him into the
United States - compassion or stupidity? The decision, when the embassy was
taken, that the lives of the hostages were more important than anything else, a
decision that would have been taken by few countries. The decision to try to
negotiate with kidnappers, rather than use force. Then the decision to use
force, but timidly, almost fearfully, with a built-in military timetable for
aborting, a timetable for failure. hen the decision not to talk about it much
for months, followed by the decision to make it very much a part of the
political campaign and to talk about it a lot, at moments of political choice.

There were some rather desultory hearings, but neither the Congressmen who asked
questions nor the Carter Administration diplomats who answered them seemed
interested in probing deeply. The whole attitude seemed to be the same as
President Reagan's: Turn the page.

There were reasons, of course, why so few penetrating questions were raised, why
there was so little inclination to look backward.  To start with, there seemed
to be little to gain. For a full-scale, deeply prepared and tough-minded
in-quiry to take place, there has to be a strong political motivation or strong
public pressure.

The Democrats certainly did not want that. The Reagan Administration wanted to
focus American attention on itself, not on an Administration that had lived
briefly, failed and died.

All that Congressional and television and press scrutiny would have taken away
from the President and focused on the past at the very moment he was trying to
lead the country down new roads.

What's more, any major inquiry would have forced the Reagan Administration and
the Republicans to come up with some pretty good answers as to what they would
have done differently.

Maybe they had some ideas. If so, those were some of the best-kept secrets in
American history. But even if they did, what point in surfacing them?

If there were other revolutionaries having thoughts about seizing American
Embassies, let them wonder what the new American Government would do, what it
meant by its statement that there would be punishment, not negotiations.

There is another kind of inquiry, the never-ending inquiry of selfexamination,
which is the most important kind. It can come out of a sense of desperation. Why
must we be prisoner to foreign oil and where is our independence going?

Or, even more painfully, it can come out of self-loathing - the questions that
will never end about Vietnam, why we fought as we did and did not fight as we
might, and why, hav-ing done what was done, we turned against our own American
victims, the Vietnam veterans.

While it is the task of journalists to continue to probe and push, there is no
fire in the American belly or misery in the mind for an official inquiry into
the hostage crisis.

There are those who talk about guilt in the national psyche about the crisis,
who feel that because we were stupid enough and insensitive enough and callous
enough to support a despotic Shah that we are responsible for the crimes against
us of an equally despotic Ayatollah.

It won't work. The Shah was our mad fool and the Ayatollah is theirs and both
are destined for equally glorious places in world history.

But, having put investigation and guilt aside, there remains perhaps the most
fascinating question. It is not what this tells of the Ayatollah and the Shah
and Iranian terrorists but of ourselves.

We are not simply what we appear to be. But what we appear to be is indeed a
large part of what we really are.  I read that somewhere a couple of years ago
and it stayed with me.  It means so many things, some of them rather
frightening.  It means that there really is no hiding place, that the mask
becomes the face. You may protest and say, ''No, it is not I,'' but it is, or in
large enough truth to matter. You can fool all of yourself some of the time, but
if you fool all of yourself all of the time, you are smashing mirrors.

It is a frightening thought, if you are miserable with yourself as an individual
or as a nation. It is exhilarating if you feel there's a little hope left. It
means that others do matter, that decency is quite as important and real as
meanness, that neatness counts and there is always one more choice to be made.
As we are, so we acted during the hostage episode, and as we acted, so we are.

For instance, quite level-headed and dignified, fairly reticent. We were
different, in our emotional response, from our national caricature - a
caricature is not what we appear to be, but what we are falsely made out to be -
of a country full of bluster and elbow, of overweaning ego and loud noises.  Our
emotions were deep, but we muted them publicly because we felt it was in the
best interests of the hostages to do so - and anyway we weren't quite sure what
we would do if we had our choice.

The fact is that there is remarkably little stomp and bluster in American
international posture, given our strength. Perhaps Vietnam did that for us,
perhaps we were less overbearing than we thought.  Compared to the Russians, we
are modest; compared to the French, positively demure.

The United States is a nation that sees itself as believing in law and order,
and that is how we behaved. There were ''Nuke Iran'' bumper stickers, but they
were not on the cars of the judges who ruled that Iranians had exactly the same
rights in this country as anybody else.

Americans put a lot of store in the individual and we acted that way during the
hostage crisis. That may be less a question of virtue than of good fortune.

If you are born in India and live in a society where millions have died of
starvation or religious warfare or typhoon and where a man's labor is less
valuable than that of a good ox, it takes more strength to believe in the value
of the individual.

The hostages were individuals to Americans, and it was the realization that they
were indeed individuals - each one by each one - that was the base of American
policy for months, and its weakness.  What if your child were there, would you
go in and bomb Teheran or storm the embassy?

Some other characteristics also showed up that were not quite as attractive as
dignity, faith in the law and belief in the individual. Such as: We like to
think of ourselves as independent-minded, but we often seem to be
follow-the-leader. And if we seem to be, we probably are, in some measure. uring
the days of captivity, when we were told that saving the lives of the hostages
was the paramount value, we accepted that without much question or discussion.

Then when Mr. Carter decided to send in the helicopters, which probably would
have resulted in the death of many of the hostages, the only real fault we found
was that the mission failed.

We were told that the capture of the hostages was one of the most important
issues in the world. But we were agreeable when the Government said or did
little for months because it lacked the wit or the strength to do anything much.

We agreed that it all must be taken out of politics. But it was obvious during
the campaign that the Carter Administration regarded the entire hostage affair
as make or break, politically - and millions of Ameri cans voted against Jimmy
Carter because they believed it really was part of politics of the most
essential sort, the politics of leadership.  And for all our sentimentality we
are often seen as being quite unknowing and uncaring about the sentiments and
needs of others.  During the hostage crisis we showed that too - plainly.

It was one thing for us to refuse to ''apologize'' to a mad dictator for our
support of his predecessor. It was another to fail to understand that the
Iranian passion was not based simply on the Ayatollah's rhetoric but on a deep
hatred for a Shah we had supported and whose police, with the United States
saying not a word, had tortured and killed thousands of Iranians. e simply could
never understand that 52 Iranians were as important to other Iranians as 52
Americans were to other Americans, and that a lot more than 52 Iranians had been
killed by our own client, the Shah.

We still don't seem to get that point, not as a matter of guilt or excusing the
hostage taking. But it is important to comprehend it in order to understand what
took place.

Why was it all so important to us? More people die in fires or in automobile
accidents or in plane crashes -many, many times more. Why the anger, the sense
of mourning for those 52, who after all were Government servants and expected to
take risks when they served abroad?

Partly because of compassion, certainly, and partly because of embarrassment -
here were these crazy, wild-eyed Iranians making the United States look like a
clown.

But mostly, I believe, we mourned because there was a feeling in this country
until the 444th day that it was not just the 52 but all Americans and, worse
still, our very Government that had been taken captive and held hostage in that
embassy.

No amount of reticence, logic, patience, or understanding could assuage that
sensation, ever.  There are countries and civilizations that treat victims with
contempt and hatred. Stalin shot and imprisoned Soviet prisoners of war. In
primitive societies the wounded were left in the open to die. The victim is
often seen as unclean.

The hostages, as we all knew, were honorable and faithful men and women who had
done their duty, but they were essentially victims. And this country greeted
them with love.

That was part of the American character revealed: compassion for the victim.
But that compassion could not extend to the leader taken prisoner.  That is why
Mr. Carter had to go. He had been taken and could not free himself.  At least,
it is to be hoped that the kidnappers of the world are aware of the fact that
all future leaders of the United States will closely study the fate of the
captured President.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Jerry Miele, blindfolded being led through
compound

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 17, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GOING THE MILITARY ROUTE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 103, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5863 words


Drew Middleton is The New York Times's military correspondent. By Drew Middleton
fter five months of fruitless negotiations to free the American hostages, Jimmy
Carter decided to interrupt the diplomatic approach in favor of direct action.
On April 11, 1980, at a meeting of the National Security Council in the White
House, he took the decision to ''lance the boil'' of American frustration, as
National Security Adviser Zbigniew Brzezinski put it, with a daring rescue raid
on the United States Embassy compound in Teheran (see operation map on following
pages).

The special meeting was held on the day after Secretary of State Cyrus Vance,
the principal objector to a rescue raid, left Washington for a brief vacation at
Hobe Sound, Fla. Vance, whose foreign-service personnel constituted a majority
among the hostages, was not informed of the meeting before his departure, nor
was he advised of it after he left, although he could have flown back to the
capital in a matter of hours.

For months, a hard-nosed Pentagon view had held that the seizure of the hostages
itself was an act of war and that the United States was, therefore, justified in
adopting a military response. The imminent start of Iran's dust-storm season,
which would seriously hamper vital helicopter operations for months to come,
undoubtedly quickened the April decision-making process.

By the time President Carter sat down to preside at the April 11 meeting, the
principal participants - Vice President Walter Mondale, Gen. David C. Jones,
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Adm.  Stansfield Turner, Director of
Central Intelligence, and the White House aides Hamilton Jordan and Jody Powell
- had become persuaded of the raid's necessity and its chances of success.
Brzezinski and Secretary of Defense Harold Brown, who were also present at the
meeting, were the plan's leading proponents.

Filling in for Vance at the meeting was Deputy Secretary of State Warren
Christopher. Because of tight operational security, Christopher had not
previously been told about the raid. He emerged from the meeting with the
impression that though his boss had consistently opposed a rescue plan, Vance
preferred it to politically volatile military options. Midway through the
hostages' captivity, when there was growing apprehension that steps - such as
selected execution - would be taken against the Americans, a plan was evolved to
take punitive military measures. That plan included a naval blockade, the
bombing of Kharg Island, the site of Iran's main oil-export facility, and air
strikes on the huge refinery at Abadan, which produces most of the country's
fuel for internal use.

Under the impression that his boss, who was taking his first time off in months,
had given his tacit, if reluctant, approval to the plan, Christopher decided not
to disturb Vance with word of the decision to go ahead. Vance learned of it only
after his return to Washington the weekend before the raid was scheduled to
start. At a private meeting with Carter in the Oval Office that Saturday, April
21, Vance repeated his objections, stressing the likelihood that some of the
hostages would be killed in the attempt (a consideration Carter and his other
advisers had also taken into account), and suggesting that the raid might invite
Soviet intervention. That Monday, three days before the April 24 date set for
the rescue raid to begin, Vance told Carter that since he could not support the
rescue attempt he felt he had to resign, but that he would hold off doing so
until after the raid had taken place, and that until then, he would remain
publicly silent.  The failure to rescue the American hostages ended in the
earlymorning hours of April 25 in a grim scene of death and destruction at an
airstrip, code named Desert One, in a remote section of Iran. The full story of
the aborted mission may not be known for years, or even decades. While military
men talk freely among themselves about the raid, only a few will comment
publicly on the affair, and those only anonymously. Months of in-depth reporting
has unveiled new details: Some participants in the decision-making process have
stated that opposing views of the potential Iranian response to a rescue raid
delayed the final decision to go ahead until April 1980.  In the early stages of
preparation for the raid, only the Army and Air
Pgs 106 Force were involved. The subsequent inclusion of the Ma rines and the
Navy has been blamed by some experts for confusing the command structure.

The reason the U.S.S. Nimitz did not carry the additional choppers - which some
experts felt would have assured the success of the raid - was that to do so
would have deprived the carrier of the combat aircraft needed to protect itself
in a dangerous area.

The fuel available at Desert One, according to an Army officer who prefers to
remain anonymous, would have sufficed to refuel at least 10 helicopters and,
with relatively minor adjustment in loadings, could have refueled as many as 15
helicopters, which could have been the backup if the first-wave helicopter force
encountered difficulties, as, in fact, it did.

The landing spot at Desert One was not a random one on a highway, as has been
previously depicted, but was, in fact, an airstrip that had been used in the
past by Savak, the Shah's secret police force.

One knowledgeable military expert has indicated that President Carter accepted
the controversial small rescue force, which must have been put forward by the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, because he wished to present the mission to the world as
a ''humanitarian'' one and not as an act of war against Iran.

Many highly qualified senior military officers were convinced that total
casualties among the hostages and their rescuers would not have exceeded 18
killed or wounded, a number which seems low to other experienced military
experts.

Defenders of limited air support may contend that additional aircraft would have
risked discovery by hostile radar, but the fact remains that the C.I.A. had
supplied detailed information about radar sites along Iran's borders which would
have helped avoid detection.

Plans for the completion of the raid called for a second force of helicopters to
land at a site near Damavand, a small town in the mountains about 50 miles
northeast of Teheran.

Rescue teams from the Desert One and Damavand forces were supposed to move into
Teheran in trucks provided by C.I.A. agents who had infiltrated into Iran
earlier.

The first stop for the rescue team was to have been a warehouse on the outskirts
of Tehe-ran, where the troopers would have been brought up to date on conditions
in the embassy compound by American agents who had earlier infiltrated into
Iran.

The State Department had provided the rescue teams with detailed blueprints of
every building in the compound so that they would know the exact location of all
telephone and electric lines and where to cut them to sever communications as
quickly as possible.

The number of guards at the compound, the kind of weapons they used, and the
guards' probable off-duty locations were known from information provided by a
foreign espionage source that had been monitoring the embassy closely, and with
remarkable accuracy, for some time.

One section of the rescue force was to have engaged the Iranian guards at the
embassy while another group collected the hostages and led them to a football
field and a parking lot within the compound, where helicopters would be waiting
to evacuate them.

If the rescue helicopters were prevented by enemy fire from landing within the
compound, they would put down at Amjadieh soccer stadium, just outside the
compound, to pick up the hostages and their rescuers, who would have to fight
their way there.

The helicopters used in the rescue would all be abandoned at Damavand and the
rescuers and hostages airlifted out of Iran in C-130 transports.

A simultaneous effort was evidently planned to free the three hostages held in
the Iranian Foreign Ministry.  The national rejoicing over the eventual safe
release of the American hostages, through diplomatic means, did little to wipe
away the military's humiliation over the aborted rescue raid. The humiliation is
widespread within the armed services and runs deep, especially among those most
directly involved. Col. Charlie Beckwith, the veteran Army officer in charge of
the ground rescue team at Desert One, now assigned to produce training manuals
at Fort Bragg, N. C., is one of the few who has spoken to the press of his
personal anguish. ''It was the biggest failure of my life,'' he says. ''I cried
for the eight men we lost. ... I'll carry that load on my shoulders for the rest
of my life.''

The disaster in the desert raised a host of critical questions, which persist a
year after the aborted rescue. No one knows all the answers, a senior admiral
says. However, the most important of the nagging questions should be kept in
mind when reviewing what did and did not happen:

Why did the Carter Administration and the Joint Chiefs of Staff accept an
operational scheme from the mission's planners that many American and foreign
experts have summarized as being too little - particularly in terms of the
number of helicopters involved - and too late?

Why was operational security so tight that most of the men on the mission did
not know what the overall plan was until shortly before they took off for Desert
One?

Why was highly important intelligence material on the aircraft at Desert One not
destroyed, once it was decided to abort the mission?

What does the failure indicate about American military preparedness in general?
The answers to many of these questions are hidden behind the wall of security
that has surrounded the mission from its earliest days.  Some military experts
are convinced that the armed services' obsession with security significantly
contributed to the failure of the raid, a view upheld in the report issued by
the Special Operations Review Group, appointed by the President to investigate
the failed mission: ''Many things, which, in the opinion of the Review Group,
could have been done to enhance success, were not done because of the strict
(security) considerations.'' As an example, the review report cited the lack of
sufficient combined exercises among the participating armed services; the need
for more rigorous testing and evaluation by qualified observers other than the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, and better communication between the Air Force Weather
Service team and the operation's planners.

Others, while they disapprove of the way the operation was conceived and
executed, argue that to shed too much light on the Desert One affair could
imperil the success of similar missions in the future.

Whatever the merits of security during the mission itself, was it realistic to
think it possible to maintain security during the training period?

A former American intelligence officer recently also wondered if it was
realistic to expect that total security could have been maintained during the
training period for the mission: ''Hell, this is an open society. You start to
train 15 or 20 helicopter crews and you widen the risk area. You think the
Russians don't watch every major base and exercise area in this country? You
guys, the newspapers and TV, always have these go-go kids looking for something
different on a base. Maybe you can be reasonably sure that 20 servicemen will
keep their mouths shut about what they're doing. You double that number and you
quadruple the risk. Too many operations have been blown by some smart aleck
talking big to show how important he is.''

The review group report noted that although command and control of the operation
was excellent at the higher echelons, it became more tenuous and fragile at the
intermedi-ate levels and that further down the command structure,
''relationships were less defined and not as well understood.''

Further complicating command problems was the decision fairly late in the
planning to expand the original Army-Air Force team - which, according to an
informed source, had been training for a rescue opera-tion ever since the
hostages were seized, on Nov. 4, 1979 - to include personnel from the Navy and
the Marine Corps. Each service had its own methods of training, its own
interpretations of tactical doctrine, which it was not willing to relinquish,
and, as a former Defense Department official recently said, ''On the basis of my
experience, each service would want a piece of the action, and simply settling
who was to do what, with which and to whom would be a major problem.''

The same cloak of secrecy that has covered the April 1980 rescue attempt has
been draped over what appears to have been at least a training program for a
second raid. NBC-TV reported in special segments of its Feb. 19 and Feb. 20
nightly news programs that planning for a second attempt began almost
immediately after the failure at Desert One, despite the fact that the Iranians
had announced they were moving the hostages out of the embassy to a number of
other sites in an attempt to frustrate another rescue operation.

The training for the second attempt apparently followed the tactics employed for
the actual rescue attempt: helicopter and C-130 flights over mountain and desert
terrain in Utah and Nevada, and practice in aerial refueling. In July 1980, one
of the helicopters crashed during a training exercise in Monticello, Utah, and
one of the mechanics, J. Stuart Schatte, was killed and six other crewmen
injured.  Military criticism of the aborted rescue plan, however, has focused
most strongly on the key question of why the helicopter force was so small.
Yitzhak Rabin, the former Israeli Prime Minister and former Army Chief of Staff,
voiced the feelings of many when he asked, with heavy sarcasm, ''America doesn't
have enough helicopters?''

Incredible though it may seem, the first estimate of the number of choppers
required for the mission was four. A re-examination by the joint task force of
the number necessary to assure an acceptable probability of success resulted in
the decision to increase the force to eight.

But why not 12 or 15? Some American civilian experts have suggested that as many
as 25 could have been deployed without undue risk. The length of the flight to
Desert One -over 500 miles - the known delicacy of helicopters in flight, the
probability that in April the force would encounter dust storms, all point out
that the limitation of the force to eight helicopters was a serious misjudgment.

In support of the chosen number, a well-placed source says that the Nimitz could
handle only eight helicopters. If it were to carry more, he says, the carrier
would have had to unload some of its own combat aircraft. Here, as elsewhere in
this tangled, tragic story, there is a sense that those involved in the planning
and execution were ''going by the book.'' And the book made no provision for an
unorthodox aircraft component on a carrier deployed in a high-risk zone. As to
why additional heli-
PAGE 109
copters were not based on the other carrier then in the area, a possible
explanation offered by some is that ''the book'' calls for one carrier to keep
its combat craft fully intact in such circumstances.

In its report, which is not notable for sharply worded criticism, the Special
Operations Review Group said that additional helicopters and crews ''would have
reduced the risk'' of failure. An ''unconstrained planner,'' the group report
suggested, would have asked for at least 10 helicopters under Joint Task Force
Combat rules, 11 under a ''most likely case scenario,'' based, apparently, on
the breakdown of one or more choppers, and 12 if the record of earlier,
comparable operations had been consulted.

As to whether the mission's planners ever actually asked for more than eight
helicopters, that question has never been officially answered. The Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Jones, is on record as saying, ''We were not
denied anything by anybody,'' which begs the question of whether ''we'' asked
for more. That question may be years in the answering, as the Pentagon continues
to keep the mission wrapped in operational secrecy.

One argument put forth by some American military men against the deployment of a
larger helicopter force was that it would increase the risk of the aircraft
being detected by Iranian or Soviet radar.  But most of the Iranian radar sites
had been installed under American supervision, so their location and the area
covered by them were known in Washington. Washington was also aware, from many
sources, that the level of technological aptitude in Iran's radar stations had
deteriorated since the overthrow of the Shah. At any rate, eight helicopters,
all armed with electronic jamming equipment, did fly 500 miles into central Iran
without being detected, so it was not improbable that additional copters could
have done so as well. As for Soviet radar, the C.I.A. made available fairly
detailed information it had about sites along the U.S.S.R.'s borders with Iran.
The story of the failed mission is short and somber.  At 7:30 P.M., local time,
on the night of April 24, 1980, eight Navy RH-53D Sea Stallion helicopters flew
from the aircraft carrier Nimitz, deployed in the Arabian Sea off the coast of
Iran, and headed for Desert One, five hours' flying time away. At roughly the
same time, six Air Force C-130 Hercules tactical air transports, one of them
modified as a tanker, took off from an undisclosed base to rendezvous with the
copters.

Secretary of Defense Harold Brown declared after the mission was aborted that
''no other country ... was aware of, or informed of, the prospect of a rescue
operation.'' ... We relied heavily on our carrier task force.'' He seemed to be
implying that the C-130's, like the helicopters, took off from a carrier. But
the United States was not obliged to inform friendly governments that a group of
C-130's scheduled to land at out-of-the-way American bases within their
countries were destined for a rescue mission in Iran. The C-130's, which have a
maximum range of about 2,100 miles, could have taken off from an American base
in Turkey, or from a base serving the missile testing range in Crete, or
possibly from one of the American-leased airfields in southern Egypt.

About 80 miles into Iranian airspace, on the flight to Desert One, one of the
helicopters was forced down by impending rotor blade trouble and landed at an
undisclosed spot in the desert. Before they were picked up by another chopper
that continued on to Desert One, the ailing chopper's crew removed code books
and secret papers from the aircraft they were abandoning.

About half-way to Desert One, the seven still operable helicopters flew into a
dust cloud, which evidently had not been detected beforehand by military
meteorologists, although such clouds and storms appear with great regularity and
force in that section of Iran at that time of year. After flying through this
cloud without undue difficulty, the choppers ran into a second, larger storm,
said to have been about 200 miles wide and rising as high as 6,000 feet. As the
helicopters groped their way through the cloud, which they were forced to fly
through to conserve their limited fuel, navigation and flight instruments on one
of the copters failed. The pilot, taking into account the deteriorating weather
conditions and the diminishing chances of a safe flight to Desert One, decided,
on his own authority, to return to the Nimitz. When he did so, he was not aware
of the first copter's failure.

Some critics have argued that the pilot should have
Pages 110 111
flown on, taking the chance that his instruments could be repaired at Desert
One. Others ask, ''What the hell sort of maintenance did they have on the
Nimitz, anyway?'' Despite the probability that the dust cloud contributed to the
malfunction, the question still remains whether a shortage of 20,000 Navy
technicians was a factor. It would appear, however, that none of the helicopters
was equipped with dust filters, as are the aircraft of some nations when
operating under similar meteorological conditions.

The six remaining helicopters flew on to Desert One, arriving at intervals of
between 50 and 85 minutes later than planned. Waiting for them were the six
C-130's, which apparently had not encountered any difficulties en route.

Sometime after the aircraft rendezvoused at the landing strip, which had been
used in the past by the Shah's secret police, three vehicles - a bus with a
driver and 43 passengers, mostly elderly people and children, a small fuel truck
and a pickup truck -came down the road. When none of the drivers halted on
signal, an American road-watch team fired warning shots. The bus stopped and its
driver and passengers were detained. When the fuel truck caught fire after its
engine block was struck by a bullet, its driver jumped out and ran to the pickup
truck, which escaped during the turmoil. Col.  Charlie Beckwith, the Army
officer in charge of the ground rescue team, assumed that the men were smugglers
and would not raise an alarm, so no attempt was made to pursue the truck, though
shots were fired at its tires.

Meanwhile, a third chopper, which had suffered a partial hydraulic failure in
flight, was judged to be unsafe and scratched from the mission by the helicopter
unit's commander, Air Force Col. James Kyle. This reduced the helicopter force
to five, one below the minimum decreed by the operation planners.

Colonel Kyle, who was the on-site commander at Desert One, consulted with
Colonel Beckwith, who recommended that the mission be aborted. Colonel Kyle then
reported the situation by radio to the operation's joint task force command in
Washington, which relayed it to President Carter through Defense Secretary
Brown. At 3:15 A.M., Iran time, President Carter gave the order to cancel the
mission.  Despite their disappointment, the prevailing view among the troopers
as they prepared to withdraw from Desert One was that this was only a temporary
setback and that they could try again.

As one of the helicopters changed position to allow a second chopper to refuel
for the flight back to the Nimitz, it collided with a C-130. Both aircraft burst
into flames. Shell casings and burning ammunition from the C-130 peppered the
other helicopters.  One on-the-scene source reports that the situation was on
the knife edge of panic. From all accounts, it was Colonel Beckwith, a man of
proven courage and experience in Vietnam, who pulled things together,
dogtrotting from aircraft to aircraft, barking out orders and assessing the
damages and casualties.

Eight crewmen died in the crash - three in the helicopter, five in the C-130.
Their bodies were left behind. The decision to do so was reportedly made at
least in part because of the urgent need to leave before the explosion's flames,
which could be seen for miles, were brought to the attention of the Iranian
police or Army. There was, thus, no time to let the aircraft cool sufficiently
to make it safe to recover the bodies.

After releasing the bus and its Iranian passengers, the 200-man American task
force left Desert One at about 4 A.M., almost four hours after the first of them
had arrived.

At 1 A.M., Washington time, on the morning of April 25, President Carter went on
television to announce that an attempt to rescue the hostages had been tried but
that the mission had ended in failure.  ''We had all this dust coming down from
the (helicopter's) rotors and all our dust comes right at them from our
engines,'' recalls Joseph J. Beyers 3d, who was, at the time of the raid, an Air
Force staff sergeant serving as a radio operator aboard the C-130 that was hit.
Beyers conjectures that the helicopter hit his C-130 because ''there was just
too much dust and stuff flying around.'' The helicopter pilot couldn't see. ''He
turned,'' Beyers continues, ''hopefully away from where he was going ... that's
when he hit us.''

Beyers further conjectures to an interviewer that when the helicopter hit his
plane, the navigator ''opened that escape hatch and something blew and the
escape hatch came down and hit me on the head and knocked me down the steps.
Either that, or the oxygen blew up.'' Eventually, Beyers crawled to the crew
door.

''They said they saw me stand up ... and then it looked as though I was
catapulted out.'' Some unnamed hero picked him up, Beyers says, ''like a loaf of
bread.''

In retrospect, Beyers, who suffered extensive burns on his hands, arms and
buttocks, sees the operation as ''a hell of a lot more'' than just another
mission. ''It was the job that we'd been trained for,'' he says. ''I don't say
let's hold a grudge. It happened. I don't imagine the wives of the pilots would
feel quite the same way.  ... But there's no personal feeling.''

Reflecting on the mission, the former sergeant, who has since been medically
retired, says, ''At least we tried, you know, which is something we haven't been
doing lately, just letting people stomp all over us.'' No overall judgment on
the prospects for success or failure of the rescue mission, of which the Desert
One affair was only the first stage, can be attempted without some idea of the
entire operational plan as it has since been divulged. Even here, the reporter
and the reader must be cautious. Years elapsed before the complete facts of what
happened at catastrophes like Pearl Harbor were revealed.

From what can be pieced together at the present time, this is probably what
would have happened had all gone well at Desert One.  Another force of
helicopters, carrying additional rescue troopers, was scheduled to land at a
site near Damavand in the mountains 50 miles east of Teheran in the early hours
of April 25. The helicopters, and the Special Forces troopers they carried, were
to remain hidden until it was time for them to join up with the team from Desert
One.

At this point, we encounter some unknowns. Had the helicopters at Desert One
landed and refueled without incident, would they have flown on to Damavand? Or
would they have flown to another staging area? And what about the helicopters
that were to land at Damavand - where were they coming from? Certainly not from
the Nimitz, which could not accommodate them. Perhaps from another aircraft
carrier.  Perhaps from an unknown but convenient ground base, possibly in Egypt.

The troopers waiting at Damavand would have been transported into Teheran in
trucks bearing Iranian Army markings that would have been provided by agents
engaged by the C.I.A. who had infiltrated into Iran. The troopers' first stop
would have been a warehouse on the outskirts of Teheran. There they would join
up with the troopers from Desert One, who would have moved in closer to Teheran,
four hours' flying time away. The combined forces would be briefed by the
American infiltrators, who would bring them up to date on the present situation
inside the compound where the majority of the hostages were held, and then guide
them to the embassy. The plan or plans for rescuing the three hostages held in
the Foreign Ministry are not known, though it is presumed there would be a
simultaneous effort to free them.

The freeing of the hostages was to be the focal point of the mission. The
Americans held some high cards. The State Department had supplied them with
blueprints of every building in the embassy compound. They had maps and
photographs of the area. They had run through the operation on a model of the
embassy. The attackers knew where to cut the telephone and electricity lines.

The number of militants guarding the compound and the kind of weapons they had
were known from a foreign espionage source who had been monitoring the embassy,
and the probable off-duty location of those guards was also known. There were
television reports that the location of the hostages within the compound had
been established through electronic signals picked up by satellites and various
electronic devices when specially treated films of the Super Bowl and other
football games were played. The detail on guard at the embassy was to be
neutralized by nonlethal gas and percussion grenades at the start of the attack.
One section of the rescue force would then engage the remain-ing militants while
another group collected the hostages and led them on to the embassy grounds,
where they would be picked up by helicopters. This could have been the most
hazardous point of the operation. Even if the militants had been overcome and
the hostages freed, the noise of the operation would surely have awakened the
neighborhood. Iranian reinforcements could have brought the hostages and their
rescuers under fire, and attacks on the helicopters flying in from Damavand
might have made this crucial part of the planned operation unworkable.
Page 112

Should the American helicopters be unable to land within the embassy compound,
the alternative plan was for the rescue team and the released hostages to fight
their way to the Amjadieh soccer stadium a few hundred yards from the embassy
and embark on helicopters there for Damavand, where the helicopters would be
abandoned and the hostages and their res-cuers flown out of Iran in the C-130's.

One small touch of success did attend the rescue mission. Despite all the furor
following the failed mission, the agents who had infiltrated into Teheran to
assist in the raid were all able to slip out of Iran by April 29. Confidential
reports from foreign intelligence services have indicated, however, that some
Iranians who had been cooperating in the effort were not so fortunate.  The
Special Operations Review Group was austerely critical of some facets of the
rescue plans. The high-level panel, which, one senior Air Force general says,
''was about as experienced a bunch as you could as-semble; very fair, no axes to
grind,'' was headed by Adm.  James L. Holloway 3d, a former Chief of Naval
Operations. The other members were Lieut. Gen. Samuel V. Wilson, a retired Army
officer and former deputy director of the C.I.A. and director of the Defense
Intelligence Agency; Air Force Lt. Gen. Leroy J. Manor, who during his active
service commanded the joint task force that attempted to rescue prisoners from a
North Vietnamese camp; Maj. Gen. James C.  Smith, Army Deputy Chief of Staff for
Operations; Maj. Gen. John L.  Piotrowski of the Tactical Air Command and Maj.
Gen. Alfred M. Gray, a Marine Corps veteran with extensive experi-ence in
amphibious operations.

The review group's report, a shortened declassified version of which was
released publicly less than a month after the aborted mission, drew some
conclusions which should serve to guide planners of similar future operations:
''As complex and difficult as the Desert One scenario was, it had not been fully
rehearsed. A training exer-cise ... conducted on 13-14 April with two C-130's
and four helicopters was used to validate the Desert One concept.'' The plan for
the desert rendezvous was ''soft.'' There was no readily identifiable on-scene
command post. There were no messengers in the event unanticipated difficulties
necessitated nonelectronic communication. Personnel with ''critical functions''
were not known to all those involved in the mission.  Although the Desert One
plan was ''feasible,'' the review report noted that the risks of compromise
along the road - which is dissected by a highway running between Yazd, a city of
100,000, and Meshed, a city of 500,000, the site of the tomb of Iman Reza, a
Moslem holy man - ''were high,'' because of the probability that it would be
well traveled at night by pilgrims escaping the heat of the day. However, the
report noted, ''no suitable alternative'' was available in a relatively remote
location.  The review report noted that while the failure to destroy classified
material - including personnel lists, planning and alternative escape routes -
on board the helicopters left at Desert One had no impact on the outcome of the
mission, it ''resulted in possible enemy exploitation of sensitive material.''
But it is at least arguable that the error forced the Pentagon to recast tactics
for possible United States intervention in the Middle East, or anywhere else.

The review group's report did state, however, that the concept of a small,
clandestine operation was ''sound'' and ''capable of execution,'' and that a
larger, overt attempt ''would probably have resulted in the death of the
hostages before they could be reached.''

The report reflects President Carter's position on the matter. In a recent
interview, Mr. Carter said: ''I thought it was a good rescue plan. It was the
best we could evolve.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of burned out plane used in rescue attempt map of
mid east area showing rescue plan with events chronology drawing of U.S.
compound with raid plan photo of Joseph Beyers showing his escape in the plane
crash photo of Ayatollah Khalkhali examining currency found on planes

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 17, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOR AMERICA, A PAINFUL REAWAKENING

SECTION: Section 6; Page 114, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4003 words


Steven R. Weisman is a White House correspondent for The New York Times. By
Steven R. Weisman or fourteen and a half months, it was a nightmare that
preoccupied the nation, shook its confidence and turned its people upside down
with frustration. And yet, though only four months have passed since the
hostages were released, it is almost hard now to remember, much less recapture,
the frenzy and emotion the crisis brought forth. It is as if the catharsis of
the event has temporarily overwhelmed our ability to consider its impact.

More than anything else, Americans encountered in Iran a symbol of their
impotence. A nation yearning to believe in itself again, after Vietnam and
Watergate, instead became enmeshed in a struggle with an ancient religious
culture whose record of misunderstanding and hostility with the West dates from
ancient times.

The hostage crisis illuminated the extent to which the United States could prove
itself unable to protect its vital strategic and economic interests, as well as
its citizens. It will be remembered further as a lesson in the limitations of
force, since an invasion or blockade might have thrown the United States into a
confrontation with its allies and with the Islamic world, jeopardized the West's
oil supply, invited Soviet intervention and very likely led to the deaths of the
hostages themselves.

But the spectacle of American failure in Iran will long haunt Americans,
especially because it was driven home by yet another blow to their
self-assurance. For a society that believes almost religiously in technology,
the breakdown of three helicopters in a desert dust storm was a bitter setback.
Fifteen years ago, the American military failure in Vietnam had spoken of the
futility of trying to stop a revolution by force. On the sands of Dasht-e-Kavir
Desert, the failure spoke of courage undermined by poor maintenance and
planning.

If President Carter had gotten the hostages out, he might well have won
re-election. If, on the other hand, he had failed where he succeeded - in
negotiating an end to the hostage crisis before leaving office - he would have
left his successor with a set of dismal choices that would have changed the
character of Ronald Reagan's Presidency.

Historically, however, the Iran crisis is likely to have some less hypothetical
effects. Just as the Vietnam War led to new restrictions on a President's
ability to commit the United States overseas, the hostage crisis will likely
give the

President fresh latitude to respond to acts of terrorists. A President in the
years ahead may find the nation once again held hostage but less willing to
endure 444 days of mostly fruitless negotiations to extricate itself. Americans
are likely to demand a policy that falls between the tough, punitive bombing
pursued by President Nixon in Vietnam, and the milder, more conciliatory
approach of President Carter.

Also, Iran provided Americans a look into the abyss of hatred for America abroad
that is going to make it more difficult, especially on an emotional level, for
the nation to do future business with the third world. The hostage crisis
reawakened the United States to an old reality: that its good intentions are not
enough; that the world is a complex place, even if its complexities are reduced
each night to a grotesque television drama - a screeching collision of two
cultures fated to misunderstand the righteous indignation and callousness of
each other.

Having stared into the face of what it regarded as the embodiment of ''evil,''
America is now probably more likely than ever to assert, free of guilt, the
''virtue'' of its own self-interest around the globe. The United States could
therefore become more distrustful
weisman first jump
of the demands of the people whose cultures it does not readily understand.

It will be the task of historians to sort out the contradictions of our behavior
during the crisis. They are likely to find it odd, for in stance, that a nation
willing to lose 57,000 lives in Vietnam later became so obsessed with saving the
lives of a few score men and women that it restrained its response. Historians
will also have to account for the fact that what might well have been an
occasion for humiliation blossomed instead into a cause for celebration. The
hostages returned home to a heroes' welcome made poignant by the simple but
awesome heroism of people who did little more than survive with grace and
dignity.

In the years ahead, it probably will become clear that America's communal
obsession with the fate of the captives helped produce the nation's ineffectual
response to the plight of the hostages. Many experts already believe that a
policy of ignoring or de-emphasizing the sense of crisis might have caused the
Iranians to lose interest in holding the Americans captive. In any case, the
emotional reaction will tell historians much about what kind of nation we were,
as we headed into the 1980's.  In terms of American attitudes, the Iran crisis
never produced a permanent consensus for any course of action -military,
diplomatic or economic - to free the hostages. But, according to Daniel
Yankelovich and Larry Kaagan, two public-opinion specialists writing in a recent
issue of Foreign Affairs magazine, 65 percent of the public agreed that the
incident, and the way it was handled, decreased American prestige, while 80
percent felt the situation had ''brought the American people together and helped
unify the nation.''

Moreover, Mr. Yankelovich and Mr. Kaagan found that the crisis reinforced
changes in attitudes that had already begun. America's renewed interest in
building up its military capacity was proceeding well before the hostage crisis,
and it probably received its biggest boost in 1979 from the Soviet intervention
in Afghanistan in late December, nearly two months after the Americans were
seized. Whereas only one out of every nine Americans favored an increase in
defense spending at the beginning of the decade, three out of four favored this
course by the end of 1980.

As for military moves to free the hostages, surveys of American attitudes can be
misleading. In the early part of the crisis, the polls showed that Americans
favored ''holding off for now'' on a military response. By April, after the
collapse of a hopeful series of negotiations, it appeared that they were ready
to support such a response, and when the raid occurred at the end of that month,
most Americans not only backed it but suggested that it should have come sooner.
In general, the public appeared to be ''far more aggressive and oriented toward
risky action than most press or leadership commentators,'' wrote Mr. Yankelovich
and Mr. Kaagan.

But experts on public opinion know also that American attitudes are
unpredictable, volatile and, in the end, pragmatic. If a military solution to a
future hostage situation were to destroy American lives in a futile attempt to
assert American self-righteousness, Americans would no doubt rise up in protest.
Indeed, the fateful and fatal landing at Desert One seemed to dampen subsequent
demands for action. Even so, support for President Carter's handling of the
crisis continued to fall from its peak of nearly 80 percent in the first weeks
to 29 percent by the end of June.

After the seizure of the United States Embassy in Teheran on Nov.  4, 1979,
President Carter faced a limited set of choices: The use of force might have
backfired; for months there was no government with which the United States could
negotiate, given the chaos that gripped post-revolutionary Iran. But the
difficulty of the choices hardly served to temper the nation's emotional
response.

There seem to have been four factors in the release of the emotional torrent.
First, the Americans seized were for the most part civilians whose families we
grew to know and whose fate we worried about because of a natural sense of
kinship with identifiable victims. Second, their captivity offered the American
people an unaccustomed opportunity to unite and play the role of aggrieved party
in an otherwise ambiguous situation. Third, the national fixation was at least
in part a product of the actions of President Carter. And fourth, it was a
product of the attention of the news media. Each of these factors needs to be
examined if one is to understand the meaning of the American reaction to the
events in Iran.

The feeling of kinship is perhaps easiest to comprehend, because it is what came
through in the tears of happiness that brought the hostages home. ''We knew the
victims as individuals,'' says David Riesman, the Harvard sociologist. ''The
hostage crisis was similar to a situation in which a community is turned upside
down after someone falls into a well or a mine shaft. The victims were like us,
and we were able to identify with them.''

More subtle than this phenomenon, perhaps, was the selfrighteousness that fueled
the rage of Americans and sent our diplomats into the World Court and the more
amorphous ''court of international opinion'' in a vain attempt to isolate the
Iranians by showing how just was our cause. Rarely does a modern nation have the
chance to portray its problems legitimately in a black-and-white context. The
American view of Iranians as evil found its echo with nations around the globe
who also have a stake in preventing terrorism from poisoning the conduct of
international diplomacy, and who agreed that the American grievance was real.

But having seen that its cause was right, what purpose was served by the nation
becoming mesmerized by its grievance against Iran?  Richard Sennett, the New
York University sociologist, argues that such an attitude was counterproductive.
''The crisis became a symbolic confrontation in which a realistic judgment of
the stakes gave way to an exercise in mass hysteria, in which we pursued the
thing that yielded the greatest psychic and emotional benefits,'' he says.
''Whereas probably the moment we had said to the Iranians that these people
aren't worth it to us, they would have been freed.''

Mr. Sennett's assertion is, of course, debatable. Mr. Sennett agrees that it is
virtually impossible to imagine any President writing off the hostages,
effectively declaring them martyrs in advance, particularly after the news media
began their coverage of the captivity.

Certainly, President Carter and his advisers assert in retrospect that they had
little choice but to keep the lives of the hostages in mind, balancing their
safety against the dictates of the nation's honor, and of demands for
potentially disastrous military response.  Mr. Carter sought to show the world
the importance he attached to the hostages as individuals as his way of
preventing their being put on trial or even executed. The President also felt
the need to sell to the American people a policy of military restraint that he
had settled on for practical reasons.

But the fact is that it also served Mr. Carter's political purposes in his fight
for re-election to dwell on the lives of the men and women in Iran, to be seen
''acting Presidential'' as he visited with their families and kept dim the
lights of the White House Christmas tree. Whatever his motives, it seems certain
that the American people followed his lead in becoming obsessed with the fate of
the hostages.

The fourth and final factor whipping up American emotions, the behavior of the
news media, may be the most complicated.  Despite the drumbeat of Walter
Cronkite's nightly countdown and, on another channel, the martial music of
''America Held Hostage,'' television's coverage of the hostage crisis was at
least as much a product of the nation's obsession as it was an instigator; the
network news shows all experienced surges in their ratings when the hostage
situation came to a boil. But it is also true that when the camera crews were
kicked out of Iran, American interest waned. When they were there,
demonstrations took place on cue as the cameras whirred, so that each night
Americans were absorbed in the spectacle of marching masses, screaming their
unintelligible slogans. Surely this presented a distorted picture of the lives
of the Iranians, the complexities of their sentiments toward the United States
and the painstaking, frustrating task confronting American diplomats. But for
most Americans, these demonstrators remained the commanding image of Iran
throughout the hostage ordeal.

''Television played it like a soap opera, and made it the greatest soap opera of
the year,'' complained George W. Ball, former Under Secretary of State and
onetime adviser on Iran to President Carter, in an interview last year before
the release of the hostages.  Referring to the seizure by North Korea of 83 crew
members aboard an intelligence ship, Mr. Ball said, ''In 1968, when the Pueblo
hostages were taken, it was not made into one of the great events of our time.
It's true, they were naval personnel, but they were in much worse shape, because
they were tortured, and they were kept for nearly a year. Television has played
this situation up so that it has become the central issue of American policy,
which I think is absurd.''

Television executives argue, in response, that the United States Government set
the tone from the outset of the hostage drama. ''If the Government had nothing
public to say, except that it would run things as if no crisis existed and we
will negotiate quietly until they're released, the media would not have been
able to do anything with the Iran story,'' says Jeff Gralnick, executive
producer of ABC's ''World News Tonight.'' The news media have been adding drama
to events of the day, of course, since the graphic revolution of the 19th
century first allowed newspapers to print photographs. The ability of the press
to whip up domestic furor about events overseas was first demonstrated during
the Spanish-American War. The question facing the country today is whether the
contrivance has taken over, and what sort of relationship there is between
reality and the events portrayed on the news each night. Twenty years ago,
Daniel J. Boorstin, the historian who is now Librarian of Congress, argued that
the United States had become threatened by ''a new and a peculiarly American
menace...the menace of unreality.''

''We risk being the first people in history to have been able to make their
illusions so vivid, so persuasive, so 'realistic' that they can live in them,''
he wrote, in words even more relevant today. ''We are the most illusioned people
on earth. Yet we dare not become disillusioned, because our illusions are the
very house in which we live; they are our news, our heroes, our adventure, our
forms of art, our very existence.''

It is important, in recounting the extremes of American emotionalism during the
Iran crisis, to remember that certain excesses were avoided. There has been no
ugly binge of recriminations over ''Who lost Iran?'' Although Americans
displayed some vindictive feelings toward Iranian nationals in the United
States, and Mr.  Carter tried to expel many of them, there was no repetition of
the brutal treatment of Japanese-Americans that occurred on the west Coast
during World War II. There were no rampages of lynch mobs, and during the
negotiations there seemed to be a widely shared recognition that Iran was due
some concessions. Although the deal to free the hostages was criticized in many
quarters, it was allowed to stand, and there have been few cries of retaliation.
''What good would just revenge do and what form would that take?'' asked
President Reagan at his first news conference. ''I don't think revenge is worthy
of us. On the other hand, I don't think we act as if this never happened.'' The
hostage drama encompassed two final elements, the rise and fall of Jimmy Carter
himself and the culmination of American misunderstanding of Iran itself.

For Mr. Carter, the Middle East became the region of his greatest triumphs and
failures. Having succeeded in bringing peace between Israel and Egypt and moving
the United States away from its dependence on imported oil, he nonetheless met
his destiny in a vendetta with an Iranian regime that saw fit to rebuke him
personally by releasing the hostages minutes after he left office. And no one
will ever know for sure how much their release was speeded by some offhand
comments from Ronald Reagan, calling the Iranians ''barbarians'' and ''common
criminals,'' and suggesting that they might find it tougher to negotiate with
him.
weisman final jump

In a sense, the 444-day hostage crisis encapsulated the arc of Mr.  Carter's
popularity, with a politically triumphant strategy used skillfully, and
sometimes shamelessly, at the outset against his election opponents. In the end,
though, it insured that the voters would punish him on Election Day, Nov. 4,
1980 - one year after the hostages had been seized - for having failed to get
them out.

Iran also encompassed the uncertainties of Mr. Carter's foreign policy, which
began with a promise to free us of our ''inordinate fear'' of world Communism
and ended high on the battle stations of a renewed cold war. Mr. Carter sought
to restore morality by emphasizing human rights, but his policy evidently sent
mixed signals to the Shah and shook his faith in our resolve to back him up. In
the end, with Iran, Mr. Carter was left to assert a different kind of morality -
that of the victim.

The hostage crisis in Iran may not have been what drove Jimmy Carter from
office, but it seemed to epitomize the forces that did.  And a President who had
risen to office because of his mastery of symbolism, achieving its height in his
walk down Pennsylvania Avenue on Inauguration Day, met his fate in large measure
because Iran had become a symbol of what Americans had come to dislike about
their country - its seeming inability to get control of events and serve as the
master of its fate.

Yet another image comes to mind when one thinks of Jimmy Carter and Iran - the
glittering dinner Dec. 31, 1977, with the Shah and Empress Farah in Teheran,
where the President turned to his hosts and declared: ''Iran, because of the
great leadership of the Shah, is an island of stability in one of the more
troubled areas of the world.'' The President took no note, that New Year's eve,
of the anti-Shah demonstrations that had led to still more arrests of Iranian
dissidents earlier in the day.

Here was a foreshadowing of American misperception of Iran, although in fairness
Mr. Carter was at this moment serving simply as its vessel. How could the United
States have evolved from its role as a savior of modern Iran in the ashes of
World War II - when President Franklin D. Roosevelt pressed both Joseph Stalin
and Winston Churchill to assure its independence as a nation - into a country
denounced as a ''great satan,'' if not without a vast quantity of delusion?

In his book, ''Paved With Good Intentions,'' Barry Rubin, a fellow at the Center
for Strategic and International Studies at Georgetown University, recounts how,
from the beginning, the United States - in its zeal to establish the Shah as its
ally in the Persian Gulf - had failed to understand three basic concepts dating
from ancient Persian history: the importance to the people that their ruler be
religiously pious, a quality more important even than his being democratic or
nationalistic; the fact that from the beginning, Iran had never fully succeeded
in accommodating the competing claims of secular and religious authority, and
the fact that throughout Iranian history swirled a tradition of xenophobia and
distrust of foreigners.

And so the United States had failed to see how the Shah's modernization program
had menaced an ancient, religious culture, and failed to see - in part because
it looked away - the savagery of his domestic persecutions. There was also the
failure to learn anything about the elements in Iranian society that had grown
weary of the Pahlevi regime.

Public opinion surveys showed later that most Americans blamed the Shah for
sowing the seeds of his own downfall, but it took the hostage crisis to drive
the point home. Meanwhile, the earlier American failures simply presaged others
to come: the willingness to accept assurances from a shaky government that the
American Embassy would be protected if the Shah were allowed into the United
States; the insistent belief that Iran's secular leaders were capable of
concluding a deal to free the hostages; the failure to comprehend how little
Iran's religious clerics cared about their country's image in the world, and how
the logic favoring release of the hostages was destined to be undermined by
internal political disputes.

For its own reasons, America had cast its lot with the Shah of Iran, and perhaps
history showed no other course of action for the nation to take. During the
hostage crisis, the news media often seemed to mirror the confusion rather than
to clarify it, which is understandable in times of turbulence. Now that the
hostage crisis is over, though, it is still not clear what lessons the United
States has learned. President Reagan has said that the hostages should have been
declared ''prisoners of war'' and that next time the United States will follow a
policy of ''swift retribution'' against terrorists. But how will such a policy
be executed? And how will we react when faced with important allies who become
embroiled in their own domestic troubles?

Already there is talk, in fact, that Iran has become the focus of a sort of
selective amnesia that characterized Vietnam. Americans who a few months ago
celebrated the end of the hostage crisis now seem to want to forget it. But this
does not mean that it will have no deep affects on the nation's psyche, only
that those affects will have to be measured in the light of future developments.

It seems certain that the hostage crisis taught Americans once again that the
world is a violent place, filled with people who don't love us after all - a
reminder likely to propel the nation to assert its interests with less of a
desire to be loved. But only in the years ahead will it become apparent whether
the United States has overcome its tendency to alternate between
self-flagellation and euphoria and awakened from the Iranian nightmare
clear-eyed enough to react rationally to events overseas, without necessarily
banishing emotions that in this case brought unity of purpose and, in due time,
a sense of joy to the American people.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of John D. McKeel welcomed home by his mother

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 17, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MORAL FICTIONS

BYLINE: By JULIAN MOYNAHAN; Julian Moynahan's most recent book was the fictional
autobiography ''Where the Land and Water Meet.'' He teaches the modern novel and
19th-century English literature at Rutgers University in New Brunswick.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1094 words


THE ART OF LIVING And Other Stories.  By John Gardner.  Woodcuts by Mary
Azarian.  Illustrated. 310 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $12.95.

MOST of the 10 stories in John Gardner's new collection develop the common theme
of art and its vexed relation to life. This was also the subject of Mr.
Gardner's book-length essay, ''On Moral Fiction,'' published in 1978. There he
made substantial use of Tolstoy's argument for a strictly moral art, as
developed in the pamphlet ''What is Art?'' Some of Tolstoy's later fiction is
sadly marred by his determination to make his artistic instincts conform to
doctrinaire moral and religious views. Certainly it is possible that Mr. Gardner
runs a comparable risk in following up his moralizing essay on fiction with
stories closely related to it in theme. But before addressing that problem let's
recall what ''On Moral Fiction'' had to say.

In it he argues that all good art, including prose fiction, should be moral. By
this he means it should be life-enhancing, protecting human existence from the
dark forces of chaos (the ''trolls'') pressing in from all sides and coming up
from below, seeking whom they may devour. In making this argument he is quite
hard on many of his fellow writers, issuing such dismissive decrees as ''bad art
is always basically creepy; that is its first and most obvious identifying sign.
Warhol. Philip Roth,'' and savaging Thomas Pynchon for his ''winking, mugging
despair.'' E.L. Doctorow and Norman Mailer are issued flunking grades and Samuel
Beckett barely passes, while John Fowles, for reasons not entirely clear, makes
the very sparse Honor Roll. These magisterial judgments are consistent with
Gardner's idea that ''true art treats ideals, affirming and clarifying the Good,
the True and the Beautiful,'' that ''real art creates myths a society can live
instead of die by.''

While there is something of the Welsh preacher, full of righteousness, in John
Gardner, perhaps even something of the upstate New York prophet in a direct line
from Joseph Smith, many pages of ''On Moral Fiction'' make lively reading, and
it's a positive pleasure to see various fashionable gloom spreaders and doomsday
peddlers get it in the neck. Yet one wishes that Mr. Gardner gave more evidence
of having deeply meditated on modern history, and that he would avoid such
juvenile terms as ''creepy'' in assessing mature art and artists. I suppose
Giacometti's sculptures are in his sense creepy, yet their contribution to
modern art and life is major. On the other hand, Mr. Gardner's title story,
''The Art of Living'' - about a small-town chef slaughtering and ragouting a
small black dog stolen from a pet store - is very creepy, and I believe I could
survive the shock of being enjoined never to reread it.

The worst thing about this story is not its central event, or the idea that
event may illustrate, but its technical ineptness. The narrator, supposedly a
member of an adolescent motorcycle gang during the early years of the Vietnam
War, looks back on that period from a time considerably later but never
establishes any significant relation between ''then'' and ''now.'' His and his
companions' speech patterns of the earlier period lack flavor and
verisimilitude, and the various Italian-American males connected with the
restaurant where the canine feast is prepared are hard to tell apart. Also, the
story lacks a consistent economy of treatment, so that we are told too much
about this or that person or incident, too little about others. The thing reads
like a try at a novel that didn't work out, not like a crafted short story.

Rather better is the story ''Nimram.'' The title character is a prominent
conductor of late-Romantic symphonic music, much preoccupied with his own
success, who finds himself next to a 16-year-old girl on a flight from the West
Coast to Chicago. It turns out she is dying of an incurable disease, and this
shows Nimram his vulgarity in worrying about being recognized in public or being
interviewed by People magazine. In a brief epilogue, the child is brought to
Orchestra Hall, where Nimram is conducting a hugely augmented Chicago Symphony
in Mahler's Fifth Symphony: '' ... she had never in her life heard a sound so
broad, as if all of humanity, living and dead, had come together for one grand
onslaught.''

Here no doubt is an instance of art's life-affirming quality, but is it truly
what a young girl with an incurable disease, who has had some recent experience
playing in the string section of her school orchestra, would hear in the music?
I don't think so. This tiresome ''humanizing'' of music tends to be a vice not
of the young, but of fiction writers and second-string critics meeting
deadlines.

There is clumsy writing, as when it's said of the conductor that ''When he'd put
behind him, at least for public appearances, that famous 'Beethoven frown' -
once a private joke between his wife and himself but now a thing as public as
the mileage of his Rolls, since his wife had mentioned both, in an unguarded
moment, to an interviewer - he'd discovered that smiling like a birthday child
as he strode, tails flying, toward the light-drenched podium came as naturally
to him as breathing, or at any rate as naturally as the second-nature breathing
of an oboist.''

This lurching style of excessive (bearish) parenthetical remarks may be a try at
rendering in prose the overloaded, ''stretched'' musical idiom of Mahler or
Bruckner. That would not explain or justify, however, comparable excesses in the
prose of the next story, ''Redemption,'' where one sentence, beginning ''Because
she had, at thirty-four ...,'' lurches on for 94 words before reaching its main
clause. ''Redemption'' is about learning, through musical study and the example
of an ancient Russian teacher of the French horn who had survived the Bolshevik
terror, how to live with the anguish and sorrow of having contributed
inadvertently to a brother's accidental death.

The best story in ''The Art of Living'' is ''Come on Back.'' It is a heritage
piece about rural and Welsh roots which produces pleasing variations on the
theme of art through an informed, affectionate look at the Welsh passion for
choral singing. By far the worst and longest story is ''Vlemk the Box-Painter,''
a tedious pseudo-medieval allegory about the painting of a ''speaking likeness''
of a princess on a rosewood box. There is nothing to be said in its favor,
except that Mr. Gardner, in conceiving it, going on with it and publishing it,
shows the courage of his moral convictions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of John Gardner

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 17, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM VOICES

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1066 words


NAM The Vietnam War in the Words of the Men and Women Who Fought There.  By Mark
Baker.  324 pp. New York: William Morrow & Co. $12.95.
EVERYTHING WE HAD An Oral History of the Vietnam War by Thirty-three American
Soldiers Who Fought It.  Edited by Al Santoli.  Illustrated. 265 pp. New York:
Random House.  $12.95.

By MARC LEEPSON

IN a split-second scene in the movie ''M*A*S*H,'' we get to see into the mind of
an American Army doctor as he hears the news that he's going home from Korea. He
visualizes stepping off an airplane in his hometown and spotting his wife and
small children. He jubilantly tosses his hat in the air and rushes to greet
them. As he is engulfed in hugs and kisses, a marching band plays a patriotic
song.

That idealized vision of coming home couldn't be farther from the welcome
accorded the nation's 2.7 million Vietnam veterans. No one expected victory
parades; after all, we lost the war. But it's hard to imagine that many
returning Vietnam veterans foresaw what awaited them. Blamed by hawks for not
winning and by doves for participating, they became uncomfortable reminders of a
conflict that caused unprecedented discord in this country.

Mark Baker's ''Nam'' provides evidence of the uneasy relationship that developed
between Vietnam veterans and the American public. Mr.Baker quotes a veteran
about what happened to him while he was celebrating at an airport bar on his way
home. The soldier noticed ''a guy over at a table with two kids and a woman. The
kids were about my age - nineteen or twenty. 'Home on leave, are you,' the guy
says to me. 'Nope, just got discharged.' 'You just got back from where,' one of
the kids says. 'Vietnam.' 'How do you feel about killing all of those innocent
people?' the woman asks me out of nowhere.''

Another veteran told Mr. Baker: ''I went home straight from California to O'Hare
Airport in Chicago. I got home about three in the morning. Everybody in the
house got up and said hello. Then they all went back to sleep. At 8:30 when my
father left for work, he woke me up to say, 'Listen, now that you're home, when
are you going to get a job?' I packed up and left. I haven't been home since.''

In the face of this underwhelming reception, most Vietnam veterans soon learned
to keep their war experiences to themselves, and a barrier of silence grew up
between them and other Americans. Only in the last few years has that barrier
begun to crumble, at least partly because veterans like Ron Kovic and Philip
Caputo have written down their real-life Vietnam nightmares in accurate and
devastatingly powerful memoirs. Mr. Kovic's ''Born on the Fourth of July''
(1976) and Mr. Caputo's ''A Rumor of War'' (1977) - along with correspondent
Michael Herr's ''Dispatches'' (1977) - contain the most vivid pictures
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Marc Leepson, a journalist and freelance writer, served with the United States
Army in Vietnam.
of the mad American misadventure in Vietnam.  Mr. Baker's ''Nam,'' which is a
skillfully arranged compilation of tape-recorded accounts of the war in the
words of dozens of its veterans, easily stands with the best descriptive
accounts of the war. Mr. Baker, who is not a veteran, presents the story as a
smoothly flowing chronological narrative, beginning with tales of draft boards,
induction ceremonies and boot camps. He ends with a series of disquieting
homecoming stories. In between are descriptions, which ring brutally true, of
what went on in Vietnam.

''Nam'' is not a literary work, but this is as it should be. The words of the
veterans were spoken, not written, and the fact that the stories are not cleaned
up adds to the book's power. Mr. Baker's brief chapter introductions, however,
are artfully written: ''The war billed on the marquee as a John Wayne
shoot-'em-up test of manhood turns out to be a warped version of ''Peter Pan.''
Vietnam was a brutal Neverneverland, outside time and space, where little boys
didn't have to grow up. They just grew old before their time.''

Al Santoli's ''Everything We Had,'' also an oral history of the Vietnam war,
does not measure up to ''Nam's'' high standards. Mr.  Santoli, a Vietnam combat
veteran, provides a brief preface to ''Everything We Had,'' and then, except for
one chapter, turns the book over to others who also fought in the war. (Mr.
Santoli gives the names, ranks, outfits and brief biographies of the men and
women he quotes; Mr. Baker does not.) Too many of these first-person accounts
are pointlessly anecdotal, and a few are barely intelligible. And yet there are
some gems in ''Everything We Had,'' including a chilling account of the
behind-the-lines work of the United States Navy Seals, as told by Mike Beamon,
and Adm. William Lawrence's courageous tale of life inside a North Vietnamese
prison.

One section is truly brilliant: a 13-page juxtaposition of the reminiscences of
a lieutenant with a cushy job near Saigon and of a Marine stuck in the hell of
Khe Sanh. This deft opposition of stories provides an inspired metaphor for the
surrealistic craziness of the war.

In spite of its shortcomings, ''Everything We Had'' - like ''Nam'' -
accomplishes what oral history is meant to do: It relates an event in the words
of those who lived it. Books such as these, Mr. Baker writes, may be filled with
''generalizations, exaggerations, braggadocio and - very likely - outright
lies.'' But as he also notes, the ''human imperfections simply authenticate the
sincerity of the whole.'' By illuminating the horror that was the Vietnam war,
both books may well help to break down some of the barriers between the Vietnam
veteran and the American public.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 17, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Nonfiction in Brief

BYLINE: By Walter Goodman

SECTION: Section 7; Page 16, Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1360 words


REAL SECURITY Restoring American Power in a Dangerous Decade.  By Richard J.
Barnet.  160 pp. New York: Simon & Schuster. $10.95.

When an Administration falls, it takes with it all manner of beneficiaries,
accomplices and hangers-on. Prominent among them these days are the think
tanksters, bands of specialists with academic credentials dedicated to
formulating arguments for previously determined positions. Richard Barnet is a
senior fellow of the Institute for Policy Studies, a group, manned by energetic
crewmen who found some favor in the Carter Administration, that has now been
outflanked on the right by tanks with names like Hoover, Georgetown and the
American Enterprise Institute. Mr. Barnet's new book is aimed at those tanks as
well as at fortresses, like the Committee on the Present Danger, that are
softening us up for the Reagan Administration's arms program.

The argument over how much is enough, Mr. Barnet observes, is a ''parallel
monologue,'' with both sides addressing the imponderables of Soviet psychology:
What will they do if we do this, how do we counter that, with what effect on
them? If those who oppose every addition to the national armory seem to be
wishful thinkers about Soviet intentions, the present advocates of the
more-the-mightier are showing symptoms of machismo.

Mr. Barnet reminds us that America's use of arms in recent decades, whether
directly in Vietnam or indirectly in countries like Iran, has not enhanced our
position. Nor have the Soviets, who have managed to make enemies from China to
Egypt, done better. As Mr. Barnet sees it, the superpowers face similar
problems: There are now too many players in the international game and they
cannot be controlled from afar. Further, thanks to the United States-Soviet
competition, this awakening has been accompanied by a spread of weapons,
including nuclear weapons, that permits even the most benighted nations to
conduct formidable military operations. And the unending expenditures on arms
for export, stockpiling and, one must hope, ultimate obsolescence have weakened
the economies of both the United States and the Soviet Union, thereby reducing
their power to act independently and effectively. The blend of martial might,
economic instability and diffusion of power is an invitation to explosion.

Although Mr. Barnet's last chapter floats away on the kind of prose that
participants in the arms debate, on all sides, find irresistible (''To develop
the strength to act in the world so that our children and grandchildren may
live, we will have to rebuild our confidence in ourselves''), his plea for an
arms control agreement is compelling at a time when the sounds and sights in
Washington contain so much drum beating, chest thumping, muscle flexing, knee
jerking and growling in the dark.
THE BON MARCHE Bourgeois Culture and the Department Store, 1869-1920.  By
Michael B. Miller.  Illustrated. 266 pp.  Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
Press.  $13.50.

From the middle of the 19th century until World War I, the Bon Marche in Paris
was the world's preeminent department store - which is to say that it epitomized
the aspirations and pretensions of a booming bourgeois society. Michael Miller,
who teaches history at Syracuse University, shows how technical innovation,
social organization and moral values came together under a remarkable merchant,
Aristide Boucicaut, to give Western society a new kind of institution.

The bright and spacious glass-and-iron building created by L.A.  Boileau and
Gustave Eiffel was suited to Boucicaut's vision of selling ''everything useful,
convenient and comfortable that experience has been able to produce'' in a
setting that made shopping a central pleasure of middle-class life. The success
of the enterprise had much to do with fixed prices, cash sales, fast turnover,
good value and a level of service and efficiency well beyond the ken of our own
Macy's or Gimbel's. Deliveries were made five times a day, in horse-drawn wagons
driven by men in top hats, and the hint of discourtesy was ground for dismissal.
(More than a third of the employees hired at the Bon Marche in 1873 had been
fired by 1878 for such offenses as talking back to a superior or not looking
presentable or ''discontenting'' a client or participating in sex out of
wedlock.) As Mr. Miller shows, the long and regimented workday was accompanied
by a paternalism that was radical for its time and would be considered
reactionary today. The management provided hot lunches, fencing lessons, a
library and retirement plans; the employees, many of whom lived on the premises,
kept their skirts and trousers clean.

Mr. Miller is a sober reporter who scorns the sort of anecdotes that his subject
invites, but even he rises to rhapsody when conveying the store's allure:
''Dazzling and sensuous, the Bon Marche became a permanent fair, an institution,
a fantasy world, a spectacle of extraordinary proportions, so that going to the
store became an event and an adventure.'' At a time of unprecedented social
movement in France, department stores not only celebrated the values of the
middle class, but also dramatized the best and the worst of the bourgeois mode
-energy, discipline and productive organization, along with materialism,
rigidity and a narrow and sometimes cruel definition of propriety. No
self-respecting department store employee today would stand (sitting down while
on duty was forbidden) for the rules that applied off hours as well as on to the
grande famille of the Bon Marche. But have you tried to exchange something
lately?
THE WORLD OF DIAMONDS By Timothy Green.  300 pp. New York: William Morrow.
$12.95.

Many fascinating facets of the diamond trade are scrutinized in this workmanlike
investigation into ''who mines, who markets, who smuggles, who buys diamonds
today.'' Visiting diamantaires in a score of cities on five continents, Timothy
Green has dug up a wealth of facts and anecdotes that convey the effort, emotion
and calculation ignited by the flash of the gem. There is ingenious engineering
and skullduggery, hard muscle power and international political power, the skill
of the cutters and the skill of their hucksters - all fed by and feeding the
human lust for possession.

The central protagonist here is the world's diamond imperialist, De Beers, the
South African firm that has for a century controlled the global market. The
future of this well-ordered yet ineffably romantic empire is increasingly
problematic as new sources of diamonds in other parts of Africa and in the
Soviet Union join the game. For now, in the largely Jewish diamond fraternity,
which ranges from the millionaires who meet periodically in London to set the
rules of their monopoly down to the retailers who enliven New York's 47th
Street, secrecy is rule number one - appropriate enough for dealing in a product
whose ultimate value is such stuff as dreams are made on.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. PANEL ASKING A BROAD STUDY OF TOXIC AGENTS OF VIETNAM WAR

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 607 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 17


A panel of Government scientists is recommending a broader study of whether the
herbicide known as Agent Orange or anything else in the environment of Vietnam
harmed the health of American soldiers who served there. The panel said the
Defense Department seemed to be unable to determine which soldiers were exposed
to the herbicide.

The Government sought to identify the military units that entered areas in which
the herbicide was used to destroy foliage that would conceal the enemy. The
panel of scientists said in a report to the White House that the Pentagon's
records were so incomplete that experts had been unable to establish the amount
of exposure that any particular group of soldiers encountered.

''The panel is of the opinion that design of a scientifically valid Herbicide
Orange study of ground troops may not be possible,'' said the panel's chairman,
John A. Moore, the associate program director of the National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences. ''If the focus of a study of Vietnam veterans is
broadened to consider Vietnam service as the exposure factor,'' Mr. Moore said,
''a scientifically valid study can be designed.''

Veterans' Groups Express Doubt

He suggested that a broader study be undertaken of the health effects of all the
herbicides, insecticides, drugs and poisonous fungi that soldiers may have
encountered in Vietnam.

But representatives of veterans' groups which have pressed for answers on the
Agent Orange issue expressed wariness about a more generalized study. ''Veterans
still want answers on whether Agent Orange caused illnesses,'' said Lewis
Milford, director of the National Veterans Law Center, which spent years trying
to interest the Government in investigating the consequences of the herbicide
spraying.

''If the Government says that they can't come up with a group of ground troops
that were exposed,'' he went on, ''they had better let veterans and their
scientists take a look at the records to see if that is so.''

Agent Orange contains the contaminant dioxin, one of the deadliest of poisons.
Twelve million gallons of the herbicide were used in Vietnam to destroy crops to
reveal enemy hiding places in jungles.  Thousands of veterans have complained of
disabling and life-threatening illnesses, including cancer and birth defects in
their children, that they attribute to exposure to Agent Orange.

45,000 Veterans Given Tests

About 45,000 veterans have taken examinations at Veterans Administration
hospitals to determine the effect of Agent Orange on them. Veterans' groups
estimate that as many as 80,000 soldiers were exposed to the chemical. The
Veterans Administraation says it has no evidence pointing to the defoliant as
the cause of any ailment suffered by troops in Vietnam.

Mr. Moore, the chairman of the scientific panel of the Interagency Work Group to
Study the Possible Long-Term Effects of Phenoxy Herbicides and Contaminants,
said there was ''at best a remote chance of accurate identification'' of troops
who were exposed to Agent Orange.

He said he had been told by the Defense Department that its experts had examined
records of battalions and companies during years of heavy use of Agent Orange.
''Their searches,'' he said, ''failed to establish conclusively levels of
exposure for U.S. ground troops who had entered sprayed areas.''

Another investigation, of the health of the airmen in the actual spraying
operation, is to be be conducted by the Air Force.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Remembering Vietnam

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 303 words


Commemorating war dead in art is a rite as old as memory and mourning, so it was
inevitable that there would be a competiton for a Vietnam War Memorial in
Washington. The winning design, by Maya Ying Lin, a Yale architecture student,
is for a low, angled wall inscribed with names, to be built between the Lincoln
Memorial and the Washington Monument. The horizontal lines, the simple geometry
and the somber stone create a mood that is sober and eternal.

The Vietnam war is not easy to memorialize; even the competition was protested
by some who also protested against the war, and the monument is likely to remain
a controversial site for some time to come.

But the controversy reflects more than bitterness left over from the war. It
used to be much simpler to build a monument. The roll of honor on bronze
tablets, or the statue of the fallen warrior holding a flag ap-peared
predictably on the village green. Anonymous generals and unknown soldiers
furnish innumerable traffic islands. Forgotten heroes dot the nation's parks.

The uniforms change, the heroes sit or stand or occasionally ride a horse, but
the message remains the same: a noble cause well served.  Nowadays, though,
patriotism is a complicated matter. Ideas about heroism, or art, for that
matter, are no longer what they were before Vietnam. And there is certainly no
consensus yet about what cause might have been served by the Vietnam War.

But perhaps that is why the V-shaped, black granite lines merging gently with
the sloping earth make the winning design seem a lasting and appropriate image
of dignity and sadness. It conveys the only point about the war on which people
may agree: that those who died should be remembered.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1198 words


Brazil getting nuclear power but the luster is dimmed A2
Latins stress self-help in charting course for '80's A3
Japanese minister assails U.S. for incidents at sea A4
Around the World A5
300,000 Poles attend special mass for Pope A8
Italy halts interrogation ofPope's alleged assailant for one day A8
Voting begins in Italy on whether to repeal abortion law A8
Doctors plan to move Pope from intensive care to private room A9
On a Sunday in Beirut, shelling and killing go on A12
Soviet accuses the U.S. and Israel of trying to blackmail Syria A13
Weinberger concedes that Saudis could misuse Awacs data A15

Government/Politics
Panel asks study of all toxic sub- stances used in Vietnam A17
Jersey law requiring data from toxic waste haulers is ignored B2
Excerpts from President's ad- dress at Notre Dame B7
Vote to replace representative draws White House attention B7
Tapes a major part of Govern- ment's case in bribery trial D13
Civil liberties union challenges charges by Reagan associates D13

General
Around the Nation A16
Some hiking boots seen as a threat to wilderness trails A16
Dallas holds a party at its new ex- pensive hotel and restaurant A16
In New York City, a day of pa- rades and endless food B3
New Yorkers promote New York in a Latin American tour B5

Industry/Labor
Labor federation head assails Reagan's Social Security plan D12

SportsMonday
Auto Racing: Reutemann wins Belgain Grand Prix C5

Field is completed for the India- napolis 500 C5
Baseball: Yankees defeated by Mariners, 1-0 C1

Mets drop seventh straight, 6-1 C5

Palmer resumes starting role and wins for Orioles C4
Boxing: Snipes beats Mustafa Muhammad in nontitle bout C6

Toughman boxing tournaments stir a controversy C2
Columns: Dave Anderson on base- ball's perfect 12 C4

Red Smith on Pleasant Colony's return to Belmont C7
Features: Sports World Specials C2
Football: Cowboys use scientific techniques for the 1980's C1

Canadian league provides lure for N.F.L. prospects C8
Golf: Kathy Whitworth, in play- off, wins her 81st pro golf event C1

Zoeller wins Colonial by four strokes on 68,70-274 C3
Hockey: Islanders confident they cannot be intimidated C6

North Stars shake up lines by shifting centers C6
Five from Preakness hope to stop Pleasant Colony C7
Outdoors: Trout fishing in still waters C11
Rowing: Yale wins varsity heavy- weight race at Eastern Sprints C6
Statistics C10
Tennis: Andrea Jaeger defeats Tracy Austin in final in Japan C8
Lewis dominates Southwest Con- ference championships C8

Style
Relationships: Informing doctors on women C16
They take the hurdles of sibling ri- valry C16
First lady of Israel: Committed to a cause C16
Mickey Spillane writes books for youngsters C16

Arts/Entertainment
Musical ''Raisin'' is revived by Equity Library Theater C12
International theater festival under way in Toronto C12
Ballet Theater previews Joffe staging from ''Fille'' C12
Hollywood has inflated titles to ec- centric lengths C13
''Grant,'' a biography by William S. McFeely, is reviewed C15
''All's Well That Ends Well'' on public television C18

News Analysis
Bernard Nossiter on the new U.S.  policy at the United Nations A3
Clyde Haberman assesses New York City's budget B6
Steven Roberts comments on goals of food-stamp legislation D12

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A18

Risk to freedom of information End run on Guatemala aid A Vietnam war memorial
Soma Golden: abortion puzzle Letters A18
Flora Lewis: divergent interests in the Western alliance A19
William Safire: State Depart- ment's signals of softness A19
Peter S. Prescott: children and the courts A19
Jack Bass: on affirmative action A19

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 19, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

INQUIRY IS SET IN COAST DEATH OF EX-MARINE

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 498 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, May 18


The coroner's office said today that it would try to determine what caused the
death of a former Marine who had fired weapons inside a veterans' hospital last
March, asserting that he had been poisoned by the herbicide Agent Orange in
Vietnam and that nobody cared.

James Roger Hopkins, 32 years old, was found yesterday lying on a bed at his
home with an empty pill vial and a nearly full bottle of bourbon nearby. His
wife, Suzanne, found his body at their home in Calabasas after returning from a
two-hour shopping trip.

Stanley White, a sheriff's investigator, said it appeared that Mr.  Hopkins had
died from an accidental overdose of drugs or of natural causes. There was no
suicide note.

Mr. Hopkins, a combat veteran, complained that he suffered deafness and other
effects from exposure to Agent Orange in Vietnam, a jungle defoliant suspected
of causing cancer.

Driving Jeep Into Hospital

Mr. Hopkins had dramatized his situation on March 14 by dressing in combat
fatigues and driving his Jeep through glass doors at Wadsworth Veterans Hospital
in West Los Angeles, where he fired nine shots from an M-14 rifle and a
.45-caliber pistol into the ceiling and walls.

No one was injured, and Mr. Hopkins surrendered to the police. He was charged
with destroying Federal property and freed on bail pending a trial in mid-July.

Later he said that he wanted psychiatric help.  ''Obviously there's something
wrong,'' Mr. Hopkins said in an interview earlier this month.  Michael McCarthy,
a spokesman for the Center for Veterans Rights, said that after the shooting at
the hospital, Government lawyers said that Mr. Hopkins was not a danger to
himself and was not suffering from depression.

Psychiatric Profile Possible

Bob Daumbacher, chief of investigations for the county coroner, said a
psychiatric profile of Mr. Hopkins might be made if the doctor who performed the
autopsy determined one was necessary.

Mrs. Hopkins said her husband had constant nightmares about the war and was so
frustrated with the Veterans Administration that he ''was starting to explode.''

''When I left to go shopping, I knew he was uptight,'' she said.  ''His
nightmares were driving him crazy.'' Mrs. Hopkins said the couple had financial
trouble because she was dismissed from her job as a pharmacy manager and her
husband was no longer eligible for unemployment benefits.

But she said he had recently seemed more positive and had made a series of
Veterans Day appearances in Texas, where he delivered a speech urging fellow
veterans to fight for their rights with the Veterans Administration.

''We had no means of support,'' she said. ''There was no way to eat and pay the
bills at the same time, but still he wasn't despondent.  We've been in tougher
situations than that.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 19, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1010 words


By John Leonard
WORLD WITHOUT END. By Francine du Plessix Gray. 314 pages. Simon & Schuster.
$12.95.

MOST of us - unless we hate literature and would kill it with a theorem or
reduce all mystery to a Rorschach splotch that can be deciphered only by
semiologists - choose up sides while reading a good novel. We root for a
character, as though we were fans at a baseball game. In very good novels, the
character for whom we are rooting will disappoint us; art is expensive and
enthusiasm is cheap.

''World Without End'' is a very good novel, and a fine surprise. I was not an
admirer of Francine du Plessix Gray's first novel, although her nonfiction books
on ''Divine Disobedience'' and ''Hawaii: The Sugar-Coated Fortress'' were
graceful and intelligent and quirky. That first novel, ''Lovers and Tyrants,''
suffered from a sort of vegetable rot of lyricism, especially when she wrote
about sex, which she wrote about as clumsily as D.H. Lawrence. ''Honeyed
Interstices,'' indeed.

Excess Is Ironic

There is sex in ''World Without End,'' but not much flora and fauna in the
description of it. There is lyric excess, in conversation, in letters and in
thought - ''old Romantic tripe. Divinity of the creator, artist as sacred vessel
- bane of our existence! Debased Faustianism, elitist ooze, Kraut metaphysics
doled out in seedy art schools'' - but, obviously, it is ironic. Mrs. Gray has
chosen to satirize the art, the religion and the politics of the last 35 years.
She has also chosen to forgive the creatures of her satire; they are more
disappointed in themselves than readers will be in them as characters.

Edmund is the only child of an impoverished Russian mother. His mother, Mara,
teaches music in New York to the children of the ruling class, who have more
money and less talent than Edmund. So, in the summer of 1945, speaking four
languages, Edmund finds himself adopted by a WASP family vacationing on
Nantucket. He is 15 years old, Claire is 15, Sophie is 15. Sophie is Jewish, and
will grow up to be Barbara Walters. Claire, who takes care of wounded birds and
rabbits, will fling herself into every radical cause from antivivisection to
anti-Vietnam, and spend some time as an Anglican nun. Edmund, who deflowers
Claire and goes on to live with Sophie, will abandon his painting for a career
as a professor of art at Berkeley, preoccupied with Titian and the sacred and
the profane.

Claire and Sophie are his adamant muses.  For most of the novel, we are in the
Soviet Union in 1975. Edmund, Claire and Sophie are trying to come to terms with
their long friendship. Most of the time we are also in Edmund's head. He loved
Claire and settled for Sophie and spent some dreary years - obliged to think
about ''the disputed meaning of clocks in 17th Century still lifes,'' Aztec
symbols of parturition and the ''Augustan View of Providence as Reflected in
First-Century Numismatics'' - living with his own conservatism, a boy named Toby
and that sense of melancholy, boredom and the void that he abhors in modern art.

Edmund is the classic outsider. At age 15, he fell in love with the privileged
Claire and Sophie. He found, in Claire's father, ''Plinker,'' the father he had
never known, and years later he will revile the family on Nantucket: ''You can't
even do a proper Sunday lunch anymore.'' Claire is ''an alcoholic of purity,'' a
''medieval city-state, self-sufficient, impregnable,'' an expert on ''moral
jujitsu.'' Sophie has been trained by her father - a talent agent who is ''plump
and lustrous as a bullet'' - to nurture artists like Edmund. She is supposed to
be a genius-groupie.

In Russia on vacation, after three decades of their obsessive triad, Edmund,
Claire and Sophie sort themselves out and lurch again. The conservative Edmund
realizes that the new art is even worse than ''the Pollack primal energy'' he
despised years ago. There is an attempted suicide. There is an Intourist guide
whose hair is ''bluntly cut as a sheaf of wheat,'' and who wins our
affection.There is a dissident, abandoned unconscionably by the author. There
are too many adjectives that turn out to be ''luminous'' and too many adverbs
that abuse the meaning of ''presently.''

But the reader chooses sides. In this novel about Renaissance art and
Puritanism, about Anglican convents and academic departments of art, about
friendship and that televised soap opera ''General Hospital,'' about lust and
literature and missing fathers and saints full of greed and pride and envy - in
this popcorn-popper of ideas, in which Edmund is the tourist of art, Claire the
tourist of suffering and Sophie the tourist of everything, we are blessed with
real people in the middle of an important argument about art and religion and
sexuality. We are persuaded.

Splendidly Evoked Places

Nantucket - and the outsider who wants the order, the father, the caring and the
dishes on the table - is splendidly evoked. So is Leningrad, whose roofs are
''shimmering like the variegated scales of a giant lizard.'' So is New York, and
the ''terrible slowness'' of Edmund (who ''always realized things awfully
late'') and Sophie (whose breasts are ''like bread loaves warm from the oven'').
Claire, who would be a saint, who would love her rabbits to death, escapes us,
and she is trapped somewhere else between art and religion, between witness and
victim.

I chose Sophie to root for. It's been a long time in novels since I was a fan.
Mrs. Gray tells us that ''Orpheus dismembered will continue to sing, his head
floating down our rivers.'' A real friend will either scoop up the head or hit
it with a stick. Mrs. Gray scoops and sings.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Francine Gray

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 21, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. Aide Sees No Proof Of G.I.'s Jailed in Laos

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 195 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 20


Amid reports here that the Government had financed and sent a secret force of
mercenaries into Laos this month looking for Americans imprisoned in a jungle
camp, a top Pentagon spokesman said tonight that ''there was no convincing
evidence of the Americans' having been there.''

Henry Catto, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs, said, ''The
department made every effort to determine if Americans were there.''

Mr. Catto was referring to a report, published in The Washington Post, that the
United States had financed and helped to train a team of Asians, believed to be
Laotians, who went into Laos earlier this month.

The report said the reconnaissance force returned a few days ago with no
evidence that Americans were in the camp. It added that overflights by
satellites and ''spy planes'' had suggested the presence of Americans still
missing from the Vietnam War in the Laotian jungle camp.

Mr. Catto acknowledged that the ''effort'' he spoke of had to do with a camp
existing in Laos, but he would not confirm that the mission in Laos had taken
place.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 21, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

GENERAL TO RETIRE IN SPLIT OVER FORCE

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 729 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 20


Gen. Volney Warner, the top general in the United States Readiness Command, said
today that he planned to retire because of a ''lack of support'' by the Joint
Chiefs of Staff in his unsuccessful fight against creation of a separate Rapid
Deployment Force command with headquarters in the United States.

General Warner, 54 years old, said, ''we asked for and lost'' the renewal of
much of the broad authority that his command once had. He said in a telephone
interview from Ft. Bragg, N.C., that he planned to retire July 31. He is a
32-year veteran of the service.

The Rapid Deployment Force was created last year by the Carter Administration to
deal quickly with crises in the Persian Gulf.

Struggle Over Control of Force

General Warner's decision to retire brings to the surface a Pentagon power
struggle over control of the Rapid Deployment Force.  When it was created under
the command of Lieut. Gen. Paul X. Kelley of the Marines, it had its
headquarters at MacDill Air Force Base in Florida under General Warner's overall
direction.

The Readiness Command, which prepares United States-based Army and Air Force
units for overseas deployment, is also based at MacDill.  Defense Secretary
Caspar Weinberger recently announced that a separate Rapid Deployment Force
command in the United States would be created. Eventually, that command will be
moved overseas.

General Warner said that creation of a United States command base for the fource
would mean a ''proliferation of headquarters.'' He particularly objected to
earmarking the force for Southwest Asia.

'Should Be Subordinate'

''As long as it remains in the United States,'' General Warner said, it ''should
be subordinate to the Readiness Command.'' ''I have been given a command and a
mission and I try to execute it as best I can,'' General Warner said. ''When I
came to a point where I can't execute as it should be done, it is better that
somebody else should be given a shot.''

He said he was ''not arguing with'' Mr. Weinberger's decision to move the Rapid
Deployment Force command to Southwest Asia within the next three to five years.
But he added that he was ''not very sanguine'' that a suitable headquarters can
be found.

The Joint Chiefs of Staff split in their recommendation for the future status of
the Rapid Deployment Force command, with all the service chiefs except the
commandant of the Marine Corps favoring its subordination to the United States
European commander, who has traditionally also had responsibility for the Middle
East.

The Marine commander, Gen. Robert Barrow, wanted the Rapid Deployment Force put
under the Pacific command, which is headed by an admiral.

General Kelly publicly favored a separate, independent command.  That was the
course announced April 25 by Mr. Weinberger.

Army or Marine Force?

General Warner acknowledged that there has been friction between his command and
the Rapid Deployment Force. ''Unfortunately, we were both caught up in the
service argument as to whether it should be a premier Army or Marine force,'' he
said.

''I asked that the land responsibility for Southwest Asia be given to the
Readiness Command,'' General Warner said. ''I lost on that.'' He also said that
he had failed to win approval of his recommendation for abolition of a separate
Washington office maintained by the rapid deployment force. The office, he said,
''belongs to P.X. Kelly and bypasses me as a unified commander. I don't like
that.''

General Warner recalled that the Readiness Command originated about 20 years ago
as an organization with worldwide responsibilities. In 1972, it was cut back, he
said, essentially to an agency limited to preparing Army and Air Force units in
the United States for overseas deployment, and then it lost its responsibilities
for conducting crisis operations in the Middle East and Africa.

He attributed this retrenchment to the post-Vietnam sentiment in favor of
limiting United States involvement overseas.  ''We didn't have as much interest
in Africa and the Mideast as we do now,'' he said. ''There was no serious Soviet
encroachment in the area then.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 21, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ULSTER'S FEARFUL PROTESTANT MAJORITY AND WHY THE ARMY STAYS THERE

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 559 words


To the Editor:

Paul Young's May 8 letter attacking the British in Northern Ireland deserves a
reply.  First, it doesn't do for an American, however new, to call British Prime
Ministers imperialist when he has before him Reagan's imperial meddling in El
Salvador, Johnson's and Nixon's in Vietnam and Kennedy's in Cuba.§econd, the
''British upper classes,'' as Mr. Young quaintly puts it, have no particular
stake in Ulster. That province was settled in 1601-1611 - 80 years before
William of Orange - by the Catholic James I of England with Scotsmen and
Yorkshiremen in the effort to stop Irish clan warfare and to bring the land
under cultivation. The settlers were Protestant, and there the present trouble
in Ulster has its roots.

But the first king of England to invade Ireland was the Frenchspeaking Henry II,
Catholic, naturally, who went at the invitation of Dermot of Leinster and with
the approval of Pope Alexander III (in 1172), who hoped Henry would bring peace
and civilization to a land torn by feud. Neither of these actions was
''imperialist'' or ''U'' but in accordance with ancient ideas of a king's
prerogative and divine right.

Third, the people of Ulster, therefore, have as much right to be called Irish as
the descendants of the Pilgrim Fathers have to be called American: neither are
English. Yet in three recent plebiscites the Protestant majority indicated it
wanted to stick with Britain rather than become part of the Republic of Ireland.

Why? Fear, surely - fear of being swamped by the profoundly reactionary
Catholicism of the Republic; fear of losing a small economic and industrial
advantage by being cut off from the neighboring island; fear of losing their old
and distinct identity; fear of losing their ties with the Crown.

And that is why the British Army stays in Northern Ireland. The province is an
economic disaster, and the cost of policing the population by means of the army
becomes more appalling in every sense every day. But the army stands between
Catholic and Protestant, and if it left, as many Britons wish it to do - just as
much as Americans - the death of a fervent young man from fasting would soon be
forgotten in far worse events. Parliament, then, keeps the army there because
Parliament must represent the will of the majority, in tune with the same notion
of democracy as obtains here.

If the Irish question is to be wisely addressed, wouldn't it be better not to
prate about the superiority of one nation over another but to consider how to
remove the initiative from the gunmen, outlawed just as much in the South as in
the North?

Why doesn't Mr. Haughey, Prime Minister of the Republic, come up with
intelligent and moderate proposals in public? If he were half as eager to unite
Ireland as Mr. Young, or his fellow correspondent Mr.  Zion, or even Paul
O'Dwyer, he'd have done so by now. Could he possibly be appreciating the role of
the wretched soldier who earns nothing but blame while he ventures his life?
MAIRI MACINNES Princeton, N.J., May 9, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 21, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 23, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 943 words


By John Leonard
SOLVENCY. The Price of Survival. An Essay on American Foreign Policy. By James
Chace. 115 pages. Random House. $9.95.  REAL SECURITY. Restoring American Power
in a Dangerous Decade. By Rich- ard J. Barnet. 127 pages. Simon and Schuster.
$10.95.

JAMES CHACE is managing editor of the quarterly Foreign Affairs, a magazine that
amounts to a palimpsest, or perhaps a Book of Common Prayer, of Eastern
establishment thinking; Foreign Affairs is so respectable that even Richard M.
Nixon has appeared in its pages.  Richard J. Barnet is a senior fellow at the
Institute for Policy Studies in Washington, about which there has been so much
hobgoblinizing in recent months - as if we had decided that the American left
should no longer be permitted to think, in or out of tanks.

Both have written essays of roughly the same length and equal grace on our
foreign policy, with particular emphasis on military spending.

Wasteful Defense Budget

Both agree to a remarkable extent. Both assert that our defense budget has been
wasteful and inflationary; that our adventurism in Vietnam, during which Lyndon
Johnson and Mr. Nixon sought to have their guns and eat their butter too,
without raising taxes, ruined the economy; that our failure to explore and
develop alternative energy sources to the Middle East oil pipeline is scandalous
and dangerous; that an arms-limitation treaty of almost any sort has a
metaphysical as well as a practical significance; and that the postcolonial
world has become far too complicated for two superpowers like the United States
and the Soviet Union to play nuclear war games. The little guys have missiles,
too.

Mr. Chace is much clearer and more persistent on the relationship between
Vietnam and inflation; we have to learn to pay for what we want to do instead of
just printing money that our allies will cease to hold in reserve -there went
the dollar. Mr. Barnet has a livelier sense of miscalculation - by man or
computer, in the United States, the Soviet Union, China, India, Israel or South
Africa - that might erase whatever civilization we believe ourselves to have
achieved.  Mr. Chace concentrates on our balance-of-payments deficit; Mr.
Barnet is more concerned with the failure of force, whether military or
economic, to make much difference in politics.

Why, Mr. Chace wants to know, do we bail out Chrysler when the Japanese are
quick to abandon support of a crippled industry, as they are abandoning
transistor radios? Why, asks Mr. Barnet, do we persist, like the Russians, in
playing world policeman when that role hasn't worked in Vietnam, China, Egypt,
Afghanistan, Indonesia or anywhere else, for anybody, since 1950? Neither is
quite as clear as Lester Thurow in the May 14 issue of The New York Review of
Books on the ''counterproductive'' nature of military spending (it is a form of
consumption not investment; what we buy now, on cost-plus contracts, is obsolete
five years later). Both are aware of the problem; the Administration seems less
shrewd.

Mr. Chace and Mr. Barnet both warn us against ''scenarios'' - spun as if from
the bowels of spiders in underground bunkers where all the apocalyptic buttons
live - in which we imagine what the Russians are thinking and they imagine what
we are thinking and everybody, sitting on an ''overkill'' capacity, goes bananas
filling a ''gap.'' Mr. Chace asks us to consider those interests that are
genuinely ''vital,'' such as Western Europe, Japan and Israel. Mr. Barnet
insists that we be realistic about the third world: In what way is our national
security threatened by Nicaragua or Zimbabwe?

Is anybody listening? Mr. Chace and Mr. Barnet both point out that the rate of
American investment in research and development, the key to economic
productivity, is lower than that of any other industrial nation in the world.
And yet it is precisely that investment which is being curtailed, even as we are
asked to increase military spending by at least 5 percent a year. Why? What's
the point of hardening missile silos when a single Trident II submarine can wipe
out 300 Soviet cities? What's the point of a ''land-mobile'' missile system when
we already have multiple-warhead ''cruise'' ships in the sky?  What are we
buying?

Voices of the Dead

We are buying ''perceptions.'' How are we ''perceived'' by the Soviets, and how
do we ''perceive'' them? It seems to be an obscene seance, full of
table-knocking and the voices of the dead. Meanwhile, the dozens of new nations
brought into being by the postwar collapse of colonial arrogance insist on
inconveniencing us and the Russians.  Terrorism and human rights are barely
touched on in either of these books; Mr. Chace and Mr. Barnet submit to
Realpolitik while suggesting superpower modesty. But their eloquent message is
obvious: please be less greedy.

Greed, however, seems to be the scenario - greed for power, prestige,
''credibility,'' being number one. For the Soviet Union, such greed is too late;
the world doesn't work that way anymore. For us such greed is nostalgic; the
world worked our way for 25 years.  Their greed is as old as the worst czars';
ours is a late, late show.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 22, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ELLSBERG TELLS OF ATOM BREACH IN '61

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 458 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 21


Daniel J. Ellsberg, the former Defense Department official who made available
the Pentagon Papers about the war in Vietnam, said today that the United States
Navy stationed a ship storing nuclear weapons within 300 yards of the Japanese
coast in 1961.

Dr. Ellsberg said this was in violation of an unwritten agreement between the
United States and Japan permitting American warships to make only routine port
calls or passages through Japanese waters while armed with nuclear weapons.

Dr. Ellsberg said senior naval officers and State Department officials contended
the presence of the ship was in what he called a ''gray area'' covered by the
unwritten understanding.  He asserted that the ship bearing the nuclear weapons
was a small amphibious vessel known as an LST, or landing ship tank, anchored
off a Marine air base at Iwakuni.

A Pentagon spokesman said there would be no comment until officials had the
opportunity to study Mr. Ellsberg's allegations. As a matter of routine
practice, the Pentagon never confirms or denies the presence of nuclear weapons.

The issue of nuclear weapons in Japan, the only nation to suffer an atomic
bombing, is highly sensitive. The Government has been under severe attack since
a former United States Ambassador to Tokyo, Edwin O. Reischauer, disclosed this
week that United States warships had routinely carried nuclear weapons in and
out of Japanese waters.  In another sign of the strained relations, Japan said
today that it had decided to suspend joint naval exercises with the United
States.

Japanese Governments have repeatedly denied over the last 21 years that United
States warships brought nuclear weapons into Japan, even temporarily.

The issue has therefore brought into question the credibility of the party that
has ruled Japan for those years, the Liberal Democratic Party.

Dr. Ellsberg, who has called a news conference for tomorrow morning, gave The
Washington Post a copy of a memorandum that he said he wrote in 1971 describing
the stationing of the ship with nuclear weapons off Japan.

In a related matter, Dr. Ellsberg asserted that Presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy
and Johnson had given selected military commanders around the world the
authority to use nuclear weapons in emergencies.  He defined those emergencies
as the incapacitation of the President or the disruption of communications
between Washington and the top commanders in the field.

Dr. Ellsberg said some commanders delegated that authority to their
subordinates. ''It was a machine out of control, a doomsday machine with a lot
of triggers on it,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 22, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. SENT TWO PATROLS INTO LAOS IN QUEST OF G.I.'S THOUGHT TO BE CAPTIVES

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 709 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 21


The Reagan Administration sent at least two long-range patrols into Laos in
response to what a high-ranking official called ''tantalizing hints'' that
American prisoners of war were still alive in that country, Administration
officials said today.

The patrols of 20 to 30 men, mostly Laotians, did not bring back the evidence
they sought, the officials said. No American military personnel were involved in
the operation, the officials said, but civilians under the supervision of the
Central Intelligence Agency helped to plan, finance and train the patrols.

Whether the Americans accompanied the patrols into Laos was not clear, and other
details of the operation were sparse. But officials said that it was mounted
with the approval of the State Department, with intelligence information from
the Defense Intelligence Agency, and under the operational control of the C.I.A.

Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger issued a statement today saying that
the Defense Department ''has checked and will continue to check regularly and
with great care'' the recurring reports of Americans held in Southeast Asia.

Pledges 'Appropriate Action'

The Secretary's statement said that ''should any such report prove true, the
Department of Defense can be expected to take appropriate action.'' What such
action might be was left undefined.  ''Meanwhile,'' the statement concluded,
''the Department of Defense will refrain from commenting, now or in the future,
on specific reports affecting such matters.''

Pentagon officials said that 2,528 American military personnel remain
unaccounted for after the conflict that ranged across Southeast Asia from the
mid-1950's until 1975.

The officials said that the recent missions were mounted after aerial
photographs, taken either from satellites or high-flying reconnaissance planes,
showed what appeared to be a stockade or prison compound in southern Laos. The
Ho Chi Minh Trail once passed through this area on its way from North Vietnam to
South Vietnam and the region was subject to heavy American bombing and
infiltration.

The site was described as being unlike the Laotian villages in that region, with
fences and towers clearly intended to keep people in rather than to keep
potential enemies out. A figure ''52,'' suggesting the B-52 bombers that had
bombed the area, was visible, the officials said, but whether it was of natural
or manmade origin could not be determined from the pictures.

Rice Not Cultivated in Fields

In addition, the fields around the village were not cultivated for rice, typical
in that region, but for other crops such as vegetables that suggested a Western
diet. Some tools also appeared to be more Western than Laotian, the officials
said.

Moreover, the photographs, which were of high resolution from sophisticated
cameras, lenses and film, showed people sitting crosslegged and square on the
ground rather than squatting on their haunches in Asian fashion.

That led the Reagan Administration, the officials said, to take a closer look to
ascertain whether Americans were there. The officials said the patrols were
assigned to gather information, not to attempt a rescue.

While the officials were guarded in discussing the operation, they suggested
that agents of the C.I.A., which had trained, supplied and financed various
Laotian guerrilla and paramilitary organizations for over 10 years during the
wars in Indochina, had recruited the members of the patrols from among Laotians
who had worked for the intelligency agency before.

The former guerrillas, who were familiar with American weapons and methods, were
assembled at a base in an undisclosed location for training. The officials said
that the patrols were then moved close to the border that runs north and south
between Thailand and Laos and inserted on the ground to the east. There were
suggestions that Americans of Oriental descent had accompanied the patrols into
Laos.

Senior officials of the Thai Government were informed of the operation,
officials said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 22, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Around the World;
China accuses Vietnam Of a New Border Incursion

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 83 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Friday, May 22


China accused Vietnam today of a new frontier incursion and vowed to inflict
''due punishment'' if fighting between the two countries continues.

Diplomatic sources in Hong Kong said a Chinese naval task force, made up of
three guided missile destroyers, a tanker and a support vessel, was moving into
the Gulf of Tonkin toward Vietnam.

The official New China News Agency said Vietnamese troops crossed the frontier
last Monday in Yunnan Province.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 23, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

EX-ENVOY SAYS HE PROTESTED ATOM BOMBS OFF JAPAN

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 662 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 22


Edwin O. Reischauer, former United States Ambassador to Japan, said today that
after he discovered 20 years ago the United States Navy had a barge bearing
nuclear arms in Japanese waters, ''I blew my top'' and the Navy told him they
would withdraw it.

Mr. Reischauer, reached by telephone in Boston, said the ship was anchored off a
Marine air base at Iwakuni, in central Japan, and appeared to violate American
understandings with Japan on nuclear weapons.

Mr. Reischauer said, ''I immediately protested to Washington.'' He said
officials there asserted that they would take care of it and he presumed they
did. Mr. Reischauer is now a professor at Harvard.

In Washington, the official who received Mr. Reischauer's protest, U. Alexis
Johnson, confirmed Mr. Reischauer's account and said he passed the message to a
senior official in the Pentagon, Paul H.  Nitze, who had the ship moved.
''That's all there was to it,'' Mr.  Johnson said.

Barge Disclosed by Ellsberg

Mr. Johnson, who was Deputy Under Secretary of State at the time, said he
thought the incident occurred in the spring of 1961 while Mr. Reischauer thought
it was later that year. But both said they were not be sure.

The presence of the nuclear weapons on the barge was disclosed by Daniel J.
Ellsberg, the antiwar activist who made available the history of the Vietnam War
that came to be known as the Pentagon Papers a decade ago.

Mr. Reischauer disclosed this week that an unwritten agreement between the
United States and Japan permitted American warships carrying nuclear weapons to
make routine port calls and transits of Japanese waters. That disclosure has
caused a political stir in Japan, where sensitivities over the atomic bombings
of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945 remain high.

Recorded in a Memorandum

Mr. Ellsberg said at a news conference this morning that his account of the 1961
incident was recorded in a memorandum he dictated 10 years later. The
memorandum, which he made available to reporters and which came to light
yesterday, covered a period when, as a Government official, he inquired into the
deployment of nuclear weapons and their command and control systems.

He said in the memorandum that, in 1958 and 1959, ''Japan had as the central
provision of its security arrangements with the United States the explicit
agreement in writing that no nuclear weapons would ever be stationed in Japan.''

Under questioning, however, Mr. Ellsberg acknowledged that his statement ''is
misleading and ambiguous.'' Under the security treaty in effect at that time,
there was no prohibition against United States nuclear weapons in Japan.

When a new treaty was negotiated in 1960, the United States agreed not to
station or store nuclear weapons in Japan without Japanese consent, but the
confidential, unwritten transit agreement allowed temporary passage of weapons
through Japan on ships and aircraft.

'Still There in 1967'

Mr. Ellsberg said today that the ship bearing the nuclear arms ''was still there
in 1967'' and asserted that it might still be there. Both Mr. Reischauer and Mr.
Johnson said, however, that they were sure the ship had been withdrawn in 1961.

Mr. Ellsberg said the ship was an LST, or landing ship, tank, that carried
nuclear bombs for Marine planes based ashore. The ship's home port, he said, was
on Okinawa, which was then under American control, but that it anchored for long
periods off Iwakuni in the guise of an electronics repair ship.

A spokesman for the Navy would not comment. A spokesman for the Marine Corps,
while neither confirming nor denying the report about the nuclear weapons, said
that Marine Air Wing 12 was stationed at Iwakuni at the time and was equipped
with A-4 attack planes that could carry tactical nuclear bombs.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 23, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

WAR OR PEACE IN THE MIDEAST

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1007 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 22


Reagan Administration officials believe that the success or failure of Philip C.
Habib's mission to the Middle East hinges on the answers to three questions: Are
the Israelis more or less likely today to use force to get Syrian missiles out
of Lebanon than they were three weeks ago when the crisis started? Is the Soviet
Union being helpful or harmful in promoting a peaceful settlement? Can Saudi
Arabia successfully use its financial leverage on Syria to achieve a compromise?

The answers to these questions are central to the Administration's strategy for
Mr. Habib's mission. The strategy is to keep the envoy out there, even though
the prospects for success are not good, on the theory that the longer he is
there the better the chances of finding some combination of pressures and
compromises to keep the peace.

The strategy, in turn, is based on a fundamental judgment by the Administration,
reaffirming the judgment of the last several administrations, that Israel should
be restrained from settling matters with its Arab neighbors by force. As a State
Department official put it: ''The United States does not benefit from any
conflict.'' Only Moscow and the radical Arabs benefit.

Uncertainty on Intentions

What is not clear is whether in the back of the minds of some in the
Administration keeping the peace also means arranging for something less than
Israel's demand for a complete withdrawal of Syrian missiles from Lebanon, let
alone the new demand by Prime Minister Menachem Begin for removal of the new
missiles on the Syrian side of the Lebanese border as well.

The crisis began several weeks ago when the Israelis shot down two Syrian
helicopters and the Syrians moved antiaircraft missiles into Lebanon in
violation of a 1976 gentleman's agreement. Mr. Habib was dispatched to keep the
parties from fighting and to restore the previous situation.

This forced the Reagan Administration, for the first time, to consider whether
to restrain Israeli military power, as prior administrations had done, or
''unleash'' the Israelis, as hinted in the Reagan campaign rhetoric.

Fear of Soviet a Restraint

The decision was for restraint for classical State Department reasons, but for
reasons appealing to the new Reagan team as well: war would reinforce Soviet
claims to a major role in the Middle East, and it would also undercut Secretary
of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.'s plan to forge an anti-Soviet ''strategic
consensus'' in the area.

Administration officials acknowledge that there had already been one substantial
cost in the new strategy - Israelis will have to pay a military price, perhaps a
heavy price, according to Pentagon analysts, if they try to eliminate the Syrian
missiles. In their view, Mr. Begin no longer has the option of a low-cost air
strike against the missiles. The officials insist that the Israelis knew they
would pay a price when they did not attack immediately and agreed to receive Mr.
Habib.

This is the one new element in the situation. It hardly guarantees against an
Israeli strike, but it did succeed in giving Mr. Habib time.

Missile Forces Bolstered

The Soviet Union and Syria used this time to strengthen the missile forces,
apparently beyond what Israel and the Administration anticipated. Pentagon
officials related that the surface-to-air missiles known as SAM-6's in Lebanon
are now backed up by SAM-2's and SAM-3's and a variety of antiaircraft artillery
in Syria and Lebanon, and that these misiles are so close to each other on the
border that it would now be impossible for Israel to attack in Lebanon without
also attacking Syria.

The Pentagon analysts say that the Syrian batteries had been arranged like those
in North Vietnam years ago, that is, they are so thick and varied as to be able
to challenge Israeli aircraft at every altitude. While an Israeli attack would
succeed, the analysts said, they would probably take heavy losses.

As for the Russians' role in diplomacy, officials said that on balance they are
being unhelpful, and are probably trying to delay a settlement, hoping to use
the crisis to establish themselves as an equal to the Americans in the Middle
East.

Haig Summoned Dobrynin

Mr. Haig called in Ambassador Anatoly F. Dobrynin, officials related, and said
that basic American policy was to avoid war and defuse a situation potentially
dangerous for all. Mr. Dobrynin was said to have responded that they would be
helpful, and wanted something as well. The Soviet Union wants to re-establish
the Geneva conference framework for Middle East negotiations under the joint
chairmanship of Washington and Moscow.

Meanwhile, there is considerable disagreement among specialists in the
Administration over whether Moscow really wants war. Some say Moscow will see it
as too risky militarily. Others say that the political opportunities will prove
irresistible. Still others stress that the friendship treaty signed by Damascus
and Moscow last year now represents a big question mark about Soviet military
intentions.

As for the Saudi role, officials said they were confident that the Saudis were
using their considerable financial support of the Syrian regime to press for
compromise. But a Saudi version of a compromise may extend only to a settlement
between Syrian and Christian forces in Lebanon, not between Syria and Israel.

The Saudis and several other oil-producing Arab nations contribute about $2
billion a year to Syria. Some payments have been stopped since January.

Israelis may begin to worry where all circumstances could be leading the White
House and, specifically, whether the Reagan Administration will continue to
press for a complete removal of the Syrian missiles in Lebanon.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 23, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Chinese Reportedly Kill 85 Vietnamese Troops

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 117 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Saturday, May 23


Chinese forces reportedly killed 85 Vietnamese troops yesterday after Peking
threatened ''due punishment'' for any further ''provocation'' from Hanoi. The
official New China News Agency said early today that a company of Vietnamese
troops had moved into the Malipo region of Yunnan Province along the Vietnamese
border in heavy fog.

The press agency said Chinese troops cut off the Vietnamese troops from the
rear, surrounded them and ''exterminated all of them'' in a four-hour battle.
The agency did not mention the number of Chinese casualties, but it said 83
Vietnamese soldiers and two officers had been killed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 24, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

QADDAFI TIED TO SHOOTING OF LIBYAN IN U.S.

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2336 words

DATELINE: FORT COLLINS, Colo., May 23


Minutes before the ''corporate recruiter'' was due to visit last Oct. 14, Farida
Zagallai, a Libyan student here, turned to her husband, Faisal, and, she
recalled the other day, said nervously: ''Maybe it's the hit man. Do you think
he's been sent by Qaddafi?''

Six months earlier, an agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation had warned
Faisal, also a graduate student at Colorado State University, that he was one of
24 students on a Libyan list of people to be killed because of their opposition
to the regime of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi.

Mrs. Zagallai remembers that her husband shrugged his shoulders in answer to her
question and said: ''I thought about it this morning.  But I've got my gun.''

Half an hour later, Faisal lay unconscious on the floor of his apartment, shot
by a man who, the police have now charged, was an American mercenary recruited
by the Libyan Government. But Faisal lived, and evidence left behind by the
suspected assassin led American authorities to him, and, six months later, to
the Libyan Government.

A New Mexican Is Arrested

On April 22 the F.B.I. arrested Eugene A. Tafoya of Truth or Consequences, N.M.,
and charged him with attempting to kill Mr.  Zagallai. Mr. Tafoya, now being
held in Fort Collins, is a 25-year veteran of the Marines and the Army who
retired in 1976. He won a Bronze Star for his service with the Army Special
Forces, or Green Berets, in Vietnam.

Two weeks later, the Reagan Administration ordered the Libyan Embassy in
Washington - the ''People's Bureau'' as the Libyans call it - to close down and
expelled all 27 of its diplomats. State Department officials say Mr. Tafoya's
arrest was the catalytic incident leading to the decision, part of an
Administration effort to expose the official use of terror by the Libyan
Government.

More than that, in the view of officials in Washington, the assasult on Mr.
Zagallai underlined the growing fragility of Colonel Qaddafi's political
situation, with growing defections from Libyan officials and students all over
the world.

Mr. Zagallai, 35 years old, a thin, intense man with thick glasses, has
recovered. But one .22-caliber bullet passed through his skull, severing an
optic nerve and blinding him in his right eye.  Another bullet is still lodged
near his palate, and it left a small depression above his right temple. A third,
fired at a range of three feet, missed him completely.

Next month, Mr. Zagallai expects to defend his doctoral thesis on institution
building in rural development. Mrs. Zagallai, a darkhaired woman of 34, has just
received her Ph.D. in sociology.

Their caller that October night had botched his task to kill Mr.  Zagallai, a
leader of the growing underground opposition among the 5,000 Libyan students in
the United States.

Only now has the significance of the incident been recognized. It marked the
first known attempt by Colonel Qaddafi to kill an enemy in the United States.
There is little doubt that the orders came from Tripoli. Four days after the
shooting, Jana, the official Libyan press agency, said that Libya's World
Revolutionary Committee had acted against Mr. Zagallai.

And, if the charges are correct, it is also the first known attempt by Colonel
Qaddafi to employ an American mercenary for a killing.  About a dozen foes of
the Qaddafi regime are known to have been murdered in the spring of 1980 in
Europe and the Middle East, but Libyan zealots were alleged to have been the
gunmen in each case.

The Zagallais now move secretly from house to house in this otherwise quiet
college town 60 miles north of Denver. They have a 6-year-old daughter in Libya
whom they have not seen in two years.  They cannot be quoted directly about
their political views or activities. But from the police in Fort Collins, the
F.B.I. in Denver and Albuquerque, court records, officials at the State
Department and their friends, this story emerges.

The Zagallais come from prominent business families in Libya. His father was a
critic of the old regime, a member of Parliament and Mayor of Tripoli under King
Idris I. When the King fell in a bloodless coup in 1969, Faisal, a student at
Ghar Yunis University in Benghazi, 400 miles east of Tripoli, joined the
exultant street demonstrations. Farida's father was a minister of education and
industry under the King, but she too enthusiastically greeted the new order.
Colonel Qaddafi personally gave her the undergraduate diploma she won at
Benghazi.

Regime Sent Them to U.S.

The two classmates, like several thousand to follow, were sent to the United
States at the expense of the Qadaffi regime to learn English and a professional
skill.

But they began to sour on the revolution as early as 1973, when Colonel Qadaffi
abrogated all Libya's laws. Faisal was repeatedly chosen by Libyan students in
the United States to represent them at conferences in Libya. There, he spoke out
for a union of students free of Government control, a free press and the return
of an orderly legal system. He quietly organized an independent union of Libyan
students abroad. When Colonel Qadaffi publicly hung six dissident students in
1977, Mr. Zagallai helped lead demonstrations of masked Libyans in the United
States.

The Zagallais were ordered back to Libya in 1976 and directed to promise that
they would take no further part in opposition acts. But on his return to Fort
Collins, Mr. Zagallai helped set up the Free Libyan Students Union, whose
members and locations are supposed to be secret. The organization says that it
has the allegiance of 2,000 Libyan students (a number that Washington regards as
exaggerated), and it tries to smuggle leaflets and posters into Libya that
denounce Colonel Qadaffi's regime.

The Zagallais lost their Libyan scholarships in 1979 and have had to depend on
odd jobs and support from their families to survive.  They said that this made
them all too receptive to a telephone call from a well-spoken woman last Oct.
13. They call that she said that she represented a company that was recruiting
translators of technical manuals for the International Business Machines
Corporation and other large concerns. Were the Zagallais interested in an
interview for jobs paying $2,000 a month?

They were, and a meeting was set with the recruiter for 7 P.M. the next day.

A Nervous 'Recruiter'

Despite much fiction and the movies, the ''recruiter'' was anything but a cool
and polished killer, Mrs. Zagallai said. She noticed that the well-dressed,
middle-aged caller was nervous, had been drinking and, in 10 minutes of awkward
conversation, could not ask the questions that an interviewer would normally
put.

Recalling what then happened, Mrs. Zagallai gave this account: She went to her
kitchen to bring the ''recruiter'' some orange juice.  He suddenly stood up and,
with braced forearms, tried to force Mr.  Zagallai to the couch. ''It's him,
Farida!'' Mr. Zagallai shouted.  She ran to the bedroom and tried to jump out of
the ground-floor window, screaming for help.

Neighbors gathered to watch, she said, but none came forward. The ''recruiter''
fired three shots and fled.  Jana, the Libyan press agency, reported the event
with this comment: ''Zagallai studied at the expense of the community for 10
years. But instead of returning to serve his country and people, he became an
agent and spy for American intelligence.''

Chance Plays a Role

In Fort Collins, Police Chief Ralph M. Smith and his force pursued leads that
went nowhere. ''The trail had gone cold,'' he said the other day. Most crimes
are solved either through the help of an informant or by chance. This time it
was chance.

In February, two boys playing in an irrigation ditch a mile from the Zagallai
apartment found an abandoned .22-caliber pistol, its serial numbers rusted but
still intact. X-rays showed that the bullet in Mr. Zagallai's skull was a .22.

The F.B.I. traced the pistol to a pawn shop in Fayetteville, N.C., home of Fort
Bragg and the Green Berets. The pawn-shop owner said that he had sold the gun to
Tully Francis Strong, now of Ormond Beach, Fla. According to an affadavit filed
by the Fort Collins police, Mr. Strong said that he in turn had sold the weapon
to a friend, Eugene Aloys Tafoya, in 1976.

The special agent in charge of the F.B.I. office in Denver, Jack N. Egnor, said
of the suspected assailant, ''He was no Phi Beta Kappa killer.''

Indeed, the F.B.I. agent said that Mr. Tafoya rented a car in his own name from
Dollar Rent-a-Car at the Denver airport on Oct. 14, the day of the assault on
Mr. Zagallai,

Suspect's House Is Searched

Mr. Tafoya was questioned by the F.B.I. and the Fort Collins police but refused
to admit anything. A search of his modest stucco house in Truth or Consequences,
however, turned up, among other things, a hand-drawn map of an apartment
resembling the Zagallais' apartment, Colonel Qadaffi's ''Green Book'' or
philosophical code, rounds of .22-caliber ammunition, Libyan currency, a Libyan
newspaper and a Kuwaiti driver's license.

Townspeople in Truth or Consequences say they do not know of any job Mr. Tafoya
has held since his retirement from the Army in 1976.  But they say that he made
frequent trips and returned, as one put it, ''with a bundle that would choke a
horse.''

Mr. Tafoya falsified a birth certificate to join the Marines at age 15 and fight
in Korea. His Green Beret training makes him a specialist in booby traps, exotic
explosives and man-to-man combat.  He has just been extradited to Fort Collins,
where he faces charges of attempted first-degree murder. He is 45 years old and
officially described in an affidavit filed by the Fort Collins police as
''suspected of being a mercenary soldier who is available to be hired and paid
to kill human beings.''

'Secretary' Known but Not Ar- rested

Who recruited the ''recruiter?'' The Fort Collins police say they have
identified but not yet arrested the ''secretary'' who entrapped Mr. Zagallai
with the enticing telephone call. The F.B.I. in Albuquerque and elsewhere are
now working on the other links in the chain. But in Washington, officials
suggest that some useful evidence has already come to light, including the
substantial sum paid to Mr.  Tafoya.

According to these officials, a plausible theory of the Libyan connection goes
like this: The Libyan Embassy in Washington, officials say, served in the
Zagallai case and in other affairs as a conduit of messages and source of funds.
So if Mr. Zagallai's execution was ordered from Tripoli, the word probably went
to the Libyan Embassy. The embassy, in turn, would likely have contacted a
hard-core member of one of the 22 Libyan Revolutionary Student Committees that
officials say the embassy created in the United States. Those Libyans are said
to be intensely loyal to the Qaddafi regime and perform its errands.

An errand runner could have been directed to contact a former Green Beret, very
likely a former instructor at the terrorist school reportedly run for Colonel
Qaddafi in Libya by Francis Edward Terpil. Mr. Terpil is one of the more exotic
figures on the terrorist scene and worked for the Central Intelligence Agency
until at least 1971.  The C.I.A. has said that he was dismissed for boasting and
boorishness.

Fugitive From Federal Indictment

Mr. Terpil, from McLean, Va., is a fugitive from a Federal indictment that
accuses him of supplying arms and training terrorists for Cololel Qadaffi. Mr.
Terpil allegedly hired former Green Berets and other American specialists in
killing to instruct Libyan terrorists.

The United States indictment also accuses Mr. Terpil of attempting to hire a
killer to murder Umar Abdullah Muhayshi. He is a former member of Libya's ruling
Revolutionary Council who defected and lives in Egypt.

In New York on May l5, Mr. Terpil, in an unusual proceeding, was convicted in
his absence of selling machine guns and other weapons to undercover agents. He
is thought to be living in Beirut.

Today, the C.I.A. refuses to discuss the Tafoya-Zagallai affair or anything
connected to it. But the plausible theory of other United States officials holds
that the one-time instructor from Mr. Terpil's terrorist school recruited a
fellow Green Beret, a jobless friend, to assassinate Mr. Zagallai.

How much of this will emerge in any trial of Mr. Zagallai's alleged assailant is
a question. Justice Department agents who have tried to examine Mr. Terpil's
affairs in the past have reportedly complained that the C.I.A. has been
uncooperative.

To be sure, there is a new Administration, and it has declared war on
international terrorism. That was the principal reason for the closing of the
Libyan Embassy earlier this month. This leads other Libyans who have been marked
for death to hope that a full account of the embassy's role may finally emerge.

As for Mr. Zagallai, the struggle to bring down Colonel Qadaffi will continue.
Mr. Zagallai has been known to say that he wants Libya free of chaos and
uncertainty, a society that observes the rule of law and respects human
personality, a Libya that eschews foreign adventures and spends its oil riches
on economic development instead of Soviet arms.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Eugene A. Tafoya photo of Libyan embassy in
Washington (page 16)

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 24, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ANTIWAR COALITION PLANS PROTESTS ON DIVERSE INTERESTS

BYLINE: By NATHANIEL SHEPPARD Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 30, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1289 words


A summer of demonstrations is being planned by a coalition of organizations
dedicated to such diverse interests as preventing a resumption of the draft,
promoting the rights of male and female homosexuals, shutting down nuclear power
plants and effecting racial and sexual equality.

Planners of the demonstrations are aiming for participation on a scale as large
as the protest against involvement in the civil war in El Salvador, which
attracted thousands of people to the Pentagon May 3.

The coalition, the People's Antiwar Mobilization, is reminiscent of the antiwar
protest groups that flourished in the 1960's and early 70's. But it is better
organized, has more ethnic diversity and seeks to address a wide range of social
issues in addition to potential American involvement in another war.

''The large turnout at the May 3 march showed that the time is right for such a
movement and that there is tremendous enthusiasm for a new movement,'' said
Laurie Fierstein, a Mobilization member from New York. ''Now local groups can go
back to their cities and point to the success of the march as an example of what
can be done and continue to broaden the structure of grassroots networks.''

Among the organization's goals is forcing the Government to rescind the budget
increases proposed for the Department of Defense and to use the money to restore
and increase funds for social programs and create jobs for the unemployed.

80 Chapters Across Nation

Spokesmen for the group say it has 80 chapters in cities across the country and
that it is run by a national board made up of 60 representatives of community
activist organizations.

''We were a lot of community groups struggling to deal with problems at the
local level,'' said Brian Becker, a Washington-based member of the organization.
''But among local community groups there developed a deep, growing level of
frustration, a feeling that they were powerless to solve the problems they faced
at the local level.

''It became clear that if there was to be success it would have to come from a
national movement,'' he said, ''and that movement was galvanized by President
Reagan when he stated his objectives were to cut social programs and put more
money into a national war buildup.''

Although the People's Antiwar Mobilization is now based in Washington, it is
likely to move its headquarters to its New York office above a delicatessen at
234 Seventh Avenue, Manhattan.

Sustained Summer Protests

Organizers say they hope to keep the momentum from the Washington march alive
with a sustained series of demonstrations this summer for varied objectives.
Through its affiliates, Mobilization has already conducted demonstrations almost
weekly in cities across the country, but mostly in Washington and New York.

Mobilization spokesmen see a big difference between their movement and the
antiwar movement of the 1960's. ''In the 60's, the antiwar movement was mostly
white and male and there was not the unity that we now enjoy,'' said Lois
Covington, a member who lives in Norfolk.''But ours is a grass-roots effort made
up of people from all walks of life.''

The movement that the People's Antiwar Mobilization seeks to forge is not
without its potential for problems. Where, in the 1960's, the Vietnam War became
the single issue of focus for an antiwar movement made up mostly of college
students, the coalition that this group has put together represents a variety of
activist organizations whose politics run from traditional left to Marxist and
have differing interests and agendas and widely varying experience in
antiestablishment efforts.

Among member organizations and supporting organizations are the Union of
Patriotic Puerto Ricans, which has headquarters in New York City and is active
in San Juan; the National Black United Front, a black civil rights organization,
which also has headquarters in New York City and which drew about 7,000
delegates to its last national conference in Brooklyn last year; Youth Against
War and Fascism, another New York-based group, and the Coalition for Lesbian and
Gay Rights, based in Boston.

Community Activist Groups

In addition, the People's Antiwar Mobilization says it is affiliated with
hundreds of such community activist organizations as the Lower East Side
Mobilization for Peace Action in New York; the Baltimore Welfare Rights
Organization; the Mobilization for Survival, an antinuclear power organization
based in Philladelphia; Women's Strike for Peace, also in Philadelphia; the
Chicago-based New Jewish Agenda, an organization founded two years ago to seek
to unite the struggle against racism with the struggle aginst anti-Semitism, and
the People's Committee Against Hunger, of Memphis.

Mobilization officials say they have attracted wide support from about 150 trade
unionist groups whose members have been thrown out of jobs and otherwise hurt by
the downturn in the nation's economy.

Among them are Local 900 of the United Automobile Workers, of Detroit; District
4, United Furniture Workers of Maryland, Pennsylvania and West Virginia;
District 40, Community, Education and Social Agency Employees of Boston;
District Council 37 of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal
Employees, and Local 1199 of the National Union of Health and Hospital Care
Employees, both of New York City; and the United Steelworkers of America Local
8751 from Boston.

Officials of the coalition also assert that it enjoys support from a variety of
political organizations that include Marxists, Socialists and Commmunists, as
well as persons aligned with traditional United States politics.

Bella Abzug and Paul O'Dwyer

Bella Abzug, a former member of Congress and president of Women U.S.A., a
women's rights organization based in New York, and Paul O'Dwyer, the lawyer and
former New York City Councilman, were featured speakers at the May 3 rally.

The movement, its spokesmen said, is also embraced by such groups as the Peace
and Freedom Party of California, which ran Dr. Benjamin Spock as a candidate for
the Presidency; the Citizens Party, which offered Barry Commoner as a
Presidential candidate, and the Workers World Party, a Marxist and Leninist
organization dedicated to revolution.

A few activists familiar to antiwar and civil rights demonstrations of the
1950's and 1960's are associated with the mobilization. David Dellinger was
introduced at the May 3 rally as a supporter of the organization's efforts, and
others, like James Foreman, are said to have helped organize the rally.

Mr. Becker, of Washington, was active with the National Antidraft Network in the
1960's, and Larry Holmes, a national coordinator for the new coalition, was
active with the American Servicemen's Union, which conducted antiwar efforts
from within the military in the Vietnam War.

Mr. Becker said that a ''major difference'' between current protests and those
of the l960's ''is that the economic system has changed dramatically.''

''Although the Vietnam War outraged many in the 1960's,'' he explained, ''there
was still a feeling of prosperity and that there was a better future ahead. But
today people are told they will have to learn to live with less and that many
people will have to forget about going to college, while at the same time here
we go getting into another war.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 24, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

OTHER BUSINESS;
SOILDER OF FORTUNE SEES ACTION

BYLINE: By Alix M. Freedman

SECTION: Section 3; Page 17, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 726 words


They are known as soldiers of fortune: a roving breed of hired military men,
lured by the promise of action and hard cash.  For several years, many have
looked for work - and many more for thrills - in the classifieds and ''hard
core'' adventure content of a magazine called Soldier of Fortune.

Now, the glossy magazine, filled with front-line military reportage and
advertising pages that are scarcely less peaceable, appears to have become
something of a cult among armchair warriors.  It is doing well by doing bad,
peddling weaponry and war, mercenaries and macho. With a $2.75 cover price, it
boasts sales of 199,000 an issue.

''There really aren't 199,000 readers looking for mercenary jobs abroad,'' said
J. Kendrick Noble, a publishing analyst at Paine Webber, in an allusion to the
magazine's controversial, three-page classified section, which is liberally
sprinkled with notices for bodyguards and mercenaries. ''But this is a way of
participating in a very different world, much in the way one might read a
science fiction or a macho-pulp magazine.''

Soldier of Fortune has 40,000 paid subscribers, including 5,000 overseas.
Another 144,000 copies are sold through newsstands, and 15,000 through gun shops
and sporting goods stores. The magazine says half its readership are Vietnam
veterans; the other half, law officials and ''professional'' types.

''This is my No. 1 best selling gun magazine,'' said a newstand owner, Alan H.
Forkowitz, who sells around 40 a month from a small kiosk in mid-Manhattan.
''Cops and gun nuts love it. And a lot of lawyers and white collar people are
getting into it.''

In a recent interview at the Mayflower Hotel in New York, Robert K. Brown, age
48, the magazine's founder and publisher (dressed in camouflaged fatigues),
attributed the popularity of the action magazine to its unusual brand of
''activism,'' which has included offering a $10,000 reward in gold (never paid)
for the return of Idi Amin.

''We are not the typical bunch of cloistered editors; we are, to say the least,
advocacy journalists,'' said Mr. Brown, a former Green Beret with a masters
degree in political science ''We get into firefights. We get shot at and we
shoot at.''

Swashbuckling through Rhodesia in 1974, Mr. Brown acquired some mercenary
recruiting information from the Government of Oman. Back home in Colorado, he
decided to sell the information packets through a modest ad in gun tabloid. As
inquiries shot in from mercenaries around the globe, he saw the potential for a
big business.

In February 1975, with the remaining $10,000 acquired from the sale of his stake
in a mail order house for warfare and survival gear, he test-marketed Soldier of
Fortune to gun magazine subscribers.

When Soldier of Fortune went to press in March 1975 as an 80-page black and
white magazine, it was with 4,400 subcribers and a projected budget of $36,000.
By July, the publication had already recouped $30,000.

Today, the average issue runs 100 pages with 36 to 40 advertising pages, devoted
almost exclusively to guns, knives, ammunition and outdoor suvival gear. A full
page ad costs $1,350; color is $2,025.  Published with a staff of 24 in Boulder,
Colo., it is distributed cross country twice a month by a company owned by Larry
Flynt, founder of Hustler magazine.

Meanwhile, several other recent entrants, Eagle, Gungho and Combat Illustrated,
are also attempting to capture adventure fans. They have had little to satisfy
their thirst for action since Argosy and True folded in the mid-1970's.

Despite Soldier of Fortune's mystique, general advertisers shy away. Indeed,
Soldier of Fortune revels in its general unacceptability (in 1976 the Cuban
ambassador to the United Nations condemned the magazine before the General
Assembly). Soldier of Fortune will never have a circulation of more than
400,000, Mr. Brown said, and he has no plans to change the concept of the
magazine to broaden readership.

''My corner of the market,'' he said, ''is those that have the same philosophy
that I do.'' Alix M. Freedman

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Robert Brown

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 24, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CREATING A DYNASTY IN THE PHILIPINES

BYLINE: By Henry Kamm

SECTION: Section 6; Page 15, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6785 words


use this
Henry Kamm is The New York Times's chief Asian diplomatic correspondent. By
Henry Kamm arxists would say that the ''objective conditions'' for revolution
exist in abundance in the Philippines. The country's leader - who began his
first term 16 years ago under a constitutional limitation of two four-year
mandates -and his relatives and friends flaunt their great wealth while the gap
between them and the vast majority of the impoverished grows. Many bishops,
priests and nuns in this profoundly priests and nuns in this profoundly Roman
Catholic nation of 47 million people denounce the regime and are sympathetic to
its opponents; the bulk of the politically aware elite is openly disaffected,
and scattered groups of insurgents have tied down much of the armed forces in
prolonged combat.

Some critics go so far as to draw pines and El Salvador or Iran under the Shah.
Some economic analysts caution against investing in an unstable coun-try. But,
thus far, the Philippines of President Ferdinand E. Marcos has defied the
''objective'' prerequisites for revolution. So sure is Mr. Marcos of his
position that he is presenting himself for re-election on June 16 for the first
time since 1969, throwing out a defiant challenge that is unlikely to be taken
up. The 63-year-old President can look forward to serving until 1987, and
beyond, if he so chooses.

In a country that is deeply sensitive to style, Ferdinand Marcos has it, and
actions that in essence converted the nation from an illfunctioning, raucous but
free democracy into his personal fief and seemingly permanent possession.

His deep and resonant voice, his stiffly elegant gestures and his unabashed
acceptance of the regal luxury that surrounds him in a land of pervasive poverty
cloak Mr. Marcos with an aura of command that contrasts with this most relaxed
of countries, sets him apart and is probably as responsible for his
unchallengeable political strength as is the unswerving loyalty of the armed
forces.

A supremely skillful lawyer, Mr. Marcos has drastically reduced the
effectiveness of members of the open opposition - men and women who had held
national political office until mar-tial law was imposed in 1972 - by strip-
ping them of their wealth, political power and even personal liberty, or by
forcing them into exile. He has kept at bay - and in small numbers - insurgents
such as the Maoist Communists and the Moslem separatists. He has, despite
human-rights violations and a severe curtailment of civil liberties, retained
the support of the United States, which has extended substantial amounts of
military and economic aid to the Philippines since the end of American rule in
1946. Two years ago, Mr. Marcos managed to extract from the Carter
Administration a $500 million, five-year commitment in military and economic aid
as ''compensation'' for American use of the important air and naval bases at
Clark Field and Subic Bay, even though the existing agreement does not expire
until 1991.

By a master stroke early this year -one that was lauded by the international
press - Mr. Marcos even removed the onus of running a military regime. In
January, days before Ronald Reagan's inauguration and about a month before the
visit to the Philippines of Pope John Paul II, President Marcos - his wife,
Imelda, at his side - stepped before a large audience invited to the vast,
luxuriously refurbished heroes' hall of Malacanang, the Presidential palace on
the polluted Pasig River, and proclaimed the lifting of martial law. he
announcement procured for Mr. Marcos, however briefly, the international image
of a president who had returned his country to normalcy, without losing the
powers essential to his continued full control.

Those powers are clearly evident not only in political terms but in the manner
in which the Marcoses conduct their lives. Mr. Marcos is one of the few heads of
state in recent times to have sustained power for so long, and he and his wife
have adopted the style of dynastic rulers. They have offered each other birthday
presents that were paid for from the public purse. He ''gave'' her a bridge
linking her native island of Leyte with the largely undeveloped island of Samar.
The bridge is impressive but carries little traffic.

Mrs. Marcos, whose gifts are more frequent, offered her husband a computer
center. For his 60th birthday in 1977, she persuaded a number of Government
contractors to underwrite the conversion of six simple old houses in his native
province of Ilocos Norte in northern Luzon into luxurious residences, shrines
and museums. (The Governor of Ilocos Norte is the President's sister; the Vice
Governor, his son. A brother of Mrs. Marcos's is Governor of their home
province.)

The President, too, offered regal gifts for the occasion. To fellow alumni from
the University of the Philippines law school, class of '39, who came to
congratulate him, he presented porcelain plates bearing his portrait and Swiss
watches whose faces were gold medals featuring his profile.  ''There are only
two flaws,'' said a Malacanang insider who has served his President loyally for
more than a decade, ''his cronies and Imelda.'' Filipinos make a distinction
between what the official Marcos sketch says about his being ''fiercely loyal to
his friends'' and ''cronyism.'' Mr. Marcos's ''cronies,'' his critics say, are
profiting hugely from their friend's autocratic rule; there is the added
suspicion that they serve as fronts for garnering profits that those in official
positions cannot acquire openly.

A leading ''crony,'' Antonio O. Floirendo, is not insulted by the term. The
Marcoses, he says, ''are my personal friends. I don't feel bad about it.'' Mr.
Floirendo, a trim, gray-haired man of 64 in Jordache jeans and a blue sport
shirt, was speaking at the side of his swimming pool, complete with an
artificial Niagara Falls of huge, real boulders, while a youth with a flywhisk
on a long broom handle was respectfully shooing insects from his guests and the
amply set breakfast table.

The swimming pool is in a palatial oasis in the midst of one of the world's
biggest banana plantations, the bulk of whose lands, together with about 800
convict laborers, Mr. Floirendo leases from the Davao prison and penal farm on
the southern island of Mindanao. Mr.  Floirendo has homes elsewhere and a
multitude of other business interests here and in the United States.

''I am close to them,'' he says of the Marcoses. ''They ask me to entertain
people for them.'' Mr. Floirendo is a frequent member of the court that
accompanies Mrs. Marcos when she travels. He says Mrs. Marcos often ''tapped''
him, the way she does other businessmen, Filipino and foreign, to finance the
public projects to which she attaches her name. ''She calls on people she is
comfortable with,'' he says in recalling his contributions to a heart center, an
art center and a children's hospital, among the spectacular and costly projects
that have been identified with the President's wife. In return, her critics
contend, these business friends are rewarded with lucrative Government
contracts.

Imelda Romualdez Marcos, who began her political career by gradually raising the
journalistic designation ''First Lady'' to the status of an official style and
title, is now Governor of metropolitan Manila and Minister of Human Settlements.
(The latter is a new ministry whose functions Mrs. Marcos devises as she carries
them out.) In a highly concentrated political structure in which some ministers
are designated in court gossip as ''his'' as distinct from ''hers,'' Imelda
Marcos wields power second only to that of the President. If in 1987 Mr. Marcos
chooses not to seek another term, Mrs. Marcos, 12 years younger and politically
no less active or ambitious than her husband, is considered his most likely
successor.

Although Filipinos are well aware of the extravagance of both the President and
his wife, it is Mrs. Marcos who bears the brunt of the widespread criticism for
profligacy with the people's money. ''He has the Ilocano instinct for making
money,'' a ranking official said.  ''She spends it.'' Another, an academic,
groaned: ''I don't care what
first jump
they do, but does she have to flaunt it so much?'' He recalled how he had been
watching television coverage of an international film festival - a project of
Mrs. Marcos's, in the Manila Cultural Center, another of her projects - by a
worth many years of the couple's combined salaries.

The President earns about $13,000 a year; a Cabinet Minister, $10,000. Mr.
Marcos has been uninterruptedly in public office, as a Congressman, Senator and
Senate President before assuming the presidency, since 1949, with little
opportunity before then, because of his wartime military and guerrilla service,
to amass a fortune.  His wife used to speak with pride of coming from the poor
branch of the well-established Romualdez family.

Mrs. Marcos's projects, housed usually in luxurious and costly buildings, are
always presented as benefits that the First Lady bestows on her people,
particularly in the Manila area, whose governor she has been since 1975. This
has earned her the irreverent title of ''Nuestra Senora de Metro Manila'' (''Our
Lady of Metropolitan Manila'').

The visit of Pope John Paul II to the Philippines in February illustrated the
essential features of the Marcos style that infuriate critics, particularly
among the educated elites and the street-wise and cynical people of Manila.
However, according to a wide range of observers, that event enhanced the ''first
couple's'' standing with the rural masses who form the nation's majority.

The Pope's arrival had been preceded by wrangling between the President's palace
and that of Jaime Cardinal Sin, Archbishop of Manila and head of the church,
over who would play host to the Pontiff. The church carried the day, obtaining
from Malacanang a letter conceding that the Pope was coming on a pastoral visit.
The cardinal, as skillful a politician as the President, then let it be known
that the Pope would not fail to call on the President.

Nonetheless, there was not a day in the six that the Pontiff spent there that
did not involve the presence of Mr. Marcos or his wife and on some occasion
their daughters.

The Marcoses greeted the Pope at the airport and received him at Malacanang the
afternoon of the first day. They had met a rebuff when the church said Pope John
Paul did not have time to celebrate mass at the palace. But the ''first couple''
made the most of the reception, turning the occasion into a political plum. The
guest list excluded nonsupporters of the regime, to the extent of ostracizing
the only living ex-President, Diosdado Macapagal. The gap was filled by
''cronies'' and a handful of world travelers of wealth or social standing with
whom Mrs. Marcos likes to surround herself. Prominent was Cristina Ford, the
former wife of Henry Ford II.

The President had a bronze medal struck for the occasion bearing the likenesses
of himself and the Pope, and every guest was expected to pin it to the
traditional Filipino dress that Mrs. Marcos had specified for the occasion. The
palace had gone to the length of having delivered to the guests' homes the white
material out of which the butterfly-sleeve dresses for women and the loose
shirts for men were to be tailored. The uniformity caused foreigners, such as
ambassadors and their ladies, journalists and favored businessmen, to look as
though they were at a masquerade.

The ceremonies, during which the Pope read to the President a pointed homily on
human rights, also featured a song composed for the occasion by Mrs. Marcos and
sung by their daughter Irene, 21, accompanied by a choir in a balcony above.

The reception, church officials later said, fulfilled their worst fears that in
a country of great poverty the Pope would be surrounded by official luxury.
Outstanding even in the opulent decor of noble woods, rich cloth and lustrous
crystal was a table the length of a long hall heaped to its full extent with
carefully piled fruit, largely imported, resembling a 17th-century Flemish still
life that had proliferated out of the painter's control.

The Pope and the President sat on tall-backed chairs on a dais under the
Presidential seal; to their left sat Mrs. Marcos on a somewhat lower chair, and
next to her sat her two daughters, on chairs slightly lower yet. (In the
remodeling of the palace, Mr.  Marcos has had his desk placed on a low platform,
making certain that he sits making certain that he sits above his guests.)

On the second day, the presidential couple sat just below the alter in Luneta
Park at a mass during which the Pontiff beatified 16 martyrs. The Marcoses were
the first to receive communion from the Pope's hands. Arriving in the central
Philippine city of Cebu the following morning, the papal party found Mrs. Marcos
at the foot of the gangway, her international friends behind her. Dismayed
bishops consoled themselves with the thought that only because Julio Cardinal
Rosales of Cebu was a special friend of Mrs. Marcos had the First Lady come to
his city.

But on the following morning, in southern Davao, a plane touched down shortly
before the papal aircraft, and out stepped Mrs. Marcos and her as well at the
subsequent stops at Bacolod and Iloilo.

The fifth day found Mrs. Marcos showing the Pontiff through an Indochinese
refugee camp in Bataan. On the last day, the President received the visitor in
Baguio, near his native region; the presidential couple then saw the Pope off at
Manila Airport. The entire trip was accorded heavy but selective play in the
press and on television, which judiciously emphasized papal admonitions to the
clergy and nuns not to put excessive emphasis on social or political action.
Coverage made light of the Pope's critical comments on the country's imbalance
in social justice.

Despite claims to having created a ''new society'' under martial law (the
President has given his party the name of New Society), the economic changes
that Mr. Marcos has brought about are more a matter of style than of substance.
Politically, he has gathered for himself more power than any other Philippine
President.

At his election to the Presidency in 1965, Mr. Marcos took over a powerful but
constitutionally circumscribed office. Four years later, he became the first
President in Philippine history to be re-elected to a second term of office.
However, in 1972, with two years of presidential power remaining before he would
have to yield it forever, Mr. Marcos staged what can be described as a lawyer's
coup d'etat.

On Sept. 21 of that year, he declared that the system was no longer working,
suspended Congress and proclaimed himself absolute ruler.  Within a few months,
he had secured from a subservient constitutional convention a charter converting
the Philippines into a Westminsterstyle parliamentary democracy, with a prime
minister as head of government. He then declared it ratified by informal
citizens' assemblies and conferred on himself the office of President under the
old Constitution and the office of Prime Minister under the new.

Following the declaration of martial law, Mr. Marcos quickly bolstered the size
of the military - from 60,000 men to its present 155,000 -with an attendant
increase in the officer corps and rapid promotion, thereby creating an important
group of generals and colonels who owe their careers - and loyalty - to him.
Provincial and district military commanders acquired a local political clout
that had been alien to an officer corps that still draws much of its inspiration
from the American tradition. Military tribunals tried those arrested for
martial-law infractions - sentencing, for instance, Benigno S. Aquino Jr., the
former Senator and noted Marcos foe, to ''death by musketry.'' Military
detention and interrogation centers housed thousands of other outspoken
opponents of the Marcos regime, including politicians, labor leaders and members
of the clergy. All Filipinos were subject to arrest and detention without
charge.

At the national level, Mr. Marcos allowed neither military nor civilian
personalities to exercise any power not specifically delegated and controlled by
him. President Marcos alone made and executed the law.

Wealth was redistributed from former oligarchs (including the family of Mr.
Marcos's former Vice President, Ferdando Lopez, one of the country's wealthiest
and most powerful families) to a new set, the friends and relatives of the
Marcoses. These favored Filipinos got the lion's share of lucrative
Government-subsidized projects as well as the newspapers, radio and television
networks, banks and other business concerns that were stripped from several of
the oligarchs. In addition, the entire bureaucratic apparatus was subjugated to
personal loyalty to the President rather than the Presidency.

''I hate it, and at the same time one has to admire the way he does it,'' said
Salvador P. Lopez, author, journalist and former ambassador and president of the
University of the Philippines. ''Each people gets the type of government it
deserves,'' said the Rev.  Joaquin G. Bernas, the Jesuit provincial, or national
superior of the order, and an outspoken opponent of Mr. Marcos.

Over the past nine years of one-man rule, Filipinos, not only members of the
intellectual and economic elites but much of the Manila proletariat and many in
the villages of this largely rural nation, have come to believe that Mr. Marcos
is no worse than many of the politicians whom he has relegated to impotence.
They see him as the most crafty at an ignoble craft.

In the quarter-century between independence in 1946 and Mr.  Marcos's seizure of
full powers under martial law in 1972, the politicians of the Philippines had
enriched themselves from the public purse, made alliances and deals for personal
profit, used legislative and executive power to substitute pork-barrel projects
for progress, and practiced an inflamed style of politicking in which oratory
quickly gave way to violence by the politicians' private armies. They were
abetted by a business community that had no compunctions about converting the
venality of the politicians to its profit and a press that more often than not
gave up its freedom for profitable service to business and political interest
groups.

During the early days of Mr. Marcos's authoritarian rule, he enjoyed
considerable support, particularly for a drop in violent crime resulting from
the confiscation of many weapons, but gradually the support gave way to
widespread fatigue and renewed cynicism.

The repeal of martial law has not dispelled any of this cynicism.  True, it
spelled the end of military tribunals (which, in any event, have rarely been
held in recent years) and ostensibly permitted free speech, free assembly, a
free press and free elections.

Close to 1,000 persons arrested under martial-law provisions remained in prison
shortly after the decree was rescinded. They included persons held for strictly
political reasons as well as offenders against public order. Charges of torture
and occasional violent deaths ''under interrogation'' have abated, partly as a
result, many feel, of American protests.

Martial law may have ended, but the President has reserved for himself the use
of the new Constitution's sixth amendment, passed in 1976, which empowers him to
rule by decree whenever he deems it necessary. Furthermore, he expressly
declared that all the decrees and orders that he had
issued unilaterally under mar-tial law remain the law of the land.  Last month,
a plebiscite was held on constitutional amendments to create what was called ''a
Filipino system of parliamentary government.'' These amendments amount to a
fundamental revision of the Constitution, returning the Philippines to an even
stronger form of presidential government than under the earlier,
American-inspired charter. The President will again be the Chief Executive,
rather than a ceremonial figure, with explicit control over all ministries,
while the Prime Minister will be nominated by him and serve as principal
administrator. Moreover, the President will have the right to dissolve
Parliament, will serve a six-year term, be eligible to run an unlimited number
of times and to appoint a successor.

The amendments were passed, unsurprisingly, and Mr. Marcos, as vigorous and trim
as ever, has set the full panoply of his political and media power in motion to
campaign for his virtually unopposed election. Possible serious opposition
candidates have declined to enter a contest in which the incumbent holds all the
cards, and only Alejo Santos, a little-known representative of the Nacionalista
Party, is running merely to keep his party's franchise alive.
second jump
bored great animosity toward both her daughter and the children she brought
back. He retains an indelible memory of the old woman, face pressed flat against
the glass of her living-room window, making terrible faces at her unloved
daughter's youngest child. He remembers, too, their bourgeois penury. ''My worst
nightmares, still, are about being stranded somewhere with-out any money,'' he
says.  ''To me, poverty is synonymous with powerlessness.''

As if life did not hold perils enough, along came World War II.  Alsace, which
is situated on the Franco-German border and controls one of the busiest ports on
the Rhine River, has been buffeted back and forth between the two nations since
the Franco-Prus-sian War in 1871. And when war broke out in 1939, first French
Army officers were billeted in Ungerer's grandmother's house. Then, in 1940, the
Germans moved in. Overnight, French, which had been the official language since
the end of World War I, was forbidden, in and out of school. Under the Nazi
occupation, Ungerer received a completely German education from the age of 8 to
13. To these wartime years he attributes his ability to see at least two sides
of every question.  ''As schoolchildren,'' he explains, ''we were given
pushcarts and told to bring from home any books written in French, so that they
could be burned.'' Though Ungerer knew that more than half his father's valuable
library was in French, he neither batted an eye at nor complied with this
unorthodox homework assignment. ''What a fox I became,'' he says, ''and, of
course, to be a good fox you must look like a lamb.'' Almost reflexively, the
Ungerer posters, drawings and cartoons come to mind that derive their bite from
this notion of reversible roles. In addition to ''Black Power-White Power,''
there is the wry political cartoon of a worker in overalls, facing the viewer,
with a wing for a left arm. The picture is labeled ''Left Wing.'' In a small
inset, the same man is shown rear view, this sketch dubbed ''Right Wing.''

''My whole childhood was a schooling in relativity,'' Ungerer says, ''in
figuring out for myself who were the good guys and who were the bad.'' Not
surprisingly, his school days were punctuated by frequent ''Heil Hitler!''
salutes, for which he soon substituted a serviceable ''Eine litre!'' Though his
classwork was done in careful German (his mother saved all his grammar-school
notebooks, their margins filled with Ungerer's earliest drawings), he also kept
a private journal in French, filled with irreverent, doubtless treasonable,
caricatures of the conqueror.

During this period, Ungerer also developed his fierce pride in being Alsatian, a
race apart - a condition he attributes to Alsace's having served as a buffer
between antagonistic powers for so much of its history. Ungerer boasts that
''during World War II, Alsace resisted the Nazis magnificently, but in the way a
blotter resists.  We said yes to everything, then went our own way.'' Even
today, Strasbourg is half Roman Catholic and half Protestant, and though the
inhabitants speak French, there is a local Alsatian dialect, similar to
Swiss-Deutsch, that shifts effortlessly from French to German. It is an earthy
dialect. ''There are more than 200 ways to refer to drunkenness,'' Ungerer
reports with relish, ''and almost as many for fornication.'' Strasbourg is also
the city where the great 19th-century illustrator Gustave Dore was born, where
earlier that consummate graphic artist of the Renaissance, Albrecht Durer,
worked for a time and where, in our own day, the sculptor Jean Arp was born.
Other painters of the region who were early influences on Ungerer included
Matthias Grunewald and Martin Schongauer, as well as two turn-ofthe-century
Alsatian illustrators, Hansi and Schnugg.

The worst days for Ungerer's family were at the war's end, when the Germans made
a last-ditch stand in what came to be known as ''the Colmar pocket.'' After
their house was bombed, the Ungerers lived in their basement for three months.
Forced to dig trenches for the Germans, they devised a system whereby Ungerer's
sister tossed a shovelful of dirt to him and he heaved it back. ''We laughed all
the time,'' he remembers. ''It was a kind of nervous reaction.'' It was also a
form of armor. The family had no running water and each day the children went to
the river with buckets. ''We'd go together so that we could die together,''
Ungerer explains. The possibility was always there. ''One thing I learned
then,'' he says grimly. ''There is nothing in this life so stupid, so empty and
devoid of meaning, as the dead body of a human being. Even the blood isn't red -
the way it always is in war movies. It turns a sickly brown in less than 15
minutes. A human carcass,'' he winds up hollowly, ''is the most desolate thing
in the world.''

His bitterest shock, however, came in 1945, when the French returned. ''Those
French teachers would laugh at our German accents and punish us for all the
French grammar we'd forgotten,'' he recalls. ''They treated us as if we were
second-class citizens - even collaborators.'' Disillusioned, Ungerer dropped out
of school and embarked on an extended Wanderjahr, getting as far as Lapland,
mostly on foot. In 1953, he joined the French Camel Corps in Algeria but was
discharged when he developed a serious case of pleurisy. For a brief while, he
studied at the Ecole des Arts Decoratifs in Strasbourg, but he was restless and
was soon expelled for being ''subversive and perverse.'' ''The professor who
wrote that comment,'' Ungerer says, looking back, ''was either a complete fool
or perceptive beyond his wildest imaginings.'' Doubtless, a good part of
Ungerer's present elation at showing in Paris is that it signals a personal and
an Alsatian victory over France proper. ''I've taken over that museum like a
tank division!'' he gloats. ''It is my diploma and my coming to terms with the
past.'' For the unwary museumgoer expecting an esthetically soothing experience,
or for anyone who feels uncomfortable unless a clear line is drawn between art
destined for the ages and frivolous graphic sport, some of Ungerer's work is
likely to cause queasiness, even distress. What are we to make of an artist who,
on the one hand, can move us to the brink of tears with a tender, Ingres-like
pencil portrait in miniature of his infant son, Lukas, asleep, and, on the
other, repel absolutely with a remarkably conceived study of a scantily attired
female trussed to a steel bar. Words cannot approximate the demonic power and
effect on the emotions of this and other Ungerer images. What nags at the
viewer's sensibility in these depictions of sexuallly subjugated females is not
just the horrific images and what they say of the imagination that produced
them, but the certain awareness that, at some point, they required actual models
posing in order to achieve the haunting precision they possess. What we are
bearing witness to is the artist's - or our own - ultimate capability of
committing as yet unimagined sins.

Overall, Ungerer's imagery with regard to women is unremittingly negative, often
aggressively hostile. In the more frivolous cartoons and social commentaries of
the early 1960's, he depicts women as maneating spiders, predatory beasts on the
prowl, eviscerating or coldly manipulative love partners. Many of his most
masterful drawings of the mid to late 70's are of female models deliberately
posed in an awesome variety of submissive positions. Asked the reason for these
consistently brutal portrayals, Ungerer is bluntly forthright: ''It's simple. I
don't like women. I can love an individual woman, sure, but that's because,
temperamentally, I love exceptions to the rule.''

In terms of draftsmanship, his most recent large pencil drawings are worthy of a
Durer. Their very size attests to Ungerer's virtuosity. A minor artist can often
control his line, small scale.  But to work with such elan and assurance on a
grand scale is an achievement of the highest order.

Ungerer takes himself seriously about few matters, but he never makes light of
his metier: drawing. ''Drawing is the most direct and personal kind of graphic
expression,'' he says. ''Unlike painting, it doesn't forgive. You put down your
black line, and there it is - as inevitable as death. That is why death can only
be drawn.'' His awed respect for the medium suggests a possible reason for
Ungerer's irresistible attraction to difficult, even distasteful, subject
matter. It poses the supreme challenge to his graphic hubris, his prowess over
image and line.
This penchant for extremes
third jump

These rebels do not, as a rule, seek to engage the army in combat, concentrating
more on gaining the confidence of the villagers and indoctrinating them for
class struggle. But their presence has, in classical insurgency fashion, been
followed by the introduction of military units to hunt them down. This, in turn,
has led to the abuses that are customary when underpaid soldiers are set loose
to hunt for an enemy who hides among the civilian population, with the usual
share of extortion, acts of cruelty and rape. In consequence, the affected
population turns against the military, and the rebels gain sympathy.

The Communists have exploited the real grievances of people in areas of sereal
grievances of people in areas of severe underdevelopment or where foundly with
people's lives. In northern Luzon, for instance, villagers are irate about
Government plans to build a series of hydroelectric-power dams along the Chico
River which would flood many of their villages as well as the ancient rice
terraces that are among the great wonders of man's struggle to dominate nature.
In some instances, the Communists have cooperated with the Moro National
Liberation Front, which, seeking autonomy for its Moslem followers in the island
of Mindanao, has been waging a protracted guerrilla war against the Philippine
Government.

While they have sympathizers in Manila, particularly among the large university
population, the Communists have not extended their open activities to the
cities. (In the last two years, the urban terrorists have been members of two
quixotic groups of professionals from the Manila elite - the Light a Fire and
April 6 movements - who have resorted to arson and bombings to combat what they
feel is an unjust and illegal regime.)

The most significant support that the Communists have gained in the martial-law
years has come from church radicals. Many priests and nuns have found it easy to
transfer or extend the dogma of Roman Catholic theology to the equally schematic
dogma of Maoism. ''There are Christians who are reading reality the way Marxists
do,'' a non-Marxist priest said. Only a handful of priests and nuns have
deserted the church for the New People's Army. However, familiar with victims of
economic exploitation and conscious of the chasm between the rich, who sometimes
include their own families, and the poor, who are their parishioners, many
priests and nuns find that the Marxist catechism flows easily from their lips.

''There are already many liberated areas,'' said a middle-aged nun with visible
satisfaction. Asked what ''liberated'' meant, she replied, ''Saved from the
clutches of Marcos and imperialism.'' By imperialism she meant ''the
multinationals,'' and that, she said, meant mainly the United States.

In many years of travel through formerly colonized nations, this writer has
encountered nothing that rivals the Philippine-American relationship in the
depth and extent of the imprint that a colonial power has left behind. There is
a silly but not insignificant movement that wants the Philippines to be
incorporated as the 51st state; there are the endless daily queues in front of
the American Embassy seeking immigration visas; and the technocratic, business,
professional and military elites share an Americanized vocabulary and behavior.
Filipinos seem to look toward the United States either angrily - as the source
of their problems - or hopefully - as the solver of their problems - or both.
Conversely, Filipinos seem little interested in what other countries, even such
major trading partners as Japan and Australia, feel about their country. The
nation's foreign political relations rarely rise above the perfunctory, even
with its Southeast Asian neighbors.

''In the eyes of Filipino intellectuals, America is to be feared, distrusted,
even to be angry about,'' said Salvador Lopez. ''In military and economic power,
you are frightening. You impinge on our lives every moment of the day, every day
of the year. We love you and we hate you.

''We know you so well. We are so close to it: The plurality and openness of your
civilization and culture, your passion for individual freedom, I love this. But
about the military bases, I'm not too happy. Your multinationals are very
clever, cunning and subtle. You don't exploit us so crudely. It is more subtle
but no less effective. Other countries exploit us, too, but we expect better
from the Americans.''

In Mr. Lopez's view, Mr. Marcos would not have declared martial law and
sustained authoritarian rule for so long ''without tacit American tolerance.''
That is a moderate attitude; the more radical anti-American view holds that the
United States conspired to consolidate power in Mr. Marcos to secure its hold
over Subic Bay Naval Base and Clark Air Base and to protect American investments
here, which are estimated at $3 billion. Many large American corporations,
including Ford, Westinghouse and Coca-Cola, have sizable operations in this
country.

Former Senator Jose W. Diokno, an outspoken critic of the United States and a
leading civil-liberties lawyer, believes that the bases are the fundamental
American interest in his country. ''For that they would sacrifice anything,
including the economic interests,'' he said. ''The bases are the unfinished
national issue, a continuing frustration. They are not like American bases in a
country where the United States was never the colonial power. They were forced
on us from the very beginning.'' Indeed, it was only when the agreement on the
bases was renegotiated in 1978 that the Philippine flag flew for the first time
over Subic Bay and Clark.

American officials grant that the Pentagon attaches cardinal importance to the
bases, particularly since the loss of Iran, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan
and the Soviet assumption, via Vietnam, of an active Southeast Asian role. Subic
Bay has the best and cheapest naval repair and maintenance facility in the
Pacific.  Clark Air Base provides a Pacific reach and an alternative route
across the Indian Ocean to the Persian Gulf and the Middle East.

At the same time, these officials point to frequent Washington statements
critical of human-rights violations as well as pronouncements in favor of a
speedy return to political normalcy and they challenge critics to say whether
they desire direct American intervention in the Philippines' domestic affairs or
the withdrawal of the bases, which, the officials say, serve not only American
security interests but those of all non-Communist nations.  Withdrawal, of
course, would also mean considerable economic deprivation for the Philippines.
After the Philippine Government itself, the two military bases are the largest
employers in the country and pump about $200 million a year into the economy.

Filipinos looking toward the United States for relief from the Marcos regime are
more pessimistic now that President Reagan, perceived here as a friend of
governments guaranteeing stability at any price, has replaced Jimmy Carter. But
during the Carter Administration, the same Filipinos accused the President of
putting up a human-rights smokescreen behind which the United States gave de
facto support to authoritarianism.

The support took concrete form in the ''compensation'' for the use of the bases,
and the United States is extending $40 million a year in development aid.
American officials assert that while in the past American military aid came in
outright grants, all assistance now furnished is in sales under ''pretty tough''
credit terms. While American military planners and most businessmen here are
clearly satisfied with the Marcos Government, civilian American officials have,
during the years of martial law, shown unease over the dilemma of assuring what
are believed to be American national interests while helping to prop up what
many consider to be a corrupt authoritarian regime.

With Mr. Marcos soon to be constitutionally in power for a new sixyear term and
Mr. Reagan in office until at least 1985, no peaceful change seems in the cards.
Unless economic conditions take such a sharp downturn that the impoverished
majority, particularly in Manila, fuses into a critical mass with the radical
students under the influence of the New People's Army, it is likely that Mr.
Marcos will remain where he is.

The battle over who governs the Philippines is most likely to occur when Mr.
Marcos can no longer serve. If, over the next six years, Mr. Marcos does not
assure a peaceful succession by sharing and eventually surrendering power to
persons who are not necessarily his ''cronies'' or members of his family, the
military, whom Mr. Marcos created as a major political force, will be the most
likely arbiter of the future of the Philippines, the kingmaker or the king.

''The most serious danger created by Mr. Marcos is that he proved it could be
done,'' said Father Bernas, ''and henceforth others will try to do it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Marcos and Zhou Enlai (Page 58) Phoot of Marcos
and family (Page 58) Photo of Mrs. Marcos (Page 57) Photo of Manila riot police
(Page 55) Photo of Marcos (Page 54) Photo of Marcos Photo of Imelda Marcos

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 24, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PECK'S BAD BOY OF ART

BYLINE: By Selma G. Lanes; Selma G. Lanes is the author of ''The Art of Maurice
Sendak.''

SECTION: Section 6; Page 26, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4660 words


In contrast to the towering cathedral of Strasbourg, which commands the plains
of Alsace and seems sublimely poised to project its attenuated poised to project
its attenuated Gothic spire heavenward, Tomi Ungerer, well over 6 feet tall and
awesomely broad-beamed, is a decidedly earthbound colossus. As he tramps through
the cobbled streets of his native city, clad in coarse-grained Irish sweater,
baggy corduroy trousers and sturdy farmer's shoes, he gives the impression of
taking root to the spot whenever he breaks stride to emphasize a conversational
point. He bears, in fact, an uncanny resemblance to the ravenous villain-hero of
one of his own children's fairy tle children for breakfast the best''),
particularly as he expounds on the gastronomic delights of his home region.
During dinner, fork at the ready, Ungerer proffers a veritable panegyric to a
specialty of the province: a heaping platter of disarmingly gentle sauerkraut
crowned by a steaming wreath of plump, locally stuffed sausages.

It is difficult to reconcile this genial, quasi Rotarian of Alsace with the
Peck's Bad Boy of children's books, or with the irreverent artist-Wunderkind of
Madison Avenue, who, a little more than a decade ago, extricated himself from a
stormy 15-year love affair with New York City. He entered his own equivalent of
The Wilderness, first in a remote fishing village in Nova Scotia, recently on an
even more remote 200-acre farm - now his home for the greater part of every year
- at the southwestern tip of Ireland.

During this past February and March, however, Ungerer returned in triumph to
Strasbourg, where his 87-year-old mother still lives, to supervise the selection
and framing of more than 400 of his graphic works and sculptures for shipment to
Paris. There, at the renovated Musee des Arts Decoratifs in the Palais du
Louvre, a Tomi Ungerer retrospective opened last month and will continue until
July 27. In five spacious galleries on two spit-and-polish floors is ensconced a
vintage choice of Ungerer's prolific output from the last 25 years.  The show
provides an unparalleled opportunity for Ungerer boosters and detractors alike
to see the artist at his best, and on his own terms. Certainly it is as eclectic
and comprehensive an exhibition as has ever been accorded a living artist whose
work occupies an esthetic no man's land somewhere between the formal picture and
the selling image, the ether of high art and the crass commerce of the
marketplace. That it is taking place at all is, to the 49-year-old Ungerer,
proof of one of his existential rules of thumb. ''When you disappear from a
scene,'' he says, ''you create a vacuum. I didn't do it intentionally, God
knows, but it's true that you can eventually win a battle by becoming invisible
to the enemy. Look at David and Goliath!''

If the world at large is his Goliath, Ungerer hardly fits the bill as a callow
boy warrior. He has been a notable success as the author-artist of several
refreshingly irreverent children's books, an advertising and magazine
illustrator con brio and a mordantly effective social satirist and political
cartoonist, both here in the United States, where his career began in 1956, and
in Europe and Japan as well. His first book, ''The Mellops Go Flying'' (1957),
about a genial family of Gallic pigs, was done for the doyenne of United States
children's-book editors at the time, Ursula Nordstrom of Harper & Row. His
corruscating antiwar posters during the Vietnam era gained him a worldwide
audience, and his annual income from advertising clients, mostly in Germany, is
reputed to be in six digits. No less a personage than Willy Brandt enlisted
Ungerer's talents during his successful bid for the office of Chancellor of West
Germany in 1969. More recently, his ''Das grosse Liederbuch'' (1975), a lavishly
illustrated, large-format collection of lullabies and folk songs - and the
artist's masterwork to date - sold more copies in the German-language market
than any previous juvenile title on the list of the Swiss publisher Diogenes
Verlag, no mean feat for a $25 work.

Despite a conspicuous talent for selling ideas in compelling pictorial packages,
Ungerer has long dreamed of divorcing his art entirely from the worlds of
advertising and public relations. When he moved to rural Canada in 1971, he felt
the problem would solve itself. He didn't count, however, on the determination
of Robert Putz, owner of a small but highly successful advertising agency in
Cologne. Putz made a pilgrimage of sorts to Nova Scotia to entice Ungerer back
into the field. He had seen a number of the artist's posters and illustrations
and felt that the two of them could scale as yet uncharted commercial peaks.
Ungerer reacted like a born vaudevillian being lured back to the footlights.
Mostly, he recalls, ''I was attracted to Putz's sense of fun. He seemed
unwilling to take anything -even money - too seriously.'' Theirs is among the
most enduring, and lucrative, marriages in modern advertising. One of their
campaigns, for a West German canning firm, transformed the client's wallflower
of a brand name, known to only 6 percent of consumers in 1974, to a reigning
queen of the supermarket shelves, recognized by 68 percent of consumers just
three years later. Perhaps Ungerer's most memorable contribution was a poster of
a mouthwateringly browned roast turkey pouring the client's small green peas
over itself in a veritable orgy of self-gratification.

His overall commercial success notwithstanding, Ungerer is more than mildly
disconcerted that, in art circles, if he is noticed at all, it is as a
lightweight, a cartoonist-huckster-kiddie-book figure and, at the far end of the
spectrum, a purveyor of sophisticated pornography. Various critics have labeled
his work as ''brutal,'' ''ferocious,'' ''nasty,'' ''puerile'' and ''savage.'' He
derives only slight consolation from the knowledge that, for some time now, a
handful of admirers of his graphic wit and collectors of his powerful drawings
have mentioned Ungerer in the same breath with William Hogarth, Honore Daumier,
George Grosz, the Goya of the ''Disasters of War'' etchings, and the Picasso of
''Guernica.'' The comparisons may strike some as grandiose. To be sure, Ungerer
lacks Hogarth's unfailing light touch, Daumier's underlying humanism, Grosz's
consistent political commitment, Goya's compassion or Picasso's fine moral
outrage, but there is no denying that Ungerer is among the most incisive graphic
commentators of our time, a consummate draftsman in the tradition of past
masters of the pencil and brush.

Among those who have long recognized his gifts, the art critic John Gruen has
characterized him as ''an overpowering satirist whose particular genius is for
transforming human cruelty, violence and sadism into blackest, sickest
laughter.'' The late psychoanalyst Erich Fromm proclaimed his con,'' a series of
erotic drawings published in 1970, ''the last word that can be said about
pornography.''

What viewers in Paris are seeing is a body of work remarkable in variety,
vitality and daring. It includes, for example, a sampling of political posters
and social commentary, such as Ungerer's famous reversible ''Black Power-White
Power'' image: Held one way (so that the viewer reads ''Black Power'' across the
top), the illustration reveals a generic black man devouring an upended white;
flipped downside-up (so that ''White Power'' is emblazoned across the top), the
reverse is taking place. His pert and irreverent advertisements, exhibited on
clear plastic panels, were originally done for clients as diverse as the
Aqueduct Raceway, a leading manufacturer of women's panty hose, the United
States National Park Service and The New York Times. There are beautifully
observed quick sketches of small children and animals at play - loving vignettes
of his toddler son, Pascal, with a shovel; his daughter Ariel at 3, with a pail;
the family cat attacking a paper bag. There are also large erotic drawings,
several from ''Fornicon,'' which, in paperback, ''Fornicon,'' which, in
paperback, has sold out 12 printings in the German-language market. And, on the
far side of that blurred borderline separating the indecent from the perverse,
there are a few of Ungerer's ''machines of self-gratification,'' motor-driven
sculptures that the artist designed and built, based on his ''Fornicon''
illustrations. Most important to Ungerer, because it represents his
all-consuming work-in-progress at present, is the entire gallery devoted to his
outsize watercolors (many of them 2 by 3 feet) of Canadian scenes. Remarkably
controlled and forceful, they are portraits from life of the bleak landscape,
ramshackle houses, derelict cars and dour inhabitants of Lockeport, Nova Scotia,
where the artist still spends every summer.

The erotic works - Ungerer carefully avoids the term ''pornographic'' as false
to his artistic intention - are in purdah, as it were, exhibited upstairs in a
gallery presciently redecorated with red-velvet walls, from which children are
excluded. Viewers of tender years have a room of their own on the main
exhibition floor, where a generous sampling of Ungerer children's books is
assembled. A videocassette machine has also been installed for displaying a trio
of the artist's vintage tales on film: ''The Three Robbers'' (1962), ''Moon
Man'' (1967) and ''The Beast of Monsieur Racine'' (1971).

In response to questions about how so sophisticated and jaded a sensibility as
Ungerer's has anything to say to small children, the artist, who enjoys shocking
friends and foes alike, says with a shrug, ''If people weren't interested in
sex, they wouldn't have children and we wouldn't need children's books.'' From
what source does so complex and varied a talent spring? Ungerer is a firm
believer in the decisive role that circumstance plays in the shaping of any
artist. ''As a child,'' he says, ''I loved rocks and minerals. If I had not been
brought up in a time and place that developed anger, I would have become a
geologist.'' Jean Thomas Ungerer was born in Strasbourg in November 1931, the
youngest of four children; he has two much older sisters and a brother six years
his senior. His father, director of a family firm that had been manufacturing
astronomical clocks since the 18th century, died when the artist was 3. Looking
back on this cataclysm of his childhood, Ungerer regards it as ''probably a good
thing. My father was strong-minded, with a Germanic, military strain that almost
certainly would have crushed me.'' The elder Ungerer was something of a
Renaissance man: A historian and author of a work on clocks, he was an
accomplished watercolorist and amateur architect as well. He also possessed a
highly developed sense of whimsy. The masterpiece of his lifetime, in his
younger son's estimation, was a playful timepiece designed for the campanile in
the square of Messina, Sicily. There still, each day at noon, a mechanical lion
- part of the clockworks - wags its tail and lets out an impressive roar.

Ungerer has no doubt that the early death of his father assured him of growing
up with a formidable chip on his shoulder. ''Every child who be both insecure
and angry,'' he asserts flatly. Left with heavy debts in the worst of the
Depression years, Ungerer's mother leased their Strasbourg house to a nobleman
and returned to her family outside the neighboring city of Colmar. For reasons
Ungerer has never fathomed, his maternal grandmother, a widow, harbored great
animosity toward both her daughter and the children she brought back. He retains
an indelible memory of the old woman, face pressed flat against the glass of her
living-room window, making terrible faces at her unloved daughter's youngest
child. He remembers, too, their bourgeois penury. ''My worst nightmares, still,
are about being stranded somewhere with-out any money,'' he says.  ''To me,
poverty is synonymous with powerlessness.''

As if life did not hold perils enough, along came World War II.  Alsace, which
is situated on the Franco-German border and controls one of the busiest ports on
the Rhine River, has been buffeted back and forth between the two nations since
the Franco-Prus-sian War in 1870. And when war broke out in 1939, first French
Army officers were billeted in Ungerer's grandmother's house. Then, in 1940, the
Germans moved in. Overnight, French, which had been the official language since
the end of World War I, was forbidden, in and out of school. Under the Nazi
occupation, Ungerer received a completely German education from the age of 8 to
13. To these wartime years he attributes his ability to see at least two sides
of every question.  ''As schoolchildren,'' he explains, ''we were given
pushcarts and told to bring from home any books written in French, so that they
could be burned.'' Though Ungerer knew that more than half his father's valuable
library was in French, he neither batted an eye at nor complied with this
unorthodox homework assignment. ''What a fox I became,'' he says, ''and, of
course, to be a good fox you must look like a lamb.'' Almost reflexively, the
Ungerer posters, drawings and cartoons come to mind that derive their bite from
this notion of reversible roles. In addition to ''Black Power-White Power,''
there is the wry political cartoon of a worker in overalls, facing the viewer,
with a wing for a left arm. The picture is labeled ''Left Wing.'' In a small
inset, the same man is shown rear view, this sketch dubbed ''Right Wing.''

''My whole childhood was a schooling in relativity,'' Ungerer says, ''in
figuring out for myself who were the good guys and who were the bad.'' Not
surprisingly, his school days were punctuated by frequent ''Heil Hitler!''
salutes, for which he soon substituted a serviceable ''Eine litre!'' Though his
classwork was done in careful German (his mother saved all his grammar-school
notebooks, their margins filled with Ungerer's earliest drawings), he also kept
a private journal in French, filled with irreverent, doubtless treasonable,
caricatures of the conqueror.

During this period, Ungerer also developed his fierce pride in being Alsatian, a
race apart - a condition he attributes to Alsace's having served as a buffer
between antagonistic powers for so much of its history. Ungerer boasts that
''during World War II, Alsace resisted the Nazis magnificently, but in the way a
blotter resists.  We said yes to everything, then went our own way.'' Even
today, Strasbourg is half Roman Catholic and half Protestant, and though the
inhabitants speak French, there is a local Alsatian dialect, similar to
Swiss-Deutsch, that shifts effortlessly from French to German. It is an earthy
dialect. ''There are more than 200 ways to refer to drunkenness,'' Ungerer
reports with relish, ''and almost as many for fornication.'' Strasbourg is also
the city where the great 19th-century illustrator Gustave Dore was born, where
earlier that consummate graphic artist of the Renaissance, Albrecht Durer,
worked for a time and where, in our own day, the sculptor Jean Arp was born.
Other painters of the region who were early influences on Ungerer included
Matthias Grunewald and Martin Schongauer, as well as two turn-ofthe-century
Alsatian illustrators, Hansi and Schnugg.

The worst days for Ungerer's family were at the war's end, when the Germans made
a last-ditch stand in what came to be known as ''the Colmar pocket.'' After
their house was bombed, the Ungerers lived in their basement for three months.
Forced to dig trenches for the Germans, they devised a system whereby Ungerer's
sister tossed a shovelful of dirt to him and he heaved it back. ''We laughed all
the time,'' he remembers. ''It was a kind of nervous reaction.'' It was also a
form of armor. The family had no running water and each day the children went to
the river with buckets. ''We'd go together so that we could die together,''
Ungerer explains. The possibility was always there. ''One thing I learned
then,'' he says grimly. ''There is nothing in this life so stupid, so empty and
devoid of meaning, as the dead body of a human being. Even the blood isn't red -
the way it always is in war movies. It turns a sickly brown in less than 15
minutes. A human carcass,'' he winds up hollowly, ''is the most desolate thing
in the world.''

His bitterest shock, however, came in 1945, when the French returned. ''Those
French teachers would laugh at our German accents and punish us for all the
French grammar we'd forgotten,'' he recalls. ''They treated us as if we were
second-class citizens - even collaborators.'' Disillusioned, Ungerer dropped out
of school and embarked on an extended Wanderjahr, getting as far as Lapland,
mostly on foot. In 1953, he joined the French Camel Corps in Algeria but was
discharged when he developed a serious case of pleurisy. For a brief while, he
studied at the Ecole des Arts Decoratifs in Strasbourg, but he was restless and
was soon expelled for being ''subversive and perverse.'' ''The professor who
wrote that comment,'' Ungerer says, looking back, ''was either a complete fool
or perceptive beyond his wildest imaginings.'' Doubtless, a good part of
Ungerer's present elation at showing in Paris is that it signals a personal and
an Alsatian victory over France proper. ''I've taken over that museum like a
tank division!'' he gloats. ''It is my diploma and my coming to terms with the
past.'' For the unwary museumgoer expecting an esthetically soothing experience,
or for anyone who feels uncomfortable unless a clear line is drawn between art
destined for the ages and frivolous graphic sport, some of Ungerer's work is
likely to cause queasiness, even distress. What are we to make of an artist who,
on the one hand, can move us to the brink of tears with a tender, Ingres-like
pencil portrait in miniature of his infant son, Lukas, asleep, and, on the
other, repel absolutely with a remarkably conceived study of a scantily attired
female trussed to a steel bar. Words cannot approximate the demonic power and
effect on the emotions of this and other Ungerer images. What nags at the
viewer's sensibility in these depictions of sexuallly subjugated females is not
just the horrific images and what they say of the imagination that produced
them, but the certain awareness that, at some point, they required actual models
posing in order to achieve the haunting precision they possess. What we are
bearing witness to is the artist's - or our own - ultimate capability of
committing as yet unimagined sins.

Overall, Ungerer's imagery with regard to women is unremittingly negative, often
aggressively hostile. In the more frivolous cartoons and social commentaries of
the early 1960's, he depicts women as maneating spiders, predatory beasts on the
prowl, eviscerating or coldly manipulative love partners. Many of his most
masterful drawings of the mid to late 70's are of female models deliberately
posed in an awesome variety of submissive positions. Asked the reason for these
consistently brutal portrayals, Ungerer is bluntly forthright: ''It's simple. I
don't like women. I can love an individual woman, sure, but that's because,
temperamentally, I love exceptions to the rule.''

In terms of draftsmanship, his most recent large pencil drawings are worthy of a
Durer. Their very size attests to Ungerer's virtuosity. A minor artist can often
control his line, small scale.  But to work with such elan and assurance on a
grand scale is an achievement of the highest order.

Ungerer takes himself seriously about few matters, but he never makes light of
his metier: drawing. ''Drawing is the most direct and personal kind of graphic
expression,'' he says. ''Unlike painting, it doesn't forgive. You put down your
black line, and there it is - as inevitable as death. That is why death can only
be drawn.'' His awed respect for the medium suggests a possible reason for
Ungerer's irresistible attraction to difficult, even distasteful, subject
matter. It poses the supreme challenge to his graphic hubris, his prowess over
image and line.

This penchant for extremes - for imagery that is violent, gross, sadistic,
unthinkable - constitutes the most disturbing side of Ungerer's work. By no
means strictly confined to his sexual preoccupations, it opens certain of his
most effective drawings to the charge of visual assault and battery. There is,
for example, his Vietnam War poster bearing the oneword imperative: ''EAT.'' A
large white hand is ramming into the mouth of an upturned Asian face a small
replica of the Statue of Liberty. Or consider the yellow-and-black poster in
which an enormous cash register is being borne, with considerable difficulty, by
two desiccated concentration-camp inmates. It is ringing out the message:
''HOLOCAU

.'' Ungerer dashed off the work, he says, to express his loathing for the cheap
commercialization by the mass media of the human suffering inflicted by Hitler's
extermination camps. Yet, at some visceral level, the viewer experiences an
almost equivalent distaste for the brutality of the artist's own imagery.

It should be pointed out, possibly in his defense, that Ungerer has never been
elitist, or the least bit undemocratic, in selecting the objects of his
contempt. Among the targets of his scorn over the years have been Arab oil
tycoons, backyard barbecuers, civilian and military power brokers, East
Hampton's beautiful people, nuclear families, German industrialists, Jewish
mothers and Texas rednecks.  Nor does he exempt himself from his generally jaded
appraisal of man as a species. ''Listen,'' he says frankly, ''I am in all my
drawing and books. I don't say it boastfully, but I've performed every one of my
fantasies. Maybe it was a way of liberating myself from an uptight and sterile
Protestant upbringing. But even while I did all these things, I also rebelled -
I repelled myself. And it is this revulsion that comes through so strongly in my
work.'' Like many young Europeans immediately after the war, Ungerer developed
an exaggerated admiration for all things American, particularly for the work of
Saul Steinberg, whose cartoons he saw at the library of the United States
Information Service in Strasbourg.  When he finally went to the United States in
1956, with only $60 in his pocket and a trunkful of drawings and collages, it
was in hope of emulating the success of Steinberg, a Romanian emigre. Ungerer's
first professional assignment came from Sports Illustrated, followed almost
immediately by an unexpected book contract for his children's story about the
pig family.

Ungerer's American Period was a latter-day Horatio Alger story in many respects,
with certain flamboyant flourishes not in the classical script: two broken
marriages, a funky 42d Street studio that once belonged to Flo Zeigfeld,
interludes of spe?unking and addictive kite-flying, an East Hampton house of
wild repute and some party behavior so outrageous that there are Long Island
hosts and hostesses who still wince at the mention of his name. These years also
left Ungerer with antithetical and ambivalent feelings about the United States,
a classic love-hate relationship that continues to this day. He has never
forgotten New York's open acceptance of a brash young Alsatian. ''It's a place
where neither who you are nor where you come from is important - just what you
can do.'' On the other hand, he has a decided Old World impatience with
America's maddening innocence and simple-mindedness. ''Somehow,'' he complains,
''you are permitted to be only one thing there: I was a clown - a
children's-book writer who could also draw.'' He is put off, too, by the
indigenous competitiveness and aggressive drive to succeed.  ''There are people
in New York,'' he insists, ''who get ulcers in their determination to become
gourmet cooks.''

This said, New York is also the place where Ungerer met his present wife, Yvonne
- on the subway. It still strikes him as a great joke on himself - in addition
to a one-in-a-million coincidence - that she was working, at the time, for the
Children's Book Council, a nonprofit organization devoted to the promotion of
good children's books. ''Yvonne knew my reputation as a rake and womanizer and
refused to have anything to do with me,'' he remembers. Sometime later, however,
she found herself with a paper on Mallarme due for an advanced French course she
was taking. ''And who knew French?'' Ungerer says, looking like the cat who just
swallowed the canary.  The couple have been together for 11 years now and share
a penchant for solitude as well as a childlike faith in following their
impulses. The latter resulted in their original move to Nova Scotia and, six
years later, their snap decision to settle in Ireland - with just six suitcases,
on a week's notice - when Yvonne was pregnant with their first child. (They had
come to a simultaneous realization that Lockeport provided too lean and grim a
cultural diet for rearing a family.) Most recently, their faith in impulse led
to their purchase - an overnight resolution -of an apartment on the Left Bank in
Paris as a pied-a-terre in Europe proper. Their daughter, Ariel, is now 4; their
son Pascal, 2; and baby Lukas, not quite a year old.  ''Fifty is a perfect age
to have small children,'' Ungerer says, jumping the gun by some months on this
landmark birthday. ''You have more time - and understanding - to hear the
wonderful things they say and ask.'' (He has a 19-year-old daughter, Phoebe, by
his second marriage.)

With one of his typically two-sided perceptions, Ungerer credits his and
Yvonne's lasting rapport to a mutual distrust. ''Greater harmony is possible
when you are wary of each other,'' he claims.  ''If a relationship is based on
distrust, then you know it's realistic - there's no danger of crushed ideals.''
Fond of instant adages, he then intones, ''The osmosis of distrust is really the
secret of love.'' As for love itself, he says thoughtfully: ''We are, after all,
alone in this world. And the greatest luxury two human beings can have is to be
alone together.''

Two years ago, the couple joined the Roman Catholic church, because they felt it
was the only way to bring up children in Ireland. ''The church is a geopolitical
religion that holds Irish society together,'' says Ungerer, full of Alsatian
admiration for the utilitarian. Though he is frank to admit that ''I was not
blessed at birth with the gift of faith,'' he has a genuine regard for ''the
deep spirituality of Ireland.'' Though he confesses to ''leaving my spirituality
behind'' when he is away from home, he adds, ''I like to think of it as being in
a bank there in Ireland, growing and earning interest while I am gone.''

Not a man of sentiment, nor one to rest on his laurels (or his brickbats),
Ungerer looks on the Paris show as the end of an extended apprenticeship. Eager
to be taken seriously, he has both an immediate and a long-term project. The
first is to write a lengthy children's book, ''something in the classic mold.''
He credits Yvonne's reading of the Laura Ingalls Wilder ''Little House on the
Prairie'' books to his daughter Ariel for this undertaking. ''Ariel loves them
so, and lives so deeply inside them, that I'd like to write that kind of book.''
He already has in mind two orphaned children, who live in a fishing community in
Nova Scotia, as hero and heroine. ''It will draw on all my Canadian experience,
running our own working farm there. It will be about planting and reaping,
battling with the tides and weather, killing pigs, curing meat and making your
own sausages -a book from which kids can learn a lot about life.'' The second
project is more open-ended: to continue the quest to know himself. ''The trouble
is, it's as if I'm some sort of sentry,'' he says. ''But I haven't been given
the necessary password, and so I shoot myself.'' These are the ingredients of a
quintessential Ungerer epitaph - a graphic one, of course.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Phoot of Ungers mother (Page 75) Photo of a painting
(Page 75) Photo of a painting (Page 74) 2 photos of art work (Page 73) 3 photos
of artwork (Page 27) Photo of Tomi Ungerer

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 24, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RESTOCKING THE CHEMICAL ARSENAL

BYLINE: By Wayne Biddle

SECTION: Section 6; Page 32, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5907 words


Wayne Biddle's ''Coming to Terms: A Lexicon for the Science Watcher'' will be
published by Viking this summer. By Wayne Biddle Fading from memory now, as the
last men who lived it slip away, is a sunny April day long ago on the Channel
coast of Belgium. Spring takes this languid part of Europe without hesitation,
so we are safe to assume that from the forward trenches a young soldier looked
out across the kind of grassy fields he might otherwise have chosen to lie down
in with the girl of his dreams. Around 5 P.M. on April 22, 1915, after an idle
afternoon, heavy German guns resumed their bombardment of the small market town
of Ypres. But the enemy's light batteries remained silent, so that no shells
fell along the Allied front outside the town. Instead of concussion, there was
only the still evening air. Perhaps when the French colonials (mostly Algerian
Arabs) and Canadians in the forward positions first heard the hissing sound
coming from the German side, they thought some rounds had misfired - or maybe
they thought nothing. But within minutes a greenish-yellow cloud, which distant
observers compared to mist ''such as is seen over water meadows on a frosty
night,'' stretched itself for five miles over the front. As the cloud advanced
on a light breeze, it killed 5,000, injured another 10,000 and set the Allied
army in absolute panic, dissolution and retreat.

Chemical weapons caused 1.3 million casualties in World War I, including 91,000
deaths (a half-million of these casualties were Russians, who suffered more than
any other belligerents). Except for slow-moving face-offs of negligible military
value after April 1915, it was the Battle of Ypres that formed our collective
image of gas warfare. The lasting impression, needless to say, is that there is
something peculiarly hideous about this kind of combat. Despite great advances
in chemical technology, no one has dared to wage protracted war with lethal gas
since 1918. Only by stretching definitions to include tear gas or nausea gas and
herbicides do we find any contemporary experience at all - the massive American
offensives in Vietnam, and reports of more recent activity by Soviet troops in
Afghanistan for which there is as yet no positive proof. Poison gas seems
somehow sinister beyond calculation. And there are even those in the armed
forces who will venture to say that, regardless of how effective it might be
under certain ideal conditions, it is unmanly.

Why, then, is the United States Department of Defense now ''in the process of
developing new doctrine and tactics which will integrate our chemical weapons''
into the modern battlefield, as Gen. Niles Fulwyler of the Army Nuclear and
Chemical Directorate recently announced?

A year ago, Congress, without public debate or Presidential request,
appropriated $3.15 million to begin construction of facilities in Pine Bluff,
Ark., to resume production of gas shells and bombs after a 12-year ban. This
relatively small amount of money belies the size of Defense Department
expenditures for chemical warfare that may be in store: The department projects
spending $2.47 billion for chemical development programs over the next five
years, and, in a secret study for the department, a panel of the Defense Science
Board recommends that this figure be increased by a factor of three or four.

The crucial decision now rests with the Reagan Administration. It has proposed a
supplemental military budget for fiscal 1981 which contains $20 million to
outfit the chemical-weapons facilities whose initial construction work Congress
approved last year. If the 1981 provision is passed in both the House and Senate
- where 12 Senators, including John Tower, Strom Thurmond and John Warner,
recently announced that they would support it, despite the fact that Mark
Hatfield had blocked it in subcomittiee - the indications are that Presdent
Reagan will go ahead. The decision will raise numerous national questions of
enormous significance: What will be done with these weapons? When, where and how
will they be used? Where can they safely be stored? And will the undertaking not
precipitate a chemical arms race as potentially threatening and difficult to
control as the nuclear arms race has been?  To understand why the need to defend
against or wage chemicalwarfare is again being considered, it is necessary to
step back no farther than 1968 - as long as one keeps in mind the old ghosts of
Ypres.

On March 14, 1968, some 6,000 sheep grazing in Skull Valley, Utah, 85 miles
southwest of Salt Lake City, were killed by nerve gas known as VX. The gas had
somehow drifted 30 miles off the open range of Dugway Proving Ground, an Army
reservation (25 percent larger than Rhode Island) which is the main testing site
for chemical and biological warfare in the United States. Like many of the
technological mishaps of our age, it was the kind of event many officials swore
could never happen. Following the uproar, Richard Nixon issued an order in 1969
that has restricted chemical weapons ever since: He renounced the first use (as
opposed to retaliatory use) of lethal chemical arms in war. Congress, for its
part, imposed legal and environmental restrictions on open-air testing, as well
as barriers to obtaining new weapons specially designed to fire chemical rounds.
These actions fostered the current public impression that the United States
regards chemical warfare as most nations have for many years - more a dark
remnant of history than a useful military implement. Although budget requests
for research, development and procurement of chemical materiel remained
substantial through the early 1970's, overall spending reached a low point by
1975. During this period, the Army Chemical Corps slid into a rather depressed
state. But by treating its research work as ''defensive'' rather than
''offensive'' (the two terms turn out to be much the same thing) the corps
maintained its basic fiscal health. Thus, chemical weapons, ostensibly on the
way out of the United States arsenal, were in fact still being studied in a
corner slightly more obscure than before.

Two events changed this environment. During the Middle East war of 1973,
Soviet-supplied Egyptian tanks and personnel carriers were found to contain
air-filtration systems to protect their crews from radiation and, supposedly,
chemically contaminated battlefields.  Evidence that protective equipment was
standard issue in the Soviet Army had been available since the 1950's, but
Western military analysts were particularly alarmed by the possible offensive
implications of these armored vehicles: Since the West was not planning chemical
attack, did not the Soviet vehicles suggest that the Russians might be? Then, in
January 1975, the United States became the 95th nation to join the Geneva
Protocol of 1925 banning first use of gas or germ weapons. (Although we had
initiated the treaty soon after World War I, the Senate had failed to ratify it
because of intense lobbying by the chemical industry and other opponents.) Even
upon final approval, however, President Ford made it clear that the United
States - unlike other signatories - understood the Geneva Protocol to include
neither herbicides nor the euphemistically named ''riot-control agents'' that
were part of our Vietnam arsenal. Three months later, a multinational committee
began to meet in Geneva to discuss treaty language that would bring about total
chemical disarmament. They are still meeting today, while the Russians and
Americans argue over future inspection procedures.

These events created a vigorous push-pull debate in Washington. On one side, the
United States Army seized upon the October War findings and announced that it
would give fresh priority to improving its ability to fight on a toxic
battlefield. On the other side, the Ford and Carter Administrations did not want
to upset the Geneva talks or our efforts to persuade NATO allies to accept more
important weapons like tactical nuclear missiles. Spending for chemical-war
research increased from $29 million in 1976 to $106 million in 1981 (like all
publicly available budget figures for chemical warfare, these figures must be
considered low-end estimates). In 1977, following the first bilateral
discussions between the United States and the Soviet Union on chemical
disarmament, the United States spent as much on defensive equipment as it had
during the five previous years combined. But Congress consistently denied Army
requests for new offensive weapons. After a policy review that focused on treaty
negotiations, such requests were not even included in the Administration budgets
for 1979 through 1981.

After the Russians marched into Afghanistan in December 1979, however, attitudes
in the United States Government changed. Within a month, the State Department
began to express concern over refugee reports that gas was being used by the
invaders. By April, the Secretary of Defense, Harold Brown, said, ''There is
mounting evidence that the Soviets are using incapacitating gas - and some
reports they may be using lethal gas - in the Afghan countryside.'' Much concern
was expressed, in particular, over the sighting of a Russian decontamination
vehicle in Kabul.

This Soviet invasion, together with our own policy failure in Iran, seemed to
confirm the fears expressed by Gen. David C. Jones, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff, before the Senate Armed Services Committee in the summer of 1979.
''Some believe,'' he said, ''that a perceived Soviet military edge would lead
(the Russians) to contemplate seriously a 'bolt from the blue' nuclear attack on
the United States. ... Rather, I anticipate such a disparity would be reflected
in a more confident Soviet leadership, increasingly inclined toward more
adventurous behavior in areas where our interests clash and where United States
ability to respond by conventional means could be circumscribed.'' Afghanistan
became the sparkplug for military-policy initiatives in Washington. New chemical
weapons were a part of the action.  What exactly are these chemical weapons?
Poison gases are actually liquids that vaporize after dispersion, or fine solid
dust clouds.  They are selected to have a wide variety of effects: Phosgene and
chlorine cause choking; mustard burns and blisters the skin; hydrogen cyanide
interferes with the blood; BZ - a hallucinogen like LSD - causes psychological
incapitation. Most of these types are considered to be obsolete as weapons or -
in the case of BZ - too unpredictable to use. Tear gas, pepper gas and DM, which
are commercially available all over the world, severely irritate the eyes and
respiratory tract or bring on nausea. In addition, the Army has developed many
kinds of smoke and incendiary devices, including the napalm and white
phosphorous that were used heavily in Vietnam.

The primary lethal chemical agents in modern arsenals are the nerve gases. Such
gases as VX, GB and GD disrupt the human nervous system.  They were discovered
during the course of insecticide research in Germany before World War II and are
chemically related to bug sprays like Malathion. Colorless, odorless and 10 to
100 times more toxic than mustard, they can enter the body through the skin or
lungs.

Death by nerve gas is gruesome by any standard. Because nerve impulses to
muscles are disrupted, a whole array of reactions takes place: intense sweating,
convulsions, uncontrollable vomiting and diarrhea, dimming of vision and final
asphyxia following paralysis of the respiratory system. Depending on dosage,
this may happen within several minutes or take hours. Moreover, neurological and
psychiatric disorders can develop from nonlethal exposure. Antidotes exist and
are now standard issue to NATO and Warsaw Pact troops, but they themselves are
debilitating. A common remark outside scientific circles is that a pinhead drop
of nerve gas applied to a person's skin will quickly kill. This is not true.
When injected directly into the bloodstream, nerve gases are in fact amazingly
potent. But a poncho and gas mask are good defenses against even massive
exposure.  Referring to GB, Lieut. Col. Harold W. Shear, commander of the Rocky
Mountain Arsenal, quipped in 1970: ''With a gas mask on, it can't do a thing to
you. I may be able to fly over you at low altitudes and, in its liquid form,
drown you with it.''

In the United States, the first factories to make nerve gas were built during
the Korean War in Alabama and Colorado. Production peaked around 1963 and ended
in 1968. Most professional journals estimate the current American stockpile of
usable lethal chemicals to be about 38,000 tons, slightly less than half of this
VX and GB nerve gas, and the rest mustard left from World War II. This figure
may be too high, however. The exact size of the stockpile is secret, but
informed sources say that 28,000 tons is more accurate. About 68 percent of this
is in bulk storage, with the balance loaded in about three million munitions
such as artillery shells, rockets, land mines and bombs. These sources also
report that the Joint Chiefs of Staff would like to possess about 30,000 tons or
five million munitions. If the stockpiled chemicals were placed in their
appropriate weapons, the total weapon load would weigh about 300,000 tons,
compared with the current United States Army stockpile of conventional
ammunition in Europe of about 500,000 tons. These figures do not necessarily
show comparable military effectiveness or value but they do reflect relative
sizes of inventory.

As for the Russian arsenal, almost nothing is verifiable. The last open
reference to chemical-warfare capability by a Soviet official occurred in 1938.
Because of the relatively large number of highly trained Chemical Defense Troops
in the Soviet Army, however, and the way Soviet doctrine appears to integrate
chemical-warfare operations into battle contingencies, it is prudent to assume
that their capabilities are at least as good as ours. Sky-high estimates from
American military sources that put the Soviet stockpile as much as 30 times
larger than ours simply have no basis in confirmed fact. While he was Secretary
of Defense, Harold Brown told the Senate Armed Services Committee that ''there
is no decent estimate.'' In 1975, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs admitted that
''it is not possible with any reasonable degree of assurance to predict or
estimate the size of the Soviet Union's agent stockpile.'' General Fulwyler
recently said in an interview, ''We cannot give you concrete evidence, but we
can give you what we think is very reliable evidence that the Soviets have a
significant stockpile.'' (When asked if he would call our own stockpile
significant, he answered, ''No, I would not.'') Furthermore, though the Russians
probably responded to our nerve-gas production of the 1950's and 60's by
increasing their own, there is no concrete evidence of any buildup since 1970.
The degree of truth in the reports from Afghanistan that were being used to
stimulate American support for the production of new chemical weaponry seemed,
by the spring of 1980, to be almost beside the point. During an April 24, 1980,
hearing before the House Subcommittee on International Security and Scientific
Affairs, Undersecretary of State Matthew Nimitz could only make the following
ambiguous summary of evidence: ''These reports from Afghan refugees in Pakistan
and nationalist leaders have led us to conclude that the chances are about even
that lethal agents have or have not been used by Soviet forces in trying to
suppress the Afghan resistance.'' To which Representative Jonathan B. Bingham, a
New York Democrat, replied: ''I find it difficult, Mr. Nimitz, to understand
what you mean.''

A hint of what was giving currency to the rumors had been supplied during a
House Foreign Affairs subcommittee hearing in February.  Republican
Representative Robert I. Lagomarsino of California was questioning Edward M.
Collins, vice director for foreign intelligence in the Defense Intelligence
Agency, and Bruce C. Clarke, Director of the National Foreign Assessment Center
of the Central Intelligence Agency.

Lagomarsino: ''Do we have any information on the use of chemical warfare in
Afghanistan other than just rumors?'' Collins: ''There is no confirmation at
all. ...'' Lagomarsino: ''The common perception is that the Russians are using
it there because there have been a lot of rumors in the papers.'' Clarke: ''I
don't see anything wrong with letting that rumor run.'' Perhaps the situation
was summed up best by Matthew Meselson, a professor of biochemistry and
molecular biology at Harvard who is one of the leading authorities on chemical
warfare. Sitting before the same subcommittee as Matthew Nimitz, Meselson
testified: ''What we have in the present situation is the worst of both worlds.
If the unconfirmed allegations of the use of poison gas are false, continued
doubt serves only to erode the existing restraints against chemical warfare and
to undermine the basis for effective arms control. If the allegations are true,
our inability to document them prevents us from having much impact on the actual
course of events.''

True or false, the course of events that would reopen the fight over new
American offensive chemical weapons was accelerated by Representative Richard
Ichord, a Missouri Democrat and military hardliner. Although the Army had
decided to request seed money again for the chemical-weapons plant in the fiscal
1981 budget, a study ordered by Zbigniew Brzezinski, then national security
adviser, determined that neither the State Department nor the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency would support the facility, on the ground that it would hurt
negotiations with the Soviet Union. The Pentagon then withdrew the funds from
its overall 1981 request, and there things would have rested had it not been for
Ichord. In the beginning of May, as chairman of the Research and Development
Subcommittee of the House Armed Services Committee, he cited Afghanistan and
offered an amendment to the $5.5 billion military-construction appropriations
bill that would reallocate the $3.15 million originally asked for by the Army.
This item was only two paragraphs long, buried among such flashy topics as the
MX missile and military bases in the Middle East. It was not even debated on the
House floor before the bill was overwhelmingly approved.

Apparently surprised by how easily Ichord's amendment slipped through, the
Carter Administration took steps to remind Congress of its ongoing opposition.
Secretary of State Edmund S. Muskie and Defense Secretary Brown wrote letters to
Congressmen saying that funding of a new nerve-gas plant was ''premature.''
Brown also testified to this effect before the Senate Armed Services Committee,
but his statements obviously reflected a White House position rather than the
Pentagon's. (He himself had approved the original Army request.) By September,
enough hawkish medicine about Afghanistan and a massive Soviet chemical-warfare
buildup had been administered on Capitol Hill to persuade the Senate to join the
House initiative.  Arguing that ''our chemical-warfare posture must again be
made credible'' and claiming that ''by any meaningful measure of relative
strength in the chemical-armaments field, the Soviet Union enjoys a preponderant
advantage over the United States,'' Senator Henry Jackson introduced an
amendment congruent with Ichord's. An effort by Senator Gary Hart of Colorado to
delay a decision on new weapons pending a top-level policy review failed by one
vote. Many Senators were ready to throw in the next $20 million needed to build
the complete plant, but Mark Hatfield headed them off by threatening a
full-scale debate. Jackson's amendment went on to easy approval, 52 to 38, and
the Senate's military construction bill finally passed, 89 to 3. Given the
promilitary election year mood, President Carter did not move to overturn
Congress.  All of this military and Congressional skirmishing was aimed at the
production of a new type of armament known as the ''binary'' nerve-gas munition.
The present ''unitary'' United States stockpile (and, as far as anyone knows,
the Soviet stockpile) of artillery shells and bombs is directly filled with an
active nerve agent - either VX, which evaporates about as quickly as heavy
lubricating oil and is therefore spread as a body-contact hazard, or GB, which
is nearly as volatile as water and would be sprayed to contaminate the air.
Unitary nerve-gas munitions present storage and handling difficulties, because
if they are damaged and leak, for example, their handlers will be gassed.

Binary weapons, by contrast, contain two nonlethal components that are allowed
to mix to form the deadly nerve agent only after the shell, bomb or rocket is
fired away. Although the ingredients may be noxious themselves, they do not
present the same handling problems.  Binaries have been on the Army's drawing
boards since 1949, but the impetus to produce them was not strong until after
the 1968 sheep kill in Utah.

But are binaries intrinsically better weapons than those we already possess? And
will they solve domestic-storage controversies in Arkansas, Colorado, Utah,
Oregon or other states where chemical weapons are stockpiled?

According to several members of the Defense Science Board panel on chemical
warfare, the objective in modern chemical warfare is not to cause casualties,
but to ''degrade'' the performance of enemy troops by making them put on
cumbersome protective gear. Mobility is the name of the game, especially in a
hypothetical NATO-Warsaw Pact battle, so whoever can maneuver best has the
advantage. In this regard, Pentagon sources admit that NATO forces are better
off than their Warsaw Pact counterparts. Below 70 degrees Fahrenheit, our
current chemical-warfare ''ensemble'' (gas mask with hood, charcoalimpregnated
jacket and pants, rubber gloves and boots) imposes a minimal burden unless
soldiers are involved in heavy work.  In central Europe, the average daily
temperature is below 70 degrees for nine months of the year. Soviet troops, on
the other hand, wear bulky rubberized coveralls and masks that provide much less
freedom.  Still, if they are as well trained as Western intelligence experts
claim they are, they can probably fight quite well despite their hot, heavy
gear. The conclusion to be drawn here is that only a surprise attack on
unprotected troops would bring a major offensive advantage. Against prepared
forces, conventional explosives are more effective.  This, by the way, was
precisely the lesson of World War I.

Besides a surprise attack, what other scenarios might be attractive to someone
contemplating chemical war? One leading member of the Defense Science Board
panel recently suggested that a nervegas projectile lobbed onto an
aircraft-carrier deck would be mighty nasty. Seasoned Navy men will tell you,
however, that the most dangerous thing to a sailor is the sea. The objective in
attacking a ship is to put it on the bottom. A much more feasible use of poison
gas, from the Soviet point of view, would be to disrupt the ports and airfields
so critical to NATO logistics. Theoretically, chemicals could stop operations
without destroying facilities. But because of the large amounts needed, terrain
contamination is practical only if done selectively. And to strike narrowly
defined targets, ideal weather conditions are mandatory. This, too, was one of
the lessons of World War I.

The only targets that would unquestionably be devastated by chemical weapons are
unprotected civilians. Matthew Meselson has suggested that GB contamination
intended to cause 20 percent casualties among soldiers carrying masks but not at
first wearing them could, under ordinary weather conditions in central Germany,
kill noncombatants 12 miles or more downwind and incapacitate people at twice
that distance. Battlefield chemical warfare in Europe would probably, therefore,
inflict millions of civilian casualties. Perhaps this is why the West German
armed forces and other NATO armies have officially disavowed all access to
chemical weapons.

Needless to say, the binaries will not diminish these drawbacks.  In fact,
because the first binary weapon slated for mass production - an artillery shell
-underwent only minimal open-air field testing before Richard Nixon's 1969 ban
(none of the other planned binaries have ever been field-tested), binary
munitions may be inferior to our present stocks. The Army hotly contests this,
claiming that modern laboratory testing with simulants justifies full
confidence. General Fulwyler flatly declares that binaries can be fully
integrated into our forces without open-air testing. But nobody knows for sure.
Saul Hormats, the designer of our current unitary munitions, says that ''to
embark on a multibillion-dollar production program without statistically
significant testing would be a criminal waste of money. To supply
production-line rounds to our forces without confirmatory field trials would be
worse.'' It is no secret that field commanders, let alone G.I.'s, do not like
chemical weapons. For many of them the prospect of using munitions that have
never been fired under open field conditions must seem suicidal.  The
domestic-storage safety issue has been taken up by both opponents and proponents
of the binary concept at different times for different purposes. For decades,
the Army emphasized the safety of its existing stockpiles - for instance, that
not a single human fatality related to handling chemical weapons has ever
occurred. For the past several years, however, the Pentagon has insisted that
its stocks are obsolete and increasingly unserviceable and ought to be
demilitarized soon to avoid potential health hazards. This change in opinion
coincides neatly with the move toward binaries. Opponents of chemical-warfare
modernization, on a reverse course, used to criticize the American weapons sites
as unsafe, but now tend to point out that old unitary munitions and bulk
containers are in good shape and are perfectly compatible with the latest
equipment. Perhaps the only way to see through this political posturing is to
examine one storage situation. The most visible, by far, is the Rocky Mountain
Arsenal outside Denver.

A lot has changed in Denver since the Korean War days of the early 1950's, when
the actress Piper Laurie was named ''Miss Flame Thrower'' by the arsenal's proud
staff. All that remains of more than 30 years of chemical-weapons production is
a relatively small pile of 888 ''Weteye'' bombs, each 20 inches in diameter, 103
inches long and filled with nerve agent GB. Denver has gotten a bit bigger since
World War II, so the arsenal no longer enjoys rural solitude.  Actually, the
Weteye storage yard is under the flight path of commercial airliners that use
Stapleton International Airport. This fact, plus the occasional discovery of
leaky Weteyes, tends to make Denver-area residents sensitive to chemical-warfare
matters. These bombs, moreover, are all that remain of our air-to-ground
nerve-gas capability. They were scheduled for demolition in 1973, but the Navy
(which owns them) decided to hang on to them until binary replacements - called
Bigeyes - are available.

Last year, officials at the arsenal confirmed that minute quantities of GB had
been detected in the void space of the airtight shipping containers of 70
Weteyes. By minute, they meant between .00003 and .0001 milligrams of nerve gas
per cubic meter of space.  Such ''leaks'' are not like a drippy faucet. Because
of microscopic weld defects around the bomb filler caps, vapor seeps out through
a tortuous path. The limit for acceptable leakage, set by the Defense Department
and accepted by the United States Public Health Service, is .2 milligrams per
cubic meter, or 2,000 times greater than the worst case detected.

Still, these bombs stored five and a half miles from a major airport are filled
with nerve gas, not ice cream. They are exceedingly unpopular. Therefore,
Senator Gary Hart succeeded in June 1980 in passing an amendment to the fiscal
1981 militaryconstruction bill that requires the Pentagon to detoxify or remove
the Weteyes within one year. But the Pentagon has indicated that it would far
rather keep them than detoxify them - that is, remove them from weapons and
store them in thick tanks, or mix them with other chemicals to render them
nonlethal. The current plan is to airlift the Weteyes from Stapleton to Utah,
and then truck them into the Tooele Army Depot, about 50 miles west of Salt Lake
City. Tooele is a massive desert storage area that also operates a $67 million
detoxification plant. Whether the Weteyes ever get to Tooele remains to be seen.
At a Salt Lake City news conference last January, Gov.  Scott M. Matheson of
Utah, who was instrumental in halting previous transfers, said he was sure the
Pentagon's transfer plans provided a ''happy day for Gary Hart,'' but they were
bad news for Utah.

Under the first phase of the binary work, initial production of GB artillery
shells would begin in fiscal 1983. Not until 1986 would Bigeyes be started for
the Navy and Air Force. The last phase allows for expansion to new systems, such
as multiple-launch rockets. It would probably be many years, therefore, before
Weteyes - let alone other unitary weapons - would be demilitarized. More to the
point, however, is the fact that binary ingredients are not harmless themselves.
DF, one of the components of GB, is almost as toxic as strychnine. QL, a VX
mixer, causes nausea, breathing difficulties and skin rashes. In the subjective
realm of public opinion, it seems doubtful that the residents of Colorado, Utah
or anywhere else will feel comfortable with these substances.  Since World War
I, chemical warfare has been waged only against defenseless forces who had no
ability to retaliate in kind. Chemical weapons have never generated enthusiasm
in high military circles.  Bullets and blast are much more dependable, and are
therefore preferred. Chemical warfare has been kept out of the military
mainstream for six decades as a result of psychological aversions, moral
proscriptions and international law. Yet, as Julian P.  Robinson, a scientist
and chemical-weapons expert at the University of Sussex in England, has written,
''One of the more remarkable characteristics of chemical warfare in the West,
particularly in the United States, is the long-standing contrast between the
lack of serious military interest in chemical warfare and the continued
allocation of resources to chemical-weapons programs. There is a disjunction
here which cannot satisfactorily be explained solely in terms of no-firstuse
commitment.''

Most chemical weapons mentioned in open literature are intended for a
NATO-Warsaw Pact battle in central Europe. The United States maintains one
deployment of these arms somewhere in West Germany (the Russians, likewise, keep
one stockpile in East Germany). But West Germany has made many public statements
that these stocks serve no useful purpose. British officials are not quite so
unequivocal, but continue to ban offensive stockpiles while accentuating
defense. For Denmark, Greece, Iceland, Italy, Luxembourg, Norway and Turkey, the
Geneva Protocol is a commitment against any use of chemicals, even in
retalition. Only France, which resides outside the NATO command but is a Geneva
signatory, maintains its own offensive inventory.  Obviously, without a major
policy change in the NATO alliance, new weapons produced in America will stay in
America. As of today, no one from Congress or the executive branch has formally
consulted with any NATO government about accepting binary munitions. Of what
value would they be if they are not quickly available in the European theater?

In the final analysis, we must take a hard look at whether we want to begin
like-for-like escalation in the name of deterence. Do we really want to take the
''If they have 10,000 statues of Lenin, we need 10,000 statues of George
Washington'' approach to security? The history of nuclear weapons shows that
good intentions are not enough. Once the binary program gets started, Pentagon
insiders admit that the Army will want open-air testing. Chemical proliferation
abroad is then inevitable. Saul Hormats believes that if we stopped our chemical
posturing, we would send the Soviet Union an unequivocal signal that any
escalation to chemical warfare on its part would trigger a nuclear reply.
European governments tend to favor this tack. It is ironic that one of the
reasons often cited for rejuvenating chemical warfare is the present state of
nuclear parity in Europe.

There is, unfortunately, one other factor. The Army does not like to talk about
it, but there is the lingering fear, seen in Vietnam, that the modern
battlefield may already be such a horrible place that soldiers will simply
refuse to fight. If a man feels he has a reasonable chance to use his wits and
skills to survive mortal combat, he will probably try. But when such wits and
skill seem irrelevant, he may mutiny. In Vietnam the reaction was called
''fragging.'' The lieutenants of World War I who led infantry attacks with
.45-caliber pistols raised high - not to kill the enemy, but to shoot deserters
- are a specific nightmare to Chemical Corps planners. Like nuclear weapons,
chemicals take the finesse out of war. By embracing new chemical weapons,
America may ultimately push its young men out, as well.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Utah farmers (Page 38) Photo of soilders
playing softball (Page 37) Photo of soilders wearing gas masks (Page 32)

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 24, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 6; Page 86, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 316 words


Although it was very flattering to read how influential the Institute for Policy
Studies has become, Mr. Muravchik is a bit loose with facts. The allegation that
I ''praised'' the murderous regime of Pol Pot is carrying falsehood to the point
of recklessness. In our interview, Mr. Muravchik asked me three times whether I
thought the Soviet Union was ''imperialist.'' I answered in the affirmative.
According to tapes of our conversation, I told him that the Soviet Union ''has
been expansionist,'' that it ''evidences some of the classic behavior of an
imperialist power'' and that it is becoming ''increasingly less cautious in
projecting its military power.'' Since, evidently, I did not give the answer he
wanted, he printed another. These are but two examples of numerous liberties
with the truth Mr. Muravchik has taken.  RICHARD J. BARNET Institute for Policy
Studies Washington Joshua Muravchik replies:

My article took no liberties with the truth. Mr. Barnet's letter does. I nowhere
alleged that he praised the Pol Pot regime. I quoted his praise of the
human-rights record of the Government of Viet Nam and the praise that some of
his colleagues at I.P.S. bestowed on the Pol Pot regime.

Mr. Barnet's letter attempts to leave the impression that he did not say what I
quoted him as saying about Soviet imperialism, yet it carefully avoids any
denial of the quote. He did not answer my question in the affirmative. He said,
''It depends what you mean.'' He said several other things, but the heart of his
response was that the U.S.S.R ''is fundamentally looking for ... stable
relations ...  it is fundamentally ... a status quo power.'' Mr. Barnet's
tergiversations Mr. Barnet's tergiversations on this issue contrast sharply with
his flat assertion that, ''by any historical definition, the United States is an
empire'' whose ''wars will cease only if (its) society is changed.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 24, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEHIND THE BEST SELLERS

BYLINE: By Edwin McDowell

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18, Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 674 words


It was a scene right out of the 1960's: the commencement speaker delivering his
speech while much of his audience wore white arm bands and about 50 students
turned their backs during his address.  But this was not the 1960's; it was
earlier this month at American University. And the protest was not against one
of the architects of the Vietnam War but against George Gilder, author of the
best-selling ''Wealth and Poverty,'' a blueprint for ''supply-side'' economics.

The student protests were not aimed at Mr. Gilder's economic theories, however,
but at what the protestors said were the views he expressed about sex and race
in several earlier books. The author, in turn, contended that those views were
misrepresented by the demonstrators. Whatever the case, the dispute propelled
Mr. Gilder into the headlines and demonstrated once again that he is unafraid to
take unpopular positions on controversial subjects.

The latest example of that is his championing of supply-side economics, with its
emphasis on stimulating production by lowering tax rates on business and
individuals. This position has strong support within the Reagan Administration,
where ''Wealth and Poverty'' has been cited as among the President's favorite
reading matter, but it remains controversial within the economics profession.
And at the time Mr. Gilder proposed the book to his publisher, a year or so ago,
it is doubtful that more than the barest fraction of the reading public was even
familiar with the term. Indeed, Basic Books thought so little of the book's
sales potential that it initially printed only 5,000 copies, plus another 3,000
for the Conservative Book Club. Even after the book caught on in Washington, the
publisher had to ship copies to bookstores in the District via United Parcel,
rather than via less-expensive normal distribution channels.

But there has been nothing but good news since then. The book, Basic's first
best seller in a decade, has gone into several more printings and has sold more
than 135,000 copies. The irony is that Mr. Gilder, 41, did not begin to study
economics seriously until a few years ago, and he continued to formulate his
economic theories almost up until the time he handed the completed manuscript to
his editor, Midge Decter.

Born into a distinguished New England family, Mr. Gilder lost his father in
World War II, when the boy was 3, and his mother converted the family's
Manhattan townhouse into a rooming house for music students. David Rockefeller,
a Harvard roommate of Mr. Gilder's father, helped put the boy through Exeter,
and, as a rather lackluster student, he managed to struggle through Harvard.
During his undergraduate years, and for several years thereafter, Mr.  Gilder
was a liberal Republican who seemed to delight more in twitting conservative
Republicans than Democrats. His first book, ''The Party That Lost Its Head''
(1966), co-authored with Bruce K.  Chapman, denounced Goldwater Republicanism as
reactionism rather than traditional conservatism.

Mr. Gilder subsequently turned his attention to nonpolitical but hardly
noncontroversial matters. In ''Sexual Suicide'' (1973) he maintained that women
are morally superior to men but that their place is in the home. In ''Naked
Nomads'' (1974), published about a year before he married, he maintained that
bachelorhood is harmful to a man's physical and psychic being. In ''Visible
Man'' (1978), a book that sold fewer than 700 copies, he argued that it was
racist to portray quiet, middle-class blacks as ''fake whites'' while
maintaining that to be truly black you have to be ''bad,'' ''revolutionary'' or
''angry.''

Mr. Gilder's ''Wealth and Poverty'' is no less controversial, at least to
orthodox economists, but the difference this time is that the theme is proving
to have wide appeal in the nation's bookstores.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of George Gilder

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 25, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MONDALE ASSAILS REAGAN ON RIGHTS

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 294 words

DATELINE: WALTHAM, Mass., May 24


Former Vice President Walter F. Mondale, speaking to the 30th graduating class
at Brandeis University, today criticized the Reagan Administration's human
rights policies abroad.

''Torture is torture, and terror is terror,'' he said, ''and whether it occurs
in Cuba, Russia, Vietnam, Argentina, Chile or El Salvador, we in America should
oppose it, condemn it and do our best to stop it.''

Mr. Mondale characterized President Reagan's nomination of Ernest W. Lefever as
Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights as ''sad'' and ''full of
justifications for indifference.''

''Appointments in human rights,'' Mr. Mondale said, ''are carrying the clear
message that the U.S. Government no longer believes that the human dimension of
policy is important, and repressive governments have taken heart.''

----

CHARLOTTESVILLE, Va., May 24 (UPI) - The Reagan Administration is committed to
improving human rights worldwide but will not ''shout from the rooftops and beat
our breasts,'' Vice President Bush said today.

''This Administration is pledged to human rights,'' Mr. Bush said in a
commencement address at the University of Virginia. ''We will work to effect
changes to help improve human rights, but we're going to do it quietly. We will
not be selective in our indignation.''

''Mr. Bush said the United States would ''exert our influence in the area of
human rights by quiet diplomacy and persuasion.'' ''Results are what count,'' he
said, ''not rhetorical confrontation.'' The Vice President addressed 3,600
graduates, among them his son Marvin.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 25, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

VETERANS' GROUPS SEEK ACTION ON AGENT ORANGE RISKS

BYLINE: By KAREN DE WITT, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 556 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 24


Representatives of 25 veterans' and environmental groups convened here this
holiday weekend to seek Federal action on illnesses they say are caused by Agent
Orange, a defoliant used in the Vietnam War.

Jon Furst, chairman of the National Veterans Task Force on Agent Orange, which
organized the conference, said that it was held to examine the hazards of
exposure to the defoliant and to provide documented information from scientists,
doctors and others about the current status of the Agent Orange issue.

Mr. Furst said that the Government ''hasn't even defined for us what we are
supposed to provide for proof'' of poisoning by the herbicide. Five bills
involving veterans exposed to Agent Orange have been introduced in Congress in
the last two years.

Bills Seek V.A. Study

Representative Thomas A. Daschle, Democrat of South Dakota, has sponsored a bill
that would amend the United States Code to provide a presumption of service
connection for the occurrence of certain diseases in veterans exposed to
herbicides while serving in Southeast Asia in the Vietnam War. Senator Larry
Pressler, Republican of South Dakota, has introduced similar legislation.

Representative Benjamin A. Gilman, Republican of upstate New York, Senator Alan
Cranston, Democrat of California, and Senator John Heinz, Republican of
Pennsylvania, have introduced legislation that would require the Veterans
Administration to conduct a study of veterans exposed to Agent Orange, clarify
the agency's authority to cover health-care costs and require it to issue
regulatory guidelines to resolve veterans' benefit claims involving illnessess
related to Agent Orange.

Veterans groups have long maintained that Agent Orange has caused a variety of
illnesses and cancers among servicemen exposed to the defoliant, as well as
genetic defects in their offspring.

The Government contends that there is no documented evidence of this, and thus
pays no disability benefits to veterans filing benefit claims because of
exposure to the defoliant.

Agent Orange was the code name for a defoliant sprayed by the Air Force from
1962 to 1970 on crops and jungles in Vietnam to reduce enemy food supplies and
hiding places. Agent Orange was a mixture of two herbicides, 2,4,5-T and 2,4-D,
both suspected of causing health problems, though no conclusive links have been
proven.

In the last few years, hundreds of Agent Orange lawsuits have been filed by
veterans or their families because their medical claims have been denied by the
Veterans Administration.

The groups that gathered here want compensation for veterans who feel that their
illnesses are caused by exposure to the defoliant.  They maintain that the
Veterans Administration should have guidelines to resolve claims for veterans'
benefits based on exposure to Agent Orange.

After the conference ended, several dozen Vietnam veterans and supporters
attempted to lay an orange wreath near the tomb of the unknown Vietnam soldier
to commemorate those who they said died from the effects of Agent Orange. The
group was stopped at the gate to the Arlington National Cemetery, however, by
National Park Police officers, and they left the wreath outside the gate.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 25, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Veterans Continue Protests And Seek Reagan Response

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 92 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, May 24


Two small groups of Vietnam veterans vowed today to continue a hunger strike and
a sit-in until President Reagan responds to their demands for better treatment
for veterans.

Six veterans sat in the lobby at the Wadsworth Veterans Administration Hospital
for a fifth day, waiting to hear from President Reagan.

On the lawn outside of the Wadsworth hospital, three veterans held an
independent protest of conditions at the nearby Brentwood Hospital, a V.A.
psychiatric complex.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 26, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Around the Nation;
Boston Archdiocese to Aid Its Conscientious Objectors

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 162 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, May 25


The Catholic Archdiocese of Boston, saying it wanted to insure the legal rights
of its members, announced today that it would keep files for young people who
might later seek status as conscientious objectors in a military draft.

The archdiocese's Justice and Peace Commission said that Humberto Cardinal
Medeiros had established a registry to accept ''letters or other statements
submitted by men and women who intend to claim recognition as conscientious
objectors in anticipation of a possible return to peacetime conscription.''

A dated letter could help demonstrate an objection to military service if a new
draft was ever imposed.  ''At the time of the Vietnam conflict, most draft
boards never accepted the fact that Catholics could be C.O.'s, which led to most
Catholic objectors going to Canada,'' John Moynihan, a memer of the commission,
said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 26, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
A Collision Course

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 870 words


No doubt George F. Kennan will be widely considered Quixotic for calling
attention at this time to the ''collision course'' on which he believes the
nuclear superpowers are embarked, and for urging the immediate reduction by 50
percent of American and Soviet nuclear arsenals.

After all, the Reagan Administration came to power in opposition to the SALT II
treaty, and has announced its intention to build up, not reduce, the nation's
military strength. On the very day Mr. Kennan spoke, the State Department
overruled its own legal counsel and announced that the United States had no
obligation to observe SALT II.

Even on the relatively narrow question of nuclear arms limitation in the
European theater, the Reagan Administration is in no hurry to talk with the
Soviet Union. That's one of the reasons the West German Chancellor, Helmut
Schmidt, was in Washington - trying to get American assent to a faster timetable
on theater nuclear talks.

Mr. Kennan himself said that neither the United States nor the Soviet Government
had given any indication that it might accept his proposal. Why, then, offer
such an idea at a time when it seems least likely to affect policy?

Because, Mr. Kennan told me in a telephone conversation, after more than 30
years of nuclear competition and ineffectual efforts to halt it, he thought it
necessary to say ''something blunt'' and propose to do ''something drastic''
about the ''absurd redundancy'' in available nuclear power. Perhaps that might
cause the Administration to look again at its plans for more such power - plans
he termed ''a form of madness.''

In that perspective, Mr. Kennan's timing - on the occasion of his acceptance of
the Albert Einstein Peace Prize - was impeccable.  Seldom if ever has there been
so great a need for such a clarion call to common sense, from a man whose wisdom
and experience gave him the right to make it and the ability to be heard.

Already, he said in his speech, the United States and the Soviet Union have in
their nuclear stockpiles more than one million times the destructive power of
the American bomb that destroyed Hiroshima in 1945. Yet,

''something well less'' than 20 percent of existing weapons would suffice to
deter nuclear attack, if the two nations maintained the present relative balance
of strategic weapons - as they would following a 50 percent reduction
(verifiable by national means) on each side.

But the Reagan Administration's planned expansion of military expenditures by
$181 billion over the next five years is three times the Vietnam-era buildup
from 1965 to 1970. While nuclear expenditures will account for only a small part
of this immense cost, a strategic arsenal already bloated with overkill will be
further expanded, the Russians will inevitably match or exceed the expansion, as
they always have, and the two Colossi will be speeded on their ''collision
course.''

Nuclear proliferation, meanwhile, poses a parallel danger. No serious analyst
doubts that Israel is a nuclear power. Pakistan, India, Iraq, may or soon will
be; and that may well be true of South Africa, too. How can the superpowers hope
to control the nuclear ambitions of these and other nations if Moscow and
Washington cannot agree between themselves on strategic arms limitation, much
less reduction?

Mr. Kennan's warning was not aimed only at the hawks of the Reagan
Administration and the Committee on the Present Danger. Of the strategic arms
limitation talks begun by President Nixon and in which Presidents Ford and
Carter invested so much hope, he observed:

''I have no illusion that such negotiations could ever be adequate to get us out
of this hole. They are not a way of escape from the nuclear weapons race; they
are an integral part of it.''

To reply that the ''integral part'' played by SALT has been to impose some
limitation, however slight, on the arms race does not negate Mr. Kennan's point.
SALT at best has - or would have - established the rules of the race, not halted
or even much slowed it. And while it's better to have rules than not to have
them, SALT has not been able to avoid what Mr. Kennan called ''the grotesque
dimensions'' of the destructive power available to each superpower today.

That is ''the heart of the problem'' -that so much power, so feebly restrained,
must some day tempt or delude one side or the other into using it. Yet, as Mr.
Kennan pointed out with nearhopeless eloquence:

''We have gone on piling weapon upon weapon, missile upon missile ...
helplessly, almost involuntarily, like the victims of some sort of hypnosis,
like men in a dream, like lemmings headed for the sea ....''

But what hypnosis is this that induces self-destruction? If man, as President
Reagan believes, is not an accident of nature, might he not yet summon the
rationality to move off a ''collision course'' with oblivion? Perhaps so, but
George Kennan believes that ''we're getting very close to the point of no
return.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 26, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

About New York;
SOLDIERS OF LONG AGO AND WOMEN THEY LEFT BEHIND

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 999 words


The central event of Holmes's life occurred on a warm autumn morning in 1944,
when a man came to the door of her apartment with a telegram. Every American
woman knew what a telegram meant in 1944, and so, before she had opened the
yellow envelope, Mrs. Holmes broke down. She knew without words on paper that
her 19-year-old son had been killed at old son had been killed at Guadalcanal.

That is how Mrs. Holmes became a Gold Star mother, and yesterday, to the service
of memory - which, she will remind you, is the root word from which the term
Memorial Day is Avenue to visit the boys.

So did LaRue Yessen, who is a Gold Star widow.  Agnes Hahn, who is a member of
the Daughters of Union Veterans of the Civil War, went to the hospital in the
Bronx.three women went to a Memorial Day service at the Soldiers and Sailors
Monument on Riverside Drive. There was a junior high school band and a color
guard and speeches there, beneath the Corinthian columns soaring skyward, but
for the first time since World War I, there was no parade before the ceremony.
The crowd was sparse, and not young. All of the West Side seemed to pass by, in
running clothes.

Yesterday was a good day for what Memorial Day has become, and a bad day for
what it used to be. It was warm and fine, and thousands devoted themselves to
the base layer of their summer tans. Coney Island swarmed with more than a
million people, and the streets of Manhattan were deserted.

But it was really a little too warm for the blue military cape Mrs. Hahn wore,
or the white suit jacket on which was pinned Mrs. Holmes's Gold Star pin. It got
hot out on the flagstones around the monument, listening to ''America the
Beautiful'' and taps. A Vietnam veteran's toddler son, wearing tiny green Army
fatigues and sucking on his finger, went and sat in the shade while his father
squinted at the speakers, who were angry about the arbitrary date now accorded
the holiday.

''We deserve a special day, and not a day to satisfy the commercialism of the
country and give them a three-day weekend,'' said the American Legion County
commander, Anthony F. Tuccillo.

But the Legion men, in their blue hats emblazoned ''For God and Country,'' and
the auxiliary women, wearing medals, sighed and agreed that that was what the
day had become.

Over the decades that they had paraded up the drive, the number behind them had
grown smaller and smaller. The men who had not died at Guadalcanal or in the
Argonne were dying anyway. The things that their husbands and sons had died for
were dying, too. Some of the old soldiers blamed a lack of solidarity, pointing
to the parades in the Bronx and Brooklyn and Queens, which drew several thousand
people, and saying that if everyone would stick together for the ceremony in
Manhattan they could make a real showing.

But others said that things had never quite been the same since the last war,
the first one that television had covered up close and personal.

''You know, the Vietnam thing didn't do us any good,'' said Peter Keenan, who
enlisted in the Army in 1939.  ''I don't know, everything is different,'' said
George Srour, who was stationed in Munich during the Korean War. ''I'm confused.
The city is confused. The country is confused. I just don't know where we're
going.''

Alfred Siegel, who joined the Army to learn a trade and was part of a bomber
crew in World War II, added: ''I never had any thoughts about not serving. I
never had any thoughts about what I was doing.  People don't really understand
what we did. They think that veterans are only there to make wars, and all
they're interested in now is peace.''

And so, at the end of the ceremony, they dispersed, to their Legion halls and
their homes, tired and warm and a little sad.

The women, their artificial poppies bright against their clothes, walked slowly
from their seats to the shade at the monument entrance, to inveigh against
Memorial Day sales, They seemed a little more serene about the anachronistic
nature of their calling than the men, perhaps because they had never stood
shoulder to shoulder with a buddy who had his head blown off, perhaps because
they spend so much time at V.A. hospitals and Gold Star meetings.

''I represent five wars,'' said Mrs. Hahn proudly. ''My grandfather was in the
cavalry in the Civil War, my uncle was in the Spanish conflict, my brother was
in World War I, my son was in World War II, and I had two grandsons in Vietnam.
The way everything is, people don't think about wars. The young fellows just
want to go here and go there. People just want to go shopping. To them it's a
big vacation.''

''I don't think the young people know what a Gold Star is,'' said Mrs. Holmes.
''When I go to the hospital, sometimes they'll know.  It's my calling. My one
interest now is to take care of those who come home.''

''I met him when I was 18,'' said Mrs. Yessen. ''We were married when I was 22
and I was a widow at 23. I got it in person. I got it in three words. The
officer came to the door and he kept saying something about a fatal accident and
I said, 'Where is he? Take me to him.' So my landlady sat me down and she
grabbed my hands and said, 'I want you to listen carefully and I want you to
understand. Sol is dead. Sol ... is ... dead.' That was it. That was my
teleteletelegram.''

''I'll never forget that day,'' Mrs. Holmes said. ''Sept. 19, 1944. He was 19.''
''Nov. 19, 1942,'' Mrs. Yessen cut in. ''We were married just before

''The boys like to see us,'' said Mrs. Holmes. ''They appreciate the visit.''
And they left for the hospital.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of James Shannon and son Jason

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 28, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AS HOUSTON'S AMENITIES BOOM, ITS SERVICES DECAY

BYLINE: By WILLIAM K. STEVENS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 3164 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, May 27


It burst upon the national stage in the 1960's as Space City U.S.A., the
gleaming new metropolis of the Southwest, home of the astronauts, site of the
Astrodome, citadel of medical wizardry. By the end of the 1970's, it had
advanced to world class as the capital of a potent, hard-muscled global energy
industry. Some called it Super City, others the City of the Future.

Now Houston's public reputation appears to be reversing itself.  Houston, the
critics say, cannot transport its people efficiently, provide enough water, keep
the streets repaired or the traffic lights working or the sewers fixed or its
garbage collected or the air clean or the flood waters away from the door. There
is much evidence to support them.

''Why is Houston falling apart?'' trumpets the magazine Texas Monthly. Lynn
Ashby, a columnist for The Houston Post, writes, ''This city is going down the
tube and no one is stopping it.'' The economic journal Texas Business concluded
flatly last month that Houston ''doesn't provide an example for other growing
Texas cities to emulate - but rather an example of what to avoid.''

A City of Two Realities

It is more complicated than that. The fact is that both Houstons, the positive
and the negative, co-exist in a churning, dissonant bundle of contradictions and
dislocations, a mixture of textures bold and subtle, uplifting and earthy.

And even as some Houston watchers fear that the city is about to self-destruct,
others believe that it is building a foundation, albeit in helter-skelter
fashion, that in time will make it the major center of civilized activity that
any city must become if it is to be called great.

At the moment, this city simply represents the essence of the American business
economy.  ''American culture is a business culture,'' said Barry J. Kaplan, an
urban historian at the University of Houston. ''We have marshaled our resources
to create a business culture. If that's true, Houston is the epitome of what
America can do.'' Houston's economy, he argues, is its crowning achievement so
far.

Home of Laissez-Faire Economics

In that fact, Mr. Kaplan reasons, lies the answer to the city's apparent
paradox. ''The things that make Houston great,'' he says, ''are the same things
that cause the problems.'' That is, Houston is ''one of the last bastions of the
type of economics practiced before the New Deal.'' This means laissez-faire
economics, in which the private sector remains largely unfettered by zoning
codes, taxation and other regulation, and in which government, including the
provision of public services, is held to a minimum.

There is no sign that Houston's explosive growth is tailing off.  Some analysts
attribute the force of that growth as much to Houston's oil-fed prosperity as to
its private-enterprise approach to economics and public service. A recent
Commerce Department report said the city's per capita income of $10,638 for 1979
ranked No. 3, behind San Francisco and Washington, D.C., among the nation's 10
most populous areas. In any case, the growth is now branching out into areas
that make for a more variegated urban scene than existed even a few months ago.
Houston is still Space City, still the Energy Capital. But with 1.6 million
people and growing, it is rapidly becoming much more.

In the view of Dr. John Boles, a history professor at Tulane University who is
moving to Rice University here in June, Houston has achieved a diversity of
peoples and cultures whose rich mixture can be compared to that of New Orleans
in its greatest years of economic vitality and cultural development.

Migrants from all over the country, including, most recently, blue-collar
workers from the chronically depressed Middle West, continue to converge on the
city in search of opportunity. They find jobs in construction, service and
industry in an area where the unemployment rate runs 3 to 4 percent. All of them
are added ingredients in an ethnic stew that includes Asians, Mexican-Americans
and by far the largest black population, except for Los Angeles, in any city in
the Sun Belt.

Decline of the Cowboy Motif

Creators and business people, artisans and laborers, hustlers and professionals,
winners and losers: All are shaping a social scene in which the cowboy motif,
mostly a modern affectation in any case, appears to be declining in importance.

Here and there, certain snatches of urban landscape suggest the city's flavorful
new variety: At the northern end of the downtown section, I.M. Pei's Texas
Commerce Tower, a 75-story skyscraper sheathed in gray granite, the tallest
building in the country outside New York and Chicago, prepares to receive its
first tenants next month. Jutting up next to the distinctive twin trapezoids of
Philip Johnson's Pennzoil Place, the newest symbol of Houston's present-day
commercial strength, dominates Old Market Square, the center of Houston commerce
a century ago.

Across the square is Houston's oldest building, a leaning brick structure
perhaps 15 feet wide that dates from 1845 and is now a registered historical
place. Inside, a stand-up comedian from Baton Rouge, doubling in the daytime as
bartender, serves beer and wine in a wonderfully cluttered, old-New Orleans
setting where Sam Houston once slept and slaves were once traded.

Between the two, businessmen on lunch hour, their suit coats slung over their
shoulders, stroll to and from small restaurants that flank the square. In one of
them, immigrants from Vietnam help serve Cajun food from Louisiana. Outside, a
crowd of blacks, whites and Mexican Americans mix in the noonday sun.

A Playground for Architects

Texas Commerce Tower is merely the latest in a series of towers that did not
exist three years ago. Nearly $2.5 billion worth of construction was started
here last year, easily the most in the country, in a minimum-regulation climate
that is considered an architect's playground.

Restaurants, art galleries, dance companies, theater groups, bars, stores and
other amenities of urban existence spring up all the time. Some of them are
top-drawer. Both New York's ''21'' and Sardi's, for example, are planning to
operate restaurants here.  Entertainments range from the tawdry to the sublime,
from the myriad establishments that advertise ''totally nude girls'' to the
Houston Grand Opera, which has become recognized as one of the country's best.
As a whole, this explosion is eagerly welcomed by a young, middle-class
clientele whose affluence favors a decidedly sensual, unusually materialistic
leisure climate.

All this is taking place in a setting that is not a customary city at all, but a
jumble of high-rises and town houses, shopping malls and skyscrapers, greenly
pleasant suburbs and raucous thoroughfares.  It is what Dr. William Simon, a
University of Houston sociologist, calls an ''urban region.''

As a community, Houston is tied together mostly by its freeways, by what comes
into its homes on the airwaves and by the success of its professional baseball,
football and basketball teams, all of which have been championship contenders in
the last year.

Predictions of a Hurricane

But, the critics say, the Astros and the Oilers and the Rockets lose a lot of
appeal when your living room is under water, as has been true for thousands of
Houstonians in the last two years. The flooding is considered by some to be the
one thing that could stop Houston's development in its tracks, at least for a
time, especially if a major hurricane strikes. It has been 20 years since the
last one, and some climatologists say they believe another is due.

Recently, after heavy rains flooded a southeast Houston neighborhood for the
third time in two years, a space shuttle engineer, who asked that his name not
be used, was sweating under the sweet gums and live oaks in his front yard,
sorting out his ruined carpets.

Inside, the furniture was up on tables and chairs, and the floors were bare to
the concrete slab. ''We don't think shallow,'' said the man's wife; ''we think
deep.'' They will ''camp'' in their own home for perhaps two to three months,
until repairs are made. Eventually, if they can, they will sell the house. In
the meantime, the engineer said, he has become philosophical. ''At first it
bothered me a lot,'' he said. ''Now it doesn't.''

Overdevelopment in the wrong places is almost universally blamed for the
problem. When acres of concrete replaced acres of rice fields on the city's
low-lying Southeast side, the volume of rainwater runoff increased dramatically.
At the same time, the spongy land sank by several feet in some places as ground
water was pumped out for public use. Controls on building in flood-prone areas
have since been instituted, but the damage is already done in some places.

The flooding is just one result of what some analysts consider a pattern of
short-sighted public policies that have brought down a torrent of criticism.

Hundreds of Thousands of Potholes

Houston's streets and freeways are so overloaded as to be considered a chronic
irritation and danger. The transportation problem has hardly been dented,
although the voters overwhelmingly approved a mass-transit bond issue nearly
three years ago. There are always hundreds of thousands of potholes in the
streets, creating a land-office business for front-end alignment shops. Traffic
lights frequently malfunction, causing maddening traffic jams. Railroad
crossings obstruct major thoroughfares and intersections.

Garbage collection in parts of the city has sometimes been days late.
Large-scale development has been at least temporarily halted in some areas
because sewage facilities cannot support it. Crime rates are soaring, while
officials admit that the Police Department is grossly understaffed.

Houston was forced to ration water in last summer's drought and heat wave, not
because of a shortage but because the distribution system could not pump more
than about 400 million gallons a day.

All this is by now the stuff of daily life to Houstonians. Why, it is asked more
and more insistently, can't the city apply to its public problems the slogan of
a Texas Commerce Bank billboard: ''Texas Can-Do, Houston Know-How''?

Tradeoffs for Low Taxes

The reason it has not been done until now, many agree, traces to Houston's
deliberate policy of low taxes and minimal services. Those who run the city have
customarily said that that is the way to unleash growth and development to the
benefit of all.

But this involves trade-offs, in the view of Mr. Kaplan, the urban historian.
First, the free-market theory of government leaves hundreds of thousands of the
poor to fend for themselves. The affluent can afford, and are expected, to pay
for more than the bare minimum in public services. The poor, many of whom are
employed in jobs with low wages and benefits, cannot. Second, when large-scale
growth overtakes the city, as it has, public services can be overwhelmed, and
rich and poor alike are affected.

The proper question, says Mr. Kaplan, is, ''What kind of city you want?'' In
many ways, he said, ''Houston, with all its faults, is the type of city that
many Americans do want.'' In his view, he said, many of Houston's difficulties
are inconveniences rather than serious public problems, at least for those whose
economic circumstances are basically solid.

There are some exceptions. Mr. Kaplan says that flooding is the main one. ''If
the business leaders don't marshal the public sector to do something about it,''
he said, ''that could seriously damage the business climate'' on which the
city's prosperity depends.

'Deficit Development' Assailed

To Dr. Simon, however, the city's problems amount to far more than
inconvenience. He sees the policy of low public services as one of ''deficit
development,'' in which those who have set the city's policies have merely
deferred the consequences of their actions. Each year the city puts off bringing
its public services up to par, he says, makes it just that much more expensive.
He and others lay the responsibility for this at the feet of ''developers who
have basically dominated the city.''

One myth, says Dr. Simon, is that the city has been unplanned. It is true there
is no zoning. But by their very decisions about what to build and where to build
it, the developers and their political allies have shaped the city. Houston ''is
very planned, by a very narrow group, and in many ways a reckless group,'' he
says.

Put all these factors together, he maintains, ''and you have a city that's in
deep, deep trouble.'' Some officials, particularly new, first-term City Council
members elected 18 months ago when the Council was re-structured under orders
from the Justice Department, have been trying diligently to attack some of the
problems. They are searching for unused money in the city budget that might be
used for repairing streets or hiring police officers. Others have been goading
the solid-waste department to improve garbage pickup, and more garbage trucks
have been purchased.

Waiting for Public Outrage

Nevertheless, some analysts and politicians believe that no effective attack on
the overall problem of services will be made until the public becomes more
aroused than it is now.

The public is ''inconvenienced and aggravated, but not outraged,'' by the
deterioration of public services, said Lance Lalor, a firstterm City Councilman
who is regarded as a progressive on the issue and is not a member of the
developers' circle. ''They don't care enough to make any radical changes.''

Mr. Lalor argues that the problems will not be solved short of a number of
potentially disruptive measures, including substantially higher taxes, a shift
to city-manager government and Civil Service reform in what is generally
perceived as a sloppily managed city bureaucracy.

Even though the public may not be prepared to support such measures, Mr. Lalor
believes, it may be frustrated enough to vote some people out of office. One
measure of this may lie in recent polls that show Mayor Jim McConn, a member of
the developers' community, running well behind one of his potential challengers
in this fall's election, City Controller Kathryn J. Whitmire. In November 1979
Mr. McConn won re-election easily.

Growth at Breakneck Speed

While Houston muddles through its public difficulties, the sheer force of
private prosperity continues to push the city's growth and diversification at
breakneck speed, creating some striking juxtapositions.

In the leafy Montrose section is a bar called Grif's Shellelagh Inn. It is
Houston's best-known sports bar, and on any given afternoon, a crowd of
blue-collar workers, professionals and junior executives will be gathered to
watch the Astros, Oilers or Rockets on television. There, one night recently,
Wesley Callison, a dark-haired 23-year-old in overalls, nursed a beer.

Two weeks before, Mr. Callison had cashed the check for his income tax refund,
put all his belongings in his beat-up Ford pickup truck, and headed south from
his boyhood home near Springfield, Ohio. ''No work up there,'' he explained.

Why Houston?  ''I've just been hearing that it's the main show right now in the
United States,'' he said.

Five Suites, Each $200 a Night

One block from Grif's, another dimension of the new Houston is on display. In an
old mansion, an entrepreneur named Steve Zimmerman has created a tiny luxury
hotel, La Colombe d'Or, on the model of the French auberge. Its five suites are
said to make it the smallest hotel in the country. The suites rent for $200 a
night. The meals are cooked to order. Swiss bankers, British lawyers and others
among the international travelers who routinely visit Houston stay there.  It is
usually full.

Why Houston?  ''A lot of people who came here for the opportunity eventually
wanted what they'd been exposed to in Europe or the Northeast,'' Mr.  Zimmerman
said. ''Everybody told me I was nuts, that Houston wasn't ready for it. But I
felt we were coming of age.'' Furthermore, he said, ''Houston has become one of
the top cities in the world in its openness to new ideas.'' Besides, he
conceded, if the hotel had failed, he could have torn it down and built a
high-rise.

That kind of experimentation, plus that kind of cushion against failure, is
bringing all kinds of new ventures, high and low, to Houston. The commercial
phase of the city's life is in full flush.  And now some citizens are looking
toward the next phase: Important contributions, through the arts and sciences,
to the forward march of civilization.

Hopes Tied to Space Shuttle

Space and medicine, Houston's big drawing cards of the 1960's, may well offer
its best immediate prospects in this regard. The success of the space shuttle in
particular, it is felt here, has revitalized the dream of exploring the cosmos,
and Houston is right in the middle of that effort.

Beyond those two enterprises, Houston is generally recognized as having a long
way to go. Rice University and the University of Houston, while they have come
far, are regarded as hardly likely to challenge Boston or New York or the
California cities for intellectual dominance.

''We're really an urban infant,'' says Barry Kaplan. ''To expect artistic
greatness of a city that's relatively young is really unfair.''

Still, says Chandler Davidson, a sociologist at Rice: ''I think we're finally on
our way. I feel better about the potential of the arts than about the ability to
deal with the physical problems.''

Professor Davidson's mixed feelings might well represent those of the many
Houstonians. ''I have a profound ambivalence about this city,'' he said. He is
angry at what he considers the leaders' insensitivity to the travails of
ordinary people, and about the ''terrible'' poverty quietly endured by thousands
of citizens. He is skeptical of the boosters' unflagging promotion of Houston's
virtues.

''And yet,'' he mused, ''I find the place exciting.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of declining area with modern skyline in
background (page A10)

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 28, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN VOWS U.S. WILL PRESS EFFORT TO BUILD DEFENSES

BYLINE: By HOWELL RAINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1211 words

DATELINE: WEST POINT, N.Y., May 27


President Reagan, asserting that the United States' ''era of self-doubt is
over,'' today promised a continuing defense buildup that would not use treaties
as a substitute for military hardware.

''The argument, if there is any, will be over which weapons, not whether we
should forsake weaponry for treaties and
agreements,'' the President said in a speech to graduates of the United States
Military Academy here.

''Now this is not to say we shouldn't seek treaties and understandings and even
mutual reduction of strategic weapons,'' Mr.  Reagan added. But ''the search for
peace,'' he explained, is easier ''if we maintain our strength while we're
searching.''

Volunteer Army Favored

Mr. Reagan also reaffirmed his commitment to the volunteer Army and proposed to
use higher salaries, rather than the draft, to fill its ranks. The President
said he has instructed Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger to organize a
Defense Manpower Task Force to study a merit pay system for the armed services.

In a speech that combined the tough, martial language of his campaign speeches
with appeals to West Point's tradition, the President underscored his call for
more arms by attacking the Soviet Union as a nation of prisoners and an ''evil
force'' bent on destroying the United States.

Mr. Reagan told the 906 graduates and a crowd of 26,000 that the public's
''spiritual revival'' and a bipartisan patriotic mood in Congress has swept away
''the Vietnam syndrome'' that, for a while, had put military service and
rearmament in ill repute.

New Era Is Foreseen

''The era of self-doubt is over,'' he said. ''We've stopped looking at our warts
and rediscovered how much there is to love in this blessed land.''

''Let friend and foe alike be made aware of the spirit that is sweeping across
our land,'' he added, ''because it means we will meet our responsibility to the
free world.''

Mr. Reagan is the 10th President to address a West Point graduation. His
appearance today was virtually assured by the presence in the class of Michael
Meese, one of 50 honor graduates handed their diplomas directly by the
President. Mr. Meese is the son of Edwin Meese 3d, the White House counselor,
who joined Mr. Reagan on the speaker's platform on the football field at Michie
Stadium.

MacArthur Speech Is Recalled

Speaking at 10 A.M. on a warm, hazy day, Mr. Reagan followed tradition by
reminding the corps of 4,109 cadets in white caps and gray tunics that they
stand in ''the long gray line'' of military leaders trained here. Then the
President referred to perhaps the most famous speech ever delivered at West
Point - Gen. Douglas MacArthur's farewell to the corps.

''No one who ever heard him that day can ever forget his call to duty, honor,
country,'' the President said. ''Nor his declaration that so long as there was
breath in his body he would hear the words: 'the corps, the corps, the corps.'
''

''Do your duty,'' Mr. Reagan charged the graduating class, which included 58
women. ''Keep untarnished your honor and you of the corps will preserve this
country for yourselves, for all of us, for your children and for your children's
children.''

At the end of the ceremony, the graduates, as newly commissioned second
lieutenants, followed tradition, too, by throwing their white saucer-shaped
cadet caps high into the air. At this signal, scores of small children swarmed
onto the athletic field to claim the discarded caps as souvenirs.

As in his 1980 stump speeches, Mr. Reagan softened the hawkish sound of his call
for rearmament by saying that such a rearmament would be used in a defensive way
to provide a ''margin of safety.''

Campaign Line Echoed

''Those shrill voices that would have us believe the defenders of our nation are
somehow the enemies of peace are as false as they are shrill. There have been
four wars in my lifetime,'' Mr. Reagan concluded, echoing exactly a line from
his standard campaign speech, ''and none of them came about because we were too
strong.''

The President cited the shifting of funds from the G.I. Bill to aid civilian
college students as contributing to the military pay squeeze that he says has
driven qualified career people out of the armed forces.

A White House aide said that today's announcement of the Weinberger task force
had made official an Administration review of military pay that has been going
on for some time. Mr. Reagan has already recommended a pay rise for the fiscal
year 1982.

In asserting his intention not to forsake weapons for treaties, Mr. Reagan
praised two books by ''my good friend Laurence Beilenson,'' a Los Angeles
attorney who has written for the conservative journal, National Review. Mr.
Reagan said that one of those books, ''The Treaty Trap,'' ''makes plain that no
nation that placed its faith in parchment or paper, while at the same time it
gave up its protective hardware, ever lasted long enough to write many pages in
history.'' Since taking office, Mr. Reagan has declined to resume negotiations
for a strategic arms limitation treaty with the Russians.

Goodpaster Is Honored

After his speech, the President awarded the Distinguished Service Medal, first
oak leaf cluster, to Lieut. Gen. Andrew J. Goodpaster, the academy's 51st
superintendent. General Goodpaster came out of retirement four years ago to
assume command of the institution at a time when it had suffered a series of
cheating scandals.

Vice President George Bush echoed the President's emphasis on military strength
in an address to the graduates at the Naval Academy in Annapolis, Md., as did
Secretary of Defense Weinberger in speaking to the graduates at the Air Force
Academy in Colorado Springs.

Mr. Bush asserted that the Navy was ''an irreplaceable force in demonstrating
America's determination to defend its vital interests'' but that the fleet had
fallen behind that of the Soviet Union in recent years.

''Let me assure you, however, that our Administration is determined to reverse
that trend so that the United States Navy takes its proper place as second to
none on the face of the earth,'' the Vice President said.

Warning by Weinberger

Mr. Weinberger observed that ''the fragile national consensus'' for more
military strength could be lost ''if we do anything to lose the people's
confidence.'' He said that that might happen ''if we are perceived as wasteful
or unreceptive to new ideas of strategy or tactics.''

The Defense Secretary told the Air Force graduates that the United States ''must
realign our sights to the new geography of conflict while not losing our ability
to deter and to defend in more traditional theaters.'' The first alluded to the
Persian Gulf, the second to Europe.

''As a result of these changes,'' Mr. Weinberger said, ''many of you will spend
a considerable portion of your professional careers thinking about, and even
serving in, parts of the world that once seemed remote and irrelevant to most
Americans.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Pres. Reagan congratulating 2nd Lt. Michael
Meese

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 28, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
TIRELESS TROUBLE-SHOOTER FOR THE U.S.

BYLINE: By IRVIN MOLOTSKY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 805 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 27


When Philip C. Habib was selected to try to head off an Israeli-Syrian clash
over Syria's missiles in Lebanon, White House and State Department officials
were attracted by his past record as a negotiator in one seemingly insoluble
problem after another.

The 61-year-old Mr. Habib is described by his friends and colleagues as tireless
in his pursuit of a solution. Moreover, they point out, he is also a
Lebanese-American, with a heritage that has opened doors for him in the Middle
East.

The special Middle East envoy, who began his mission for President Reagan on May
7 and was called home by the President today for consultations, was a career
State Department officer whose previous diplomatic challenges included South
Korea, Vietnam and Lebanon. At his retirement in 1978 because of a heart
condition, Mr. Habib had risen to Under Secretary of State for Political
Affairs, the highest career position in the Foreign Service.

W. Averell Harriman, who led the United States team at the beginning of the
talks that ended American involvement in the war in Vietnam, commented today
that if anyone could help resolve the current crisis over the Syrian missiles,
it would be Mr. Habib.

This is, Mr. Harriman said, because Mr. Habib ''understands the other man's
point of view.''

Called a Glutton for Work

Mr. Harriman, now an elder statesman of the Democratic Party, called Mr. Habib a
glutton for work. Mr. Habib, he said, would stay up all night to prepare the
responses that Mr. Harriman and his chief deputy, Cyrus R. Vance, would present
to the North Vietnamese in the peace-talk sessions, which were held in Paris.

Mr. Habib joined the Foreign Service in 1949, serving in American embassies in
Ottawa, New Zealand, South Korea and South Vietnam and in two State Department
posts before being named to the American delegation to the Vietnam peace talks
in 1968.

From 1971 to 1974, he was Ambassador to South Korea, and a former aide commented
today that Mr. Habib was the most popular envoy that the United States had sent
to Seoul up to that time.

Mr. Habib would drink makkoli, ''a South Korean fermented rice wine drink that
was just awful to most Americans,'' doing so with Korean journalists and
officials ''just as they did, with his thumb in the tin cup,'' the colleague
said. ''He had a wonderful air. He would make them think he was telling them
something, but he wasn't.''

Others remarked on Mr. Habib's ability to be interviewed by reporters without
giving away anything that might interfere with negotiations that were under way.


Wrote Ph.D. Thesis on Lumber

Philip Charles Habib was born in Brooklyn on Feb. 25, 1920, the son of a
Lebanese grocer in a Jewish neighborhood. He went to school in Bensonhurst and
recalled later that he was a Christian who could be relied on by Orthodox Jews
to turn the lights on and off during the Sabbath, something forbidden to the
devout.

He worked for a time as a shipping clerk in Flatbush but soon moved on to Idaho,
where he graduated from the state university in 1942, and later to the
University of California at Berkeley, where he earned a Ph.D. in 1952 with a
thesis on the economics of lumber, a specialty he never pursued.

Between degrees he served in the Army from 1942 to 1946, rising to the rank of
captain. He is married to the former Marjorie W.  Slightam, and they have two
daughters, Phyllis and Susan.

His State Department posts have included Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for
East Asian and Pacific Affairs from 1967 to 1969 and Assistant Secretary in the
same department from 1974 to 1976.

Called Back From Retirement

''If you are working 9 to 5 and if your wife is contented,'' he is quoted as
having told fellow diplomats, ''you are not doing your job.''

It is such devotion to his work, friends say, that contributed to several heart
attacks and his decision to take early retirement, from which he has been called
back for special assignments like the current one in the Middle East.

Mr. Habib has spent much of his often-interrupted retirement as a senior fellow
at the Hoover Institution of War, Revolution and Peace at Stanford University,
frequently holding foreign policy seminars.

Mr. Vance, who became one of the many Secretaries of State whom Mr. Habib served
and who is now practicing law in New York, remarked that Mr. Habib had continued
on ''a crushing schedule, even after his heart bypass surgery.'' He recalled one
of Mr. Habib's important contributions to the start of the Vietnam peace talks,
when the size and shape of the negotiating table were at issue.

''He assisted on the carpentry,'' Mr. Vance said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 28, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
Mr. Habib Shows The Way

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 895 words


The pause in Philip Habib's Middle East shuttle is a moment to say a word about
a man who earns the diplomatic accolade: professional.  Whether in the end he
will succeed in defusing the Syrian missile crisis is still a question. But we
know enough to see that Ambassador Habib is giving a classic performance in the
difficult role of the mediator.

In the tormented history of relations between Israel and its neighbors there
have been more than a dozen international efforts to mediate this or that
conflict. The problems are so deep that no one could reasonably expect outside
mediators to solve them. But a diplomat deeply familiar with that history
concludes that most of the mediation efforts were flawed - and that Ambassador
Habib is avoiding the mistakes.

First, this diplomat says, international mediators must not be in a hurry - as
many have been. They must have no illusions about instant progress. They must
show perseverance. Mr. Habib is doing exactly that.

Second, the mediator must not try to impose his ideas on the parties. He must
not produce a package ''solution'' put together by politicians far away. The day
of that kind of diplomatic formula ex machina is long gone.

Instead, the mediator's role must be to let proposals emerge in a gradual way
from the conflicting parties. He listens, he reports fully and precisely to each
side what the other says. Then he may suggest: ''I have a feeling from what you
say that you could live with -----; and I think they might just buy it.''

There is a clue indicating that Ambassador Habib is following exactly that
approach. At one point President Assad of Syria complained that Mr. Habib had
not produced an American plan but was merely reporting Israel's ''demands.'' It
is from those ''demands'' and Syria's contrary insistences that Mr. Habib is
evidently weaving his suggestions.

Philip Habib is the ultimate professional in diplomacy: precise, tough,
detached, resilient. I learned that during Vietnam. Whatever substantive
disagreements there were, he earned respect for his cool analytical ability, his
candor.

But no mediator from an outside power can operate effectively unless he has the
support of his principals back home. So full credit is due to President Reagan
and Secretary of State Haig. They understood the dangers that the missile crisis
posed both to peace and to American interests, and they have acted imaginatively
in planning and backing the Habib mission.

The first reaction of Prime Minister Begin, and of some supporters of Israel in
this country, was that Israel could handle the crisis by an air strike on the
SAM missiles that Syria had moved into the Bekaa Valley in eastern Lebanon.

But an Israeli strike, however successful at first, would not solve the problem.
The Syrians would undoubtedly replace the destroyed missiles -and the Russians
would keep supplying more as those were destroyed. The battle might not be
confined to those air strikes.  Syria could take a war of attrition, of
occasional rocket attacks, more easily than Israel.

Politically, moreover, President Assad would stand to gain from actual conflict
with Israel. All Arab states would rush to help his regime, which has stood in
virtual isolation these last few years.  Most menacingly to American interests,
and Israeli, Syrian dependence on the Soviet Union would undoubtedly grow.

All these points have obviously been conveyed to Prime Minister Begin, and have
carried some weight with him. They coincide with what seems to be a shrewd
political calculation on his part: that after his hawkish, even brutal language
lately, he stands to gain now in the election campaign by showing restraint.

What argument can Mr. Habib offer President Assad to move him, similarly, away
from a confrontation that has at least superficial political appeal for him? It
could be that Mr. Assad, an extremely shrewd figure, would rather restore some
ties to the United States than become more dependent on the Russians. And Mr.
Habib has very effectively, with the personal help of President Reagan, played
the card of Saudi Arabia's influence on Syria.

An American principle for solution of the crisis has crept into everyone's
language: a return to the status quo ante. Defining that status is not so easy.
The situation in Lebanon is too complicated, too nasty. But at the least it
gives all sides - Syrians, Israelis, the Phalangist militia that started this
latest escalation in Lebanon - a benchmark for measuring their own risks in
pressing seeming advantage.

Mr. Habib's diplomacy has left a clear sense of what might happen: the
Phalangists give up their destabilizing attempt to seize the crucial town of
Zahle commanding the Bekaa Valley, the Syrians withdraw the forces that punished
the Phalangists, the Israelis stop flying over the Bekaa in return for renewed
Syrian assurance that they can operate against the Palestinians in southern
Lebanon, finally Syria gradually withdraws the missiles: all quiet, without
formal agreement but understood. Will the parties accept Mr. Habib's definition
of their common interest?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 28, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ESSAY;
The New Haynsworth

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 854 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 27


In the summer of 1979, a human rights activist organizing the ''Internatonal
Sakharov Hearings'' asked Senator Edward Kennedy to lend his name and prestige
to the advisory board: such sponsorship would help pressure the Russians to stop
harassing their foremost dissident.

Through an aide, the Senator declined. A staff member, Laurence Horowitz,
explained that Senator Kennedy had just returned from a personal meeting with
Leonid Brezhnev in which he pressed the Soviet leader for the release of 18
Jews. ''We have to try quiet diplomacy,'' the aide said. Later the Senator wrote
to Albert Shanker of the Sakharov committee excusing himself because of the
''press of the legislative schedule.''

In that instance, the ''quiet diplomacy'' (a phrase popularized by Henry
Kissinger) worked; Mr. Kennedy was probably instrumental in the release of one
group of Jews seeking freedom. Yet the Senator, who placed pragmatism before
public support of the greatest symbol of individual opposition to
totalitarianism, is now in the forefront of those denouncing Ernest Lefever, the
nominee for Assistant Secretary of State, who preaches quiet diplomacy in the
securing of human rights in non-Communist states.

What is left of the left has joined in a swelling chorus to savage Mr. Lefever,
a fervent anti-Communist from way back. The old pullout-of-Vietnam crowd - whose
human rights policy has been to remain silent about our enemies and condemn our
friends - sees a prime target in a man who wants to condemn our enemies and
remain silent about our friends.

The ideological opponents of the Reagan administration see in Mr.  Lefever what
many of them saw a dozen years ago in President Nixon's Supreme Court nominee,
Judge Clement Haynsworth - an opportunity to smash the reputation of one man,
and thereby to discredit and weaken the policies of the Administration that
appointed him.

Any method will do. At the moment, a diligent search is on to find any
infraction that might be labeled a conflict of interest; every contribution to
Mr. Lefever's Ethics and Public Policy Center is being sifted; some personal mud
is expected to be slung at him soon.

Up to now, the greatest horror he has perpetrated may have been to suggest that
some of the uproar at his nomination was Communistinspired. Mr. Lefever is
usually fairly careful about this, differentiating the honest skepticism of many
human rights activists from the knee-jerk reaction of the ''hard left'' - and he
has reason to think that if the latter is not Communist-inspired, it is at least
Communist-in-sync.

The Senate Foreign Relations Committee Chairman, Charles Percy, promptly
escalated Mr. Lefever's complaint into a crack-brained Commie-conspiracy theory
and has asked the White House to withdraw the nomination. The Reagan men, who
did not blanch at threats to other nominess from the right wing, are not caving
in on this challenge from the left. (That shows character; remember Carter's
half-hearted appointment of Ted Sorensen to C.I.A.)

Now comes the real heat. Staff investigators are combing the ''Nestle
connection,'' and tell Senators they may be able to come up with a charge of
misleading the Senate or even better. ''Deep trouble'' is the phrase
deep-backgrounded about. The nominee may be called back for more sworn testimony
next week and confronted with the full-court press of hot lights and accusatory
grilling. Something might turn up to ruin him.

I have never been much of a ''quiet diplomacy'' man, and have expressed my own
skepticism at the prospects of success of ''the Lefever nudge'' to authoritarian
allies. But this nominee is being slammed against the wall not for his past
actions or his intellectual or other qualifications; the reason for the tally-ho
mentality is his point of view.

That point of view has just won an election. The winner, Mr.  Reagan, wants
Jeane Kirkpatrick at the United Nations and Mr. Lefever at the State Department
to castigate publicly those Communist states that deny human rights, while
working behind the scenes with friendly dictators to stop torturing their own
people.

The new Reagan approach deserves a chance. The old Carter approach -noisily
punishing only our allies and quietly pursuing detente with Communist
human-rights violators - made matters worse for dissidents around the world. If
''quiet diplomacy'' shows results in South Africa, South Korea and Argentina,
fine - if not, we would expect Mr. Lefever to go public with ferocity and great
credibility.

Self-righteous liberals and doves should beware of Lefever fever - the passion
to ''get us one of them right-wingers.'' In Richmond last month, at the age of
68, Clement Haynsworth Jr. retired as chief judge of the Federal appeals court
to become senior judge and continue a distinguished career on the bench; his
tormentor of 12 years ago, Birch Bayh, is today a politican out of a job.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 28, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MIA DILLON, BOB GUNTON WIN DERWENT AWARDS

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 389 words


Mia Dillon, who won praise for her performances in Beth Henley's ''Crimes of the
Heart'' at the Manhattan Theater Club and in Hugh Leonard's ''Summer'' at the
Hudson Guild, and Bob Gunton, who accomplished the unlikely feat of portraying
21 of the 22 characters in Amlin Gray's ''How I Got That Story'' at the Second
Stage, were named the winners yesterday of the 37th annual Clarence Derwent
Awards.

Miss Dillon will be seen in ''Crimes of the Heart'' again, since the play, which
won the Pulitzer Prize, is slated for a Broadway production in the fall.

Mr. Gunton scored with audiences when he opened on Broadway in 1979 as Juan D.
Peron in ''Evita.'' Going from Broadway to the Second Stage the next year, he
served as the omnibus character called Historical Event in ''How I Got That
Story,'' playing everyone from an orphanage nun to an Army public-relations
chief in a Vietnam-like country.

Intended for Newcomers

The Derwent Awards, $1,000 each plus an engraved crystal egg, are given to ''the
most promising female and male actors on the metropolitan scene.'' They were
established in 1944 by the late Mr.  Derwent, an actor and president of Actors
Equity, to help new talent rather than established stars.

The awards will be presented in a formal ceremony on June 5 at 12:30 P.M. during
the general membership meeting of Actors Equity at the union's headquarters, 165
West 46th Street.

The members of the award committee were Theodore Bikel, president of Actors
Equity; Alfred de Liagre, producer; T.E. Kalem, drama critic of Time Magazine;
Frank Rich, drama critic of The New York Times; Walter Kerr, Sunday drama critic
of The Times; Edith Oliver, drama critic of The New Yorker; Peter Stone,
president of the Dramatists Guild; Douglas Watt, drama critic of The New York
Daily News; Robert Whitehead, producer, and Carl Schaeffer, trustee of the
Derwent Awards.

At the same time, the British Clarence Derwent Awards were announced by Mr.
Schaeffer, a trustee of the awards program in both countries. The British
winners are Sinead Cusack for the role of Celia in ''As You Like It'' and David
Threlfall, who played Smike in ''Nicholas Nickleby.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Mia Dillon photo of Bob Gunton

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 28, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRESIDENT'S COMMENCEMENT ADDRESS AT U.S. MILITARY;
ACADEMY

SECTION: Section D; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 3097 words


Following is a transcript of President Reagan's commencement address yesterday
at the United States Military Academy at West Point, N.Y., as recorded by The
New York Times through the facilities of ABC News:

General Goodpaster, reverend clergy, General Means, the members of the United
States Senate and House of Representatives who are here, the officers on the
platform, you, the families, the friends, the Corps and, above all, this
graduating class:

Nancy and I consider it a great pleasure to be here today to congratulate you,
who have successfully completed your education and training at the United States
Military Academy.

I'm a little self-conscious being introduced as your commander, when I began my
military career as a second lieutenant in the cavalry - the horse cavalry, that
is. I have threatened on occasion that that was the reason I got this job was so
that I could reinstitute that horse cavalry.

But we honor you for the responsibility that you are willing to accept. Today
you become officers in the armed forces of the United States -guardians of
freedom, protectors of our heritage. But, more than that, you become the keepers
of the peace. Those shrill voices that would have us believe the defenders of
our nation are somehow the enemies of peace are as false as they are shrill.

A Chinese philosopher, Sun Tzu, 2,500 years ago said winning a hundred victories
in a hundred battles is not the acme of skill; to subdue the enemy without
fighting is the acme of skill. A truly successful army is one that, because of
its strength and ability and dedication, will not be called upon to fight
because no one will dare to provoke it.

There have been four wars in my lifetime; none of them came about because the
United States was too strong. At the end of World War II, we alone were at the
peak of our military strength, our great industrial capacity was untouched by
war's destruction, and it was then that - in those dark days - that Pope Pius
XII said, ''America has a great genius for great and unselfish deeds. Into the
hands of America God has placed an afflicted mankind.''

Different Drum Beat

We set out to restore the war-ravaged lands of our erstwhile enemies as well as
our friends. We prevented what could have been a retreat into the Dark Ages.
Unfortunately, another great power in the world was marching to a different drum
beat, creating a society in which everything that isn't compulsory is
prohibited. The citizens of that society have little more to say about their
government than a prison inmate has to say about the prison administration.

About 10 days ago, I addressed the graduating class at the University of Notre
Dame. Young men and women of your generation were facing a future in which they
wonder what jobs will be available and who their employers will be. You don't
have that problem. You know what your job will be and your employers will be -
those Notre Dame graduates as well as the rest of your fellow citizens. Now, of
course, they won't be directly and personally in charge - that's left to those
of us who have chosen to represent them, Secretary Marsh who is here, Secretary
of the Army.

But speaking on behalf of all of the people - those employers of yours -may I
say that we intend that you shall find better working conditions, tools adequate
to the task you are expected to perform, and pay somewhat more commensurate with
the responsibilities you assume than has been the case in recent years.

Now you may have heard rumors to the effect that increasing government spending
is not something I'm prone to do, and to tell the truth, there's a certain
substance to those rumors. At the same time, I accept without question the words
of George Washington: To be prepared for war is one of the most effectual means
of preserving the peace.

Now, in spite of some things you may have heard, he didn't tell me that
personally. Still, I'm in full agreement and believe that he did say it. But let
me seriously speak about your employers. We've been through a period in which it
seemed that we, the people, had forgotten that government is a convenience of,
for and by the people. And while we were busy with our own affairs, government
began to grow beyond the consent of the governed. Its growth was nourished by an
ever-larger share of the peoples' earnings that it took by taxation which became
more and more confiscatory.

Neglect of National Security

At the same time, government neglected one of its prime responsibilities,
national security, as it engaged more and more in social experimentation. Our
margin of safety in an increasingly hostile world was allowed to diminish; and,
for a time, it seemed that there was an erosion of respect for the honorable
profession that you have chosen.

All of this has led to an economic crisis - deficit spending, an almost
trillion-dollar debt resulted in runaway inflation, lowered productivity and
great unemployment. And the tools of your trade were given a very low priority.

Well I'm happy to tell you that the people of America have recovered from what
can only be called a temporary aberration. There is a spiritual revival going on
in this country, a hunger on the part of the people to once again be proud of
America, all that it is and all that it can be.

Now, the first step in restoring our margin of safety must be the rejuvenation
of our economy. A vibrant and expanding economy is necessary if we're to have
the research, the technology and the industry and capacity to provide you with
what you need to practice your profession.

Reflecting the will of the people, the Government has returned to our longtime
tradition of bipartisanship - not only where national security is concerned but
with regard to the economic needs of our people. In recent weeks, one could say
there were no Democrats or Republicans in Congress - just Americans.

Yes, there are and will be disagreements. But they are legitimate differences of
opinion on how best to reduce government costs, what tax changes will provide
incentive to increase productivity, and how best to restore our defense
capability. Already the Congress has voted the greatest reduction in the budget
ever attempted, and at the same time has mightily increased the spending for the
military.

The argument, if there is any, will be over which weapons, not whether we should
foresake weaponry for treaties and agreements. My good friend Laurence
Beilenson, authored a book a few years ago called ''The Treaty Trap.'' It was
the result of years of research and it makes plain that no nation that placed
its faith in parchment or paper, while at the same time it gave up its
protective hardware, ever lasted long enough to write many pages in history.

Peace Through Strength

Now this is not to say that we shouldn't seek treaties and understandings and
even mutual reductions of strategic weapons. The search for peace must go on,
but we have a better chance of finding it if we maintain our strength while
we're searching.

Mr. Beilenson has recently authored a new thought-provoking book called
''Survival and Peace in the Nuclear Age.'' But weaponry alone does not mean
security.

Gen. George Patton said, ''Wars may be fought with weapons, but they are won by
men.'' It is the spirit of the men who follow and of the man who leads that
gains the victory. Now today we seek only to make one change in that statement:
it is ''the men and women who follow'' and ''the men and women who lead.''

Now I meant to ask the general before I got up here, and I forgot to do it,
because I've been given two figures. I know that there are either 58 or 68 women
in this graduating class, and I do know that women constitute more than 9
percent of the Army today.

The indispensible factor for protection for all that we hold dear is leadership
- a leadership of you and young men and women like you that you offer to this
nation. You will be the individuals who most inspire and lead those who are
called upon to do the hard, and sometimes, thankless job.

PICK UP FIRST ADD REAGAN TEXT

There is a writer, James Warner Bellah, sometimes called our Rudyard Kipling
because of his stories of our Army on the frontier as we pushed westward, and in
one of his stories he described a poignant scene: A commanding officer lay dying
on the field of battle. As he passed the command to a younger officer, he said,
''There may be only one time in your life when your country will call upon you
and you will be the only one who can do the nasty job that has to be done. Do it
or forever after there will be the taste of ashes in your mouth.''

A torch of leadership is being handed to you in this commencement ceremony
today, a ceremony that in all this land is duplicated only in the several other
service academies.

I know that you've learned the principles of leadership here in this historic
place. You know that it requires one to command respect of those who follow by
deserving that respect. By dedication and total commitment to the defense of our
country and all that it represents, you've had an excellent example to follow -
General Goodpaster, who is, as I know, an honorary member of your graduating
class now.

Tribute to Goodpaster

He arrived as Superintendent almost at the same time as you enrolled as plebes,
and he retires now as you graduate. He served his country well, retired as a
four-star general, but was willing to leave retirement and give up a star to
return to West Point.

You're part of a great tradition. It's over-used, I know, but the term ''the
long gray line'' is descriptive of the tradition of which you are now a part. In
that line have been men who turned defeat into victory, who stood in the breach
til citizen armies could be raised.

For a time, West Point was the nation's principal source of professionally
trained engineers. The West was explored and mapped by members of the long gray
line. A West Point graduate helped design the Panama Canal and the Holland
Tunnel. Two were Presidents. Two are presently Cabinet members in this
Administration. Others have been giants of commerce and industry - Henry du
Pont, class of 1833; Robert E. Wood, class of 1900.

Dwight Eisenhower said, ''Even in the event of a complete disarmament there is a
role for West Point. Even if we just turned our graduates back into the body
politic, it would be good. The graduates are trained people who understand their
duty and who do it.''

Six of the astronauts were graduates of West Point, among them the first man to
walk in space, Col. Edward White who then lost his life in 1967 in a tragic fire
that swept the Apollo spacecraft.

But let us look ahead to the force of which you will be an important and
significant part. I doubt there will be many surprises because, in a way, you've
been ''Army'' for the last four years.  There's little chance that you'll be
like that recruit in World War II, who asked in some bewilderment why the Army
did certain things in the way that it did. A longtime regular Army sergeant
said, ''Well, let me explain it to you, son. If you were in charge of a brand
new country and in creating an army for that country you finally got a division
organized, what would you call it?'' And the recruit said, ''Well, I guess I'd
call it the First Division.'' Well, he said, ''In the United States Army when
they did that, they called it the Second Division.'' And he said, ''When you
understand that, you'll know everything about the Army and why it does things.''


Tradition of Civilian Volunteers

But our country has a unique tradition among the nations. Unlike the other
powers with armies of conscripts, our military was always composed of citizen
volunteers. In times past, the standing army was a skeleton force that expanded
in wartime to absorb the draftees, the conscripts. We also counted on a National
Guard, a trained reserve to bridge the period when the draftees were undergoing
basic training.  We must still have that reserve, and we're taking steps to
upgrade it to a state of immediate readiness.

We once had the luxury of time provided by the two great oceans, a luxury we no
longer have. At the end of World War II, we continued the draft into peacetime
even though the peacetime draft was counter to American tradition. We had always
believed that only in the most severe national emergency did a government have a
claim to mandatory service of its younger citizens.

But we returned to that tradition in 1973, a volunteer military.  Some
proclaimed it a failure from the start. I'm not going to take your time by
reciting the pros and cons of a debate which still goes on, except to say that
some express the belief that patriotism alone should be cause enough to serve.

Well, George Washington - to quote him again - once said of patriotism, ''It
must be aided by a prospective interest or some reward. For a time, it may of
itself push men to action, to bear much, to encounter difficulties. But it will
not endure unassisted by interest.''

Now it's true that patriotism can't be bought; neither can it be coerced. You
here today are living proof of that. Obviously, you did not choose this
profession with the thought of making a fortune.  Samuel Johnson, 200 years ago
said, ''An officer is much more respected than any other man who has so little
money.''

Young men and women volunteered for duty in our armed forces and then found that
too much of their reward was expected to be patriotism. And in recent years,
even here they were shortchanged. In much of the 70's, there was a widespread
lack of respect for the uniform born perhaps of what has been called the Vietnam
syndrome.  The result was inevitable: the falloff of enlistments, but even
worse, a drop in re-enlistment resulting in a great loss of experienced
noncommissioned officers. A cry for a draft arose to a crescendo. Well, I still
believe there is another way, one more in keeping with our system of rewarding
those who work and serve on a scale commensurate with what we ask of them.

The Price of Sacrifice

I don't suppose we could put an exact price on the sacrifice that we ask of
those who guarantee our safety, but one thing is certain: They deserve better
than a bare subsistence level.

I have asked Secretary of Defense Weinberger to form a Defense Manpower Task
Force to review the entire military manpower question and to make proposals
which will increase the effectiveness of the active and reserve all-volunteer
forces.

Last year's pay increase was a step in the right direction, but we're asking for
another one in the fiscal year that begins Oct. 1.  We seek to channel pay
increases and bonuses to those in the most needed skill areas. We're studying
proposals for a merit pay system and increased flexibility in personnel
practices.

A few years ago, the G.I. Bill was eliminated and replaced with a program having
fewer benefits. At the same time, we were expanding Federal aid to college
students. The Federal Government, in effect, provided more benefits to those who
were not serving their country and reduced them for those who were. The Defense
Manpower Task Force will be studying ways in which we can make enlistment more
attractive for the kind of young people we need in our military forces.

Already enlistments are up and so are re-enlistments. And, surprisingly - or
maybe we shouldn't be surprised - many who have already left the service are now
returning. There has also been a decided rise in quality as measured by
intellectual and testing attainment.

Something other than pay and benefits contributed to this. I mentioned earlier
the new spirit that is abroad in our land.  The era of self-doubt is over. We've
stopped looking at our warts and rediscovered how much there is to love in this
blessed land. All of us together, and you very definitely in the posts you go
to, can help restore the sense of pride our men and women are entitled to have
in wearing the uniform.

Let friend and foe alike be made aware of the spirit that is sweeping across our
land, because it means we will meet our responsibilities to the free world. Very
much a part of this new spirit is patriotism, and with that goes a heartfelt
appreciation for the sacrifices of those in uniform.

Heritage at West Point

You are a prime ingredient that keeps us free, that protects all we cherish and
hold dear. You can transmit the historic heritage which is in the very air of
West Point. The first Purple Heart medal was awarded here. It was the first
decoration ever given to an enlisted man. At Trophy Point, I'm told there are
links of a great chain that was forged and stretched across the Hudson to
prevent the British fleet from penetrating further into the valley.

Today, you are that chain, holding back an evil force that would extinguish the
light we've been tending for 6,000 years.  Now before I finish, there is one
thing that I should say in behalf of you directly, and that is, in keeping with
what I understand is a tradition, I have asked the Superintendent to grant an
amnesty. I knew I should have saved that for the last, but seriously, I wanted
to close with some other remarks.

Almost two decades ago, in the sunset of his life, a West Point graduate,
Douglas MacArthur, returned to this place to address the cadet corps. No one who
ever heard him that day can ever forget his call to duty, honor, country. Nor
his declaration that so long as there was breath in his body he would hear the
words, ''The Corps, the Corps, the Corps.''

Do your duty. Keep untarnished your honor, and you of the corps will preserve
this country for yourselves, for all of us, for your children, and for your
children's children. God bless you and keep you.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of end of graduation, where cadets threw their
hats into the air

TYPE: text

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 29, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE NATIONAL MOOD;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1053 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 28


In earlier Presidencies, Franklin D.  Roosevelt, John F. Kennedy and Dwight D.
Eisenhower turned their own infectious personal optimism into an important
political asset, and now Ronald Reagan follows in that tradition.

With his genial manner, his jaunty smile and his robust recovery from the
shooting nearly two months ago, Mr. Reagan has managed to tap and nurture a
budding mood of national self-confidence even before his major policies have had
enough time to achieve real practical impact or to be properly tested.

At West Point yesterday his topic was national defense. Along with encouragement
for the home front, the President offered implied warnings for adversaries
abroad that ''a new spirit'' had risen in the land that could bring new American
assertiveness abroad in meeting ''our responsibilities to the free world.''

Where Jimmy Carter, in a remarkably self-critical speech in July 1979, lamented
''the crisis of the American spirit,'' Mr. Reagan was deliberately upbeat.
''There is a spiritual revival going on in this country,'' he said. ''The era of
self-doubt is over.''

Delay on Tangible Evidence

Yet, tacitly, Mr. Reagan seemed to acknowledge that whatever shift had occurred
in his short tenure was more psychological than tangible. For it will take
several years for the Reagan increases in military spending to work through the
pipeline and produce the weapons and the trained manpower that would actually
improve American capabilities around the globe.

The Reagan military budget, for example, would allow the Pentagon to obligate
nearly $33 billion more in 1981 and 1982 than Mr. Carter proposed, but actual
spending would rise less than $6 billion in those two years because of the time
lag in gearing up assembly lines.

With that reality in mind, Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger has emphasized
that the United States does not need to have all the new weapons in hand before
starting arms control negotiations but merely to show the Soviet Union that
America is engaged in a big military buildup. That was the message the President
seemed intent on conveying at West Point.

The new air of optimism that he mentioned has been noted by others. At the
National Press Club last week, West German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt said that
in his view ''the upswing in self-assuredness of the American nation will play a
greater role in the recovery of your economy than all the economic measures.''

Polls Find Shift in Mood

Pollsters, too, have detected a favorable shift in the public mood over the last
several months. A New York Times/CBS News Poll published on April 30 showed that
twice as many people expected to be better off financially a year from now than
worse off, whereas in December the optimists and pessimists were equal.

Last Monday, Time magazine published a poll by Yankelovich, Skelly & White Inc.
that found that 51 percent of the public believed things were going well in the
country, up from 26 percent in January and the first time since October 1978
that a majority had felt so positively.

''It would be an overstatement to claim that President Reagan is running the
politics of joy,'' said Richard Wirthlin, the President's own pollster. ''But to
date he has been practicing the politics of hope and there's no doubt in my mind
that the public is more hopeful now than it was last January.''

Mr. Wirthlin cited one of his own findings that in June 1980 the public felt by
roughly 4 to 1 that the country had ''pretty seriously gotten off on the wrong
track,'' whereas earlier this month a new Wirthlin survey found 48 percent
saying the country was ''going in the right direction'' and only 42 percent
thought it was on the wrong track.

Caddell Finds Optimism Up

Even Patrick Caddell, former President Carter's pollster, said that his own
national indexes of long-term optimism about the country's future had shown an
upward jump from late 1980 to this spring.

In part, the shifting mood seems to hinge on Mr. Reagan's policies and his knack
for spreading optimism, and in part it may spring from events beyond his doing.
For as other politicians, and even his own aides, point out, he has been lucky.
In his first four months, he has not had to contend with any Bay of Pigs,
Vietnam War or seizure of hostages in Iran, and the absence of major foreign
crises has given the nation a respite.

On inflation, Mr. Reagan has been the beneficiary of a world oil glut that has
forced foreign exporters to hold prices level or even drop them. In addition,
food prices have been climbing at a slower rate lately. Thus, even before the
Reagan economic program is enacted, the Consumer Price Index, the most widely
watched barometer on inflation, rose last month at an annual rate of only 4.8
percent, a substantial decrease.

At West Point, too, Mr. Reagan spoke of the end of ''the Vietnam syndrome'' and
the sense of American retreat abroad. But by most accounts that shift and the
trend toward higher defense spending came right after the Soviet military
intervention in Afghanistan in December 1979 under President Carter.

Potential Trouble Spots

There are, nevertheless, a few omens that President Reagan does not have a blank
check on public confidence, especially in the arena of American involvement
abroad. Opinion polls show substantial majorities opposed to his dispatch of
more American military advisers to El Salvador. Both Senate and House committees
have made further aid conditional on ''significant progress'' on human rights
and economic and political reform.

On the economy, Wall Street markets continue to show skepticism toward the
President's economic program, a point that has chafed Mr.  Reagan enough for him
to complain today that he had ''never found Wall Street a source of good
economic advice.''

Finally, in the rhythm of American politics, an upsurge in public confidence
often accompanies the arrival of a new national leader. It occurred, though less
dramatically, when Jimmy Carter took over four years ago although it faded
sharply later in his tenure.

''There's certainly positive movement in public attitudes,'' observed Mr.
Caddell. ''Against the historical pattern it isn't all that extreme, and there's
a real question of whether it is sustained. That's the issue - will it sustain
itself?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 29, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PARENTS OF A MISSING FLIER REFUSING TO LET CASE REST

BYLINE: By LESLIE BENNETTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 863 words

DATELINE: NEWBURGH, N.Y.


An American flag waves above the front lawn in the breeze. Inside the modest
house, the floors are crowded with filing cabinets and cartons bulging with
photocopies of documents obtained under the Freedom of Information Act from the
Central Intelligence Agency and the Departments of State and Defense.

One wall bears a huge map of Southeast Asia, with scattered sites circled in red
ink. Aging photographs of a dark-eyed and short-haired young man in uniform
stare solemnly from tabletops and mantels.

''Nick was 38 on May 18,'' said Gladys Brooks, her tone conversational and
matter-of-fact, but she and her husband, George, have not seen their son in more
than 11 years. His bomber was shot down over Laos in January 1970, and aside
from one early report - that Lieut. Nicholas Brooks had survived the crash, had
been captured and escaped twice -he has not been heard from since.

But Mr. and Mrs. Brooks believe that he may be alive in one of those places
ringed with red ink on the map, held with other American soldiers in Communist
camps. For 11 years, the Brookses and hundreds of other members of the National
League of Families of American Prisoners and Missing in Action in Southeast Asia
have waited and hoped. They have also worked to keep the issue of their lost
loved ones from vanishing with other memories of the Vietnam War that many
prefer to forget.

'The Deep-Freeze Treatment'

In the early years, the Brookses recall, they were honored at the White House,
serenaded with stirring renditions of ''The Impossible Dream'' and lauded by the
President and Secretary of State for their patriotism. But when the war ended
for the United States in 1973, Mrs. Brooks said bitterly: ''All the doors were
closed. It was the deep-freeze treatment. This is such a cover-up it makes
Watergate look like child's play.''

''The Government doesn't have the solution, so they don't want to make it known
that there is a problem,'' Mr. Brooks said. ''It is too much trouble to try to
get these men out, it's not politically feasible, so they just want to submerge
the whole thing and wipe the slate clean.''

Two years ago, the Government changed Lieutenant Brooks's status from ''missing
in action'' to ''presumed killed in action,'' although there was no new evidence
concerning his fate. Until last week, the Brookses and many of the other
families of the missing say, the Government had not cooperated with their
attempts to discover what happened to the more than 2,500 American servicemen
still unaccounted for in Southeast Asia.

But last week, a group of C.I.A.-trained Laotians were sent on a secret mission
into Laos to investigate evidence from spy satellite photographs and other
sources that Americans might be held in a Laotian prison camp. After photographs
taken by the group were examined by Government photo interpreters, Henry Catto,
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs, announced that ''absolutely
no credible evidence of the existence of any M.I.A.'s'' had been found.

Began Inquiry on Own

''We know it's a lie, but there isn't a damned thing we can do about it,'' said
Mr. Brooks, who is 62 and an engineer.  Three years ago, frustrated by the
Government's inaction, the Brookses began their own investigation. They placed
advertisements in Vietnamese and Laotian-language publications around the world
requesting that refugees with any information about American prisoners contact
them.

The letters have flooded in ever since, with more than 1,000 reports of various
kinds, including 317 purported eyewitness sightings of American prisoners. Some
of the reports are as recent as early this year, and the stories told by the
refugees are chilling.

A Laotian wrote that three Americans had been held prisoner in a cave in Laos:
''They were arrested by the Communists and were kept there. One American was
captured 12 or 13 years ago.'' Another Laotian told of 50 Americans ''guarded by
the Lao Communist military'' and said that ''sixteen persons were serious sick
and the others are sick.''

'We're Pragmatic People'

Such reports have spurred the Brookses to persevere. They spend all their free
time - nights, weekends ''and I haven't had a vacation in 11 years,'' said Mr.
Brooks - analyzing the flow of information, cataloging the reports and poring
over the documents they have obtained from the Government.

''Our interest is in the whole group of men, not just our son,'' said Mr.
Brooks, a World War II Navy veteran who was missing in action after his ship was
torpedoed in the Mediterranean. ''We're pragmatic people. We know people get
killed in wars. But it's the not knowing that hurts. I'm not saying my son is
alive. What I'm saying is that I don't know that he's dead. We have proven
beyond a shadow of a doubt that Americans are still being held over there. But
it just seems like nobody gives a damn.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Lieut.Nicholas Brooks,with parents George and
Gladys

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 29, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

At the Movies;
Good days in the life of a screenwriter.

BYLINE: By Chris Chase

SECTION: Section C; Page 8, Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1633 words


ON May 20, John Guare, the playwright, married Adele Chatfield-Taylor, picked up
$1,000 and a medal - the Award of Merit - from the American Academy and
Institute of Arts and Letters, and flew away for a monthlong holiday in Britain.

Lately, the sun has been shining on Mr. Guare. First, he made enough money from
his screenplay for ''Atlantic City'' to buy back the movie rights to his play
''House of Blue Leaves'' from Carlo Ponti. ''It's like it's been freed from
purdah,'' he says.

Then news of the Award of Merit arrived, out of the blue. ''It's one of those
days when you're cranky, and you go to the mailbox, and there's stuff from Con
Ed and the phone company, and you open a letter and you say: 'Why is John Updike
writing to me? Is he turning off my electricity? What is this?''

Mr. Guare, a large, affable man, has never had to make a living any way except
by writing. It all began when he was 11 years old. He and a friend called Life
magazine, and said, ''There are two boys putting on a play in a garage - '' Life
magazine hung up on them. So they called Newsday and tried again. ''There are
two boys who are putting on a play in a garage and giving all the money to
orphans.''

''Oh yeah?'' said the guy at Newsday. ''And the last day of the run,'' says Mr.
Guare, ''this black limo pulls up, and out come these photographers, and in July
of 1949, Newsday ran this piece about the 11-year-old playwright.''

Next year for his birthday, Mr. Guare's father gave him a typewriter he still
uses.  After Yale University and a hitch in the Army, Mr. Guare went to
California, because he had an uncle who worked at M-G-M. He also had an aunt who
didn't want him working at M-G-M. ''It has nothing to do with writing,'' she
said, ''or what you've been going to school for.'' She offered him money to
travel.

''It was fantastic,'' he says. ''I went to Egypt. I came back to New York. I
wrote. I had plays done at the Caffe Cino. When the O'Neill Center, in
Waterford, Conn., started, I was one of the first group picked to go there, and
later I got a grant to work at Yale.''

''Muzeeka,'' ''House of Blue Leaves,'' ''Rich and Famous,'' ''Marco Polo Sings a
Solo,'' ''Landscape of the Body,'' ''Bosoms and Neglect'' - Mr. Guare kept the
plays coming, and sometimes a movie person would think he saw a picture in one
of them. Sam Spiegel bought ''Landscape of the Body.'' Mr. Guare was impressed
with Mr.  Spiegel. ''His sense of narrative is remarkable. We worked every day
for 14 months. When we were finished, Sam said: 'You know, you did everything I
asked you to do. The screenplay is exactly what I wanted. The only problem is,
if we ever made this picture, it's so depressing, the only place we could open
it is Jonestown.''

When Louis Malle called Mr. Guare about a collaboration - ''He had a production
all set to go and nothing to film'' - Mr. Guare suggested Atlantic City as a
milieu.

''When Louis was a kid, he worked for Cousteau,'' Mr. Guare says.  ''His
training is to go under the water and see what happens. He likes alien
territory, and he uses the camera like a pickax. We went to Atlantic City, and
it seemed an eminently pickaxable place. All these people coming from Las Vegas,
pushing other people out, everything being torn down. The story just manifested
itself. About five weeks later, we had a script, and we sent it to Burt
Lancaster.''

Mr. Guare has a couple of new plays that will be done after he comes home from
his vacation, whether on or Off Broadway, he doesn't yet know. And he and Mr.
Malle want to work together again. It is, says Mr. Guare, a very nice time for
him.

''Sometimes you go into a period where you get rotten reviews, and you fail, and
that's the reality. But I'm realizing that this is equally real. So I'm storing
it up like nuts for a long winter.''

On Monday, ''Cutter's Way'' will open in Seattle. This wouldn't be surprising,
except that two months ago, ''Cutter's Way,'' then called ''Cutter and Bone,''
was left for dead. The New York Times and Variety hadn't admired it, and the
picture closed almost before it had opened. Then other reviews started coming
in. One critic called it a ''small but hauntingly powerful piece of work'' and
said it deserved ''more than a quick trip to the graveyard.'' Less than a month
later, the movie - still called ''Cutter and Bone'' - was named best feature
film at the Houston International Film Festival, and Ivan Passer was named best
director.

The Czechoslovak-born Mr. Passer says that when his picture opened, ''Heaven's
Gate'' had just bombed, and people were being dismissed by United Artists, ''and
everybody who stayed there was in hysterics that they were going to get fired,
and I got a bad review. So after four days, United Artists took the film out of
the theaters. They took a baby that was just born and threw it on the street in
cold weather, and the critics picked it up and warmed it, and it's alive.''

The baby's name change doesn't bother Mr. Passer - ''People were not happy with
the title. They said it sounded like two surgeons'' - and after it opens in
Seattle, ''Cutter's Way'' will probably go to Washington and Los Angeles, and
then back to New York.

The picture deals in part with the aftermath of the Vietnam war, but Mr. Passer
doesn't believe you need to be American to understand the scars left by that
conflict. ''All Europeans know about war,'' he says. ''I have seen two
invasions, revolutions, people wounded psychologically, spiritually,
physically.''

Mr. Passer and his longtime friend Milos Forman (they were in boarding school
together, and Mr. Passer later wrote the screenplays for ''Loves of a Blonde''
and ''The Firemen's Ball,'' directed by Mr. Forman) fled Czechoslovakia after
the Russians came.

''I was trying to escape since I was 14,'' Mr. Passer says. ''I trained to be a
glider pilot, thinking I would be able to glide out, but there were always
western winds. I would have ended up in Russia somewhere.''

At glider school, a man was killed trying to land a damaged plane, and the
instructor told the students it was because he was trying to do something he had
always done. ''Sometimes,'' the instructor continued, ''you have to close your
eyes and jump, do something you've never done before.''

''When the invasion happened,'' Mr. Passer says, ''I remembered that. And I
jumped.'' He and Mr. Forman informed a border guard that they were going to
Vienna and would be back in two days. ''He recognized Milos,'' Mr.  Passer says,
''and he began to talk about films. And when he told us goodbye, he used a Czech
phrase that meant, 'I will never see you again.' ''

When Mr. Forman and Mr. Passer came to America, Mr. Passer had $250 and no
English. After their first New York party, Mr. Forman asked him what an
attractive woman had been saying to him. Mr. Passer says he answered, ''What the
hell I know?''

Shortly thereafter, he learned English. ''In three days. From a New York lady.
This lady came to visit Milos. He was leaving for San Francisco - he already had
his coat on. And me being European, I said to her, 'Can I make you a coffee?'
She said O.K. And she began to talk. I pretended to understand. And then it got
dark, and I cooked a little dinner. And the night went by, and in the morning,
she made breakfast. I had a meeting at 10 o'clock with a Czech writer, and he
came and said: 'Oh, I see you have company. I'll come tomorrow, 10 o'clock.' And
he left.

''Then the lady and I went for lunch. And the afternoon went by, and she kept
talking. We had dinner, and she talked. Next morning, this friend of mine came
at 10 o'clock, and I was still sitting at the same table with this lady. My
friend was stunned, and he said, 'All right, I'll come tomorrow at 10 o'clock.'

''The same thing happened another day. I never slept. That lady and I fell in
love. And the third day, I began to understand English. My friend came the third
time at 10 o'clock, and we were still sitting in the same place, and he
stuttered something and went away. I have never seen him since.

''He was gone. And I spoke English.'' Sometimes Mr. Passer wishes you could make
a film in three days.  ''It takes four years. Two years you are looking for a
film, two years you are making it. I worry that life is too short to make films.
But then I see a good film like 'Ragtime,' which Milos has just made, and I am
so moved, I have to walk out so nobody can see I am crying, and I say, damn, he
did it again.''

Mr. Passer himself may have done it again, if ''Cutter's Way'' takes off this
time around. ''They tell me I have a hit on my hands,'' he says. ''I believe it
when I see it. But I'm really pleased.''

Mayor Koch has proclaimed Monday to June 6 as Motion Picture and Television
Week, and for four days, starting next Friday, the Museum of Modern Art will
show films that date from the early days of the New York movie industry. You can
see pictures like ''Coney Island at Night,'' a 1905 silent, which runs two
minutes. ... Claudia Weill, director of ''Girlfriends'' and ''It's My Turn,''
will be the speaker at the annual American Film Festival luncheon next Wednesday
at the Grand Hyatt. For information about the festival, which runs Monday
through next Friday, call 246-4533.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of John Guare

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 30, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI REPORTS FINDING THE REMAINS OF 3 U.S. AIRMEN

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 464 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, May 29


Vietnam announced today that it had found the remains of three United States
airmen missing since the Vietnam War.

Vu Hoang, director of the Vietnamese office in charge of finding missing
American servicemen, said the remains of the three airmen would be turned over
to American officials as soon as forensic specialists had completed
identification. ''The Vietnamese Government, prompted by good will and a
humanitarian spirit, shall continue the search process,'' he said.

The announcement was made during a visit by a three-member delegation from the
United States Joint Casualty Resolution Center, based in Hawaii.

''We're pretty happy,'' said Lieut. Col. Joe Harvey, commander of the center,
adding that arrangements for the transfer of the remains would be worked out
with the Vietnamese Embassy in Bangkok, Thailand.

2,500 Listed as Missing

Both sides refused to reveal the names of the three airman, among some 2,500
American servicemen still listed as missing in Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia.

The Vietnamese announcement came less than a month after news reports disclosed
that the United States had sent a secret reconnaissance team into Laos to seek
evidence of American prisoners of war in jungle camps there. The team returned
with no evidence that any Americans were still being held prisoner.

''I have said many times and I reiterate, there are no American P.O.W.'s alive
in Vietnam, and all remains discovered have been handed over to the American
side,'' Mr. Hoang said. ''We have no interest to keep them.''

In October a visiting American group was told that the Vietnamese had scaled
down their search for Americans missing in action. At that time Hanoi also
turned down a United States request for regular meetings between the Casualty
Resolution Center and its Vietnamese counterpart.

----

Action Called Insulting

WASHINGTON, May 29 (UPI) - Ann Griffiths, executive director of National League
of Families of Prisoners and Missing in Southeast Asia, said today that if the
Vietnamese intended to return the remains of only three Americans, ''it's a
deliberate slap in the face.''

''They are aware our Government possesses a substantial amount of information
that has been substantiated by the Defense Intelligence Agency that Vietnam is
withholding the remains of over 400 American servicemen,'' she said. ''This is
another one of their dribbling out the remains of a couple of people because
they must think it suits their purposes. It's really insulting.

''It, of course, will ease the uncertainty for three of the families,'' she
said. ''Of course, we are happy for the three families, if indeed the Vietnamese
follow through and return them. As for the overall picture, it's disgusting.
It's another indication of how they lie.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 30, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
SATURDAY, MAY 30, 1981

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 906 words


International
A negotiated end to the Middle East crisis is ''achievable,'' said Philip C.
Habib, President Reagan's special envoy, on his return from three weeks of
negotiations in the Middle East. But he cautioned Syria and Israel against
building up combat forces near the Lebanese border. Mr. Habib said he would
return to the region next week. (Page 1, Col.1.)
Heavy artillery and rocket exchanges erupted between Lebanese Christian
militiamen in Zahle, 30 miles east of Beirut, and Syrian forces, sending the
town's 200,000 people back to underground bomb shelters. (1:2.)
China declared three days of mourning after the death of Soong Chingling, the
widow of Sun Yat-sen, who overthrew the Manchu Dynasty and founded the Chinese
Republic. Miss Soong, who was 90 years old, died of leukemia. A state funeral
has been set for June 3. (1:1-2.)
The United States will aid South Africa in ending its ''polecat status'' in the
world if it works to achieve a settlement for the independence of South-West
Africa that would be internationally acceptable, according to documents
purported to be State Department papers. (4:3-4.)
The remains of three airmen found in Vietnam will be returned to the United
States. The men, who have not been identified, were among some 2,500 servicemen
still listed as missing in Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia. (24:1-5.)
The selection of Joseph Reed Jr. as Ambassador to Morocco provides insight into
the selection of ambassadors. In theory, the names of prospective ambassadors
are passed on to President Reagan only after screening by committees. The
recommendation of Mr. Reed, however, was made by Michael K. Deaver, the White
House deputy chief of staff, who added Mr. Reed's name to a list of
recommendations. (2:3-6.)
National
President Reagan has invited Democratic leaders to the White House on Monday for
a ''last chance'' meeting on a tax compromise before deciding on whether to
start a national publicity campaign to force them to accept his plan to cut
income taxes. (1:6.)
An Air Force officer has been charged with making unauthorized visits to the
Soviet Embassy in Washington without telling his superiors, Air Force officials
said. The officer, Lieut. Christopher M. Cooke, was a member of the
missile-launching crew for the Titan, part of the nation's intercontinental
ballistic missile system. (1:3.)
A plan to double the immigration limit on Mexicans and Canadians to 40,000
annually has been proposed by a Cabinet-level advisory committee. The panel, in
a report that will be sent to President Reagan soon, said that the proposed
increase ''recognizes the unique relationship with our neighbors'' and
''provides a means for reducing pressures for illegal immigration from Mexico.''
(7:1-2.)
Success of wines is producing growth pains for towns in California's lush Napa
Valley, the center of the state's wine growing region. In St. Helena, the City
Council has approved a ban on the construction of new buildings for at least a
year because the city is running out of sewer capacity. And in the town of
Calistoga, officials warn that the community may run out of water by November.
(7:1-5.)
The leaders of striking miners approved a second proposed agreement to end the
coal strike, which has last 64 days. The 36-to-2 vote by the union's bargaining
council, then made unanimous, seemed to give the pact a better chance of
ratification by the rank and file, which overwhelmingly rejected an earlier
settlement. (1:5.)
The 1982 version of a world's fair is scheduled to open May 1 of next year in
Knoxville, Tenn. However, questions remain about the size of it, the quality of
the exhibits, the people who stand to benefit from it and whether the taxpayers,
whose $ 30 million in city-backed bonds were used to build the exhibition hall
and office tower, will be left holding the bag. (7:2-6.)
Metropolitan
Top officials of three city hospitals are being replaced, city officials said.
Stanley Brezenoff, the chairman of the Health and Hospitals Corporation,
reportedly has asked Inder Persaud of Cumberland to take early retirement. The
planned replacement of Marvin Durrell of Elmhurst and Dr. Anthony Summers of
Harlem Hospital followed disclosure of what officials called improprieties on
their part. (1:3-4.)
Immediate action to rebuild the transit system and forestall fare increases was
called for by legislative leaders, who are frustrated by the delay in proposals
from Governor Carey's transit advisory panel. (25:5-6.)
The number of blacks in Harlem has decreased sharply in the last decade, but the
black population in many other Manhattan neighborhoods has increased, 1980
census figures show. Government and community leaders have offered a variety of
reasons for the population shift, but the condition and availability of housing
seem to be the most significant. (27:1-3.)
A police officer has been indicted by a Bronx grand jury for criminally
negligent homicide in the shooting last March of a Yonkers man in Van Cortland
Park. The officer, William M. Baker, who was off duty at the time, has
maintained that he shot the 22-year-old man in self-defense. (27:6.)

Business Digest, Page 29

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

POLICY THAT LIMITS INDOCHINA REFUGEES IS REVERSED BY U.S.

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 360 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 30


At the urging of Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr., Attorney General
William French Smith has reversed a new policy that the State Department
asserted was threatening to undercut the six-year program of admitting
Indochinese refugees to this country.

According to State Department officials, the decision by Mr. Smith, issued in a
letter to Mr. Haig dated May 20, may have come just in time to help persuade
Thailand to drop its unpublicized plans to repatriate forcibly all the 140,000
Cambodian refugees in Thailand and to stop receiving new ''boat people'' from
Vietnam.

Thailand, as of April 30, had 257,346 Indochinese refugees in camps in its
territory. There were reports in the Thai press in recent weeks that decisions
had been taken secretly by the Thai leadership to close the country to refugees.
The Thai news accounts caused high-level concern here because they were regarded
as efforts by the Thai leadership to put pressure on the United States to step
up the flow of refugees to this country.

Meetings Held in Bangkok

State Department officials said that after conversations in Bangkok last week
with Ambassador Morton I. Abramowitz and with United Nations officials, the Thai
authorities said they would continue to accept the refugees.

Officials in Washington said they believed that the decision by Mr. Smith to
accept Mr. Haig's strongly stated arguments played a role in persuading the
Thais that the slowdown in bringing Indochinese refugees from Thailand to this
country would end. The slowdown was caused in part by the new policy followed by
the Immigration and Naturalization Service, they said.

In carrying out a new immigration law passed last year, immigration officers,
who are under the Justice Department's overall supervision, had been
''deferring'' as many as 16 percent of the refugees interviewed in Thailand and
elsewhere in Southeast Asia for entry to the United States.

The immigration officers had been categorizing as ''deferred'' people who they
ruled were not necessarily political

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER: NEW CAST FOR 'THAT STORY' AT THE FOLGER

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 51, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 925 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


When Amlin Gray's ''How I Got That Story'' was produced in New York last
December by the Second Stage, the play was, perhaps, somewhat overshadowed by
its marathon star turn.  ''Story'' is about a naive reporter who travels to
cover a war in mythical Amboland (read Vietnam), and Bob Gunton, cast as the
Historical Event, enacted all 21 characters the reporter meets on his
assignment. By effortlessly assuming identities ranging from American pilots to
Asian women, Mr. Gunton scored a dazzling personal triumph. Last week, he
received the Clarence Derwent Award for his performance.

Now, courtesy of the Folger Theater Group, one has a chance to see how Mr.
Gray's play holds up without its New York star. Carole Rothman, who staged the
Second Stage version, has remounted ''How I Got That Story'' at John F. Kennedy
Center's Terrace Theater with a new cast. Since December, Mr. Gray has also done
some minor tinkering with his text, and Patricia Woodbridge, the original set
designer, has elaborated on her clever construct of sliding screens.  The
result? Although the Washington production is somewhat weaker than the one in
New York, ''Story'' seems every bit as strong a play today as it did in
December. Maybe even stronger.

The first time around, one is transported by the sheer theatrical ingenuity of
Mr. Gray's approach to his subject. By describing the adventures of his
archetypal reporter, the playwright is able to dramatize the broad sweep of the
calamity in Southeast Asia. Mr. Gray not only makes his points about the
atrocities and wrong-headedness of the war, but also goes further to assert that
America was, in a sense, conquered by Vietnam rather than the other way around.
Once the hero abandons his job at the Trans-Pan-Global wire service, he
desperately tries to go native by hitching up with the anti-Government guerillas
and even proposing marriage to a peasant bar girl. But, like much of the America
of his time, he accomplishes little beyond driving himself mad. The reporter
ends up a babbling bum, a ''Yankee dressed like a gook,'' a man who's lost both
his soul and country.

Looking at the play again, one notices other virtues as well. Mr.  Amlin's
assault on modern journalism is blistering: In addition to poking fun at
reporters who parrot the official line of host Governments, he also savages a
press that can transform news into hype and entertainment. And then there is the
play's language, which manages to be at once hilarious and chilling. As the
reporter meets the various facets of the Historical Event, the playwright
parodies one form of jargon after another: fascist and Marxist propaganda, macho
journalistic shop talk, whorehouse pillow talk, military profanity. If the
Historical Event is a great role for an actor, it's because Mr. Gray has filled
it with a multitude of vibrant voices.

At the Kennedy Center, the part is played by Richard Kline. He's not at the
razor-sharp level of Mr. Gunton, but he's often good - especially as American
military man and as the petulant bar girl.  Like his predecessor, he makes his
various sex and race changes without benefit of drag outfits or makeup; his
comic timing is generally precise. Only in one of his impersonations does he
fail to the extent that he damages the play. As Madame Ing, the nefarious and
inscrutable empress dowager of Amboland, he is broad and silly where Mr. Gunton
was mysterious, psychotic and frightening.

Don Scardino's performance as the reporter may be a shade more effective than
the one by Daniel Stern in New York. Mr. Scardino, who has had his ups and downs
with the BAM Company this season, really hits his stride here. As always, he's a
convincing innocent: when he unexpectedly witnesses a monk's self-immolation, we
watch his ingenuous, gung-ho smile shatter with horror. He's even better when he
begins to unravel. With his private little giggles and beatific eyes, Mr.
Scardino's reporter becomes a most pathetic victim of a world he hasn't made and
doesn't comprehend.

Although Miss Woodbridge's set has grown busier and noisier as well as bigger
here, it hasn't taken too large a toll on Miss Rothman's swift, inventive
staging. Mr. Gray's alterations have polished the script to an even higher sheen
- he rips through history with the speed and deadly aim of a tracer bullet. Yes,
one misses Mr. Gunton, but this production decidedly proves that it will take a
lot more than his absence to slow down ''How I Got That Story.''

The Cast
HOW I GOT THAT STORY, by Amlin Gray; directed by Carole Rothman; set design by
Patricia Woodbridge; lighting design by Hugh Lester; costume design by Susan
Denison; sound design by Gary Harris; production stage manager, Martha Knight;
assistant stage manager, Laura Burroughs.  Presented by the Folger Theater
Group, Louis W.  Scheeder, producer, and Michael Sheehan, associate producer. At
the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington.  Reporter
.................................Don Scardino Historical Event
........................Richard Kline

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Don Scardino

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Stage View;
YES, IT'S TONY AWARD TIME, BUT MEANWHILE, OFF BROADWAY...

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 4; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2445 words


A week from tonight, Broadway's finest will parade before a national television
audience in the annual Tony Awards ceremony.  These rites are always
entertaining - even when they try too hard to parrot the silliness of routine
prime-time variety specials - and, this year, at least, the show will serve as a
reasonable summation of the Broadway season. One might quarrel with a few
peculiar omissions among the Tony candidates - a Maria Tucci here, a Derek
Jacobi there - but, overall, the best plays, musicals, revivals and performances
have been nominated for prizes. Some of them have been thrilling, too. At the
very least, this Broadway season is to be cherished for such productions as
''Amadeus,'' ''Fifth of July,'' ''A Lesson From Aloes,'' ''The Pirates of
Penzance'' and ''Sophisticated Ladies.''

Nonetheless, the Tony show will present a narrow picture of the American theater
- one that's a bit lacking in surprises. All four of the nominated best plays
were first produced (and acclaimed) away from Broadway, and only one (''Fifth of
July'') is the work of a native playwright. Of the four best musical nominees,
only ''Woman of the Year'' offers new songs instead of a score of old standards.
Many of the best directors and actors are English visitors in for just a brief
stay; a goodly percentage of the American nominees are being honored for their
work in revivals. Worthy as most of the competing imports, retreads and revivals
are, they don't really point the way to the theater's future.

But if these productions aren't moving us along, others are. Over the past nine
months, New York has been all but overrun by fresh playwrights, daring actors
and innovative directors. As it happens, however, they're ineligible for Tony
Awards - for the very simple reason that their work didn't appear on Broadway.
In 1980-81, the replenishing theater season - the one full of new ideas and
often new faces - is the one that took place Off and Off Off Broadway.

What follows is one theatergoer's selective, far from allinclusive, remembrance
of the noteworthy people, plays and things from that season - none of which will
be mentioned during the Tony telecast. There are so many riches to choose from
that I've excluded Off Broadway's own revivals, some of which can hold their own
with the best of Broadway's. (Think of the Roundabout's versions of ''The
Winslow Boy,'' ''Inadmissible Evidence'' and ''A Taste of Honey,'' for
starters.)

A few of my choices - ''Request Concert,'' ''Cloud 9,'' ''March of the
Falsettos'' - are still playing. The rest have vanished from view, even though
they were hits during their brief runs: actors can't hang around forever in low
or non-paying jobs in Off Off Broadway shows. Some of the departed, of course,
will be back someday - just possibly on Broadway. Like ''Fifth of July,'' which
began its life at the Circle Repertory Company in 1978, today's Off Broadway
plums can well turn out to be the Tony nominees of tomorrow.

Certainly that's a strong possibility with ''Crimes of the Heart,'' which is
already booked into Broadway for the fall. Though this comedy popped up for only
a few weeks at the Manhattan Theater Club (a year after its initial production
at Louisville's Actors Theater), it has already won its 29-year-old author, Beth
Henley, the Pulitzer Prize. It's the most deserving Pulitzer winner of recent
years.

As one expects, ''Crimes'' is a traditional well-made play, but there is nothing
conventional about Miss Henley's sensibility.  Telling the story of three
good-naturedly nutty sisters in a small Mississippi town, the playwright manages
to find dark, Flannery O'Connor-esque comedy in such unlikely phenomena as a
double hanging, an attempted murder, and an aged family patriarch's collapse
into a coma. How does Miss Henley do it? She's fearless. She insists on telling
the truth about her characters; she further insists that the truth be told in
the raucous, flowing language of fully-observed life, not the mawkish homilies
of a moralizing playwright. Under Melvin Bernhardt's direction, ''Crimes'' had a
perfect New York production starring Mary Beth Hurt, Mia Dillon and Lizbeth
Mackay.  The same director and stars will be reunited for the Broadway version.

Two other well-made American plays also introduced young writers of exceptional
promise. In ''The Diviners,'' at the Circle Repertory Company, the 24-year-old
Jim Leonard Jr. mystically recreated an entire fictional town, Zion, Inc. (pop.
40), as it suffered through the throes of the Great Depression. In ''Album,''
David Rimmer used pungent, economical incidents and language to recreate the
high school days of four kids poised at the brink of rebellion in the 1960's.
''Album,'' which began at Off Off Broadway's WPA Theater before moving to the
Cherry Lane, also marked the first-rate stage directing debut of the filmmaker
Joan Micklin Silver. Her lively cast was headed by that charismatic actor Keith
Gordon, who transformed himself from a classic adolescent wimp to a braying Bob
Dylan acolyte during the course of the play.

For JoAnne Akalaitis, a founding member of that experimental troupe, the Mabou
Mines, this has been a season of remarkable achievement. Almost single-handedly
she is giving new life to the whole notion of political theater.

With the Mines, she conceived and directed a show at the Public, ''Dead End
Kids,'' which took the most tired topic imaginable (the specter of nuclear
holocaust) and made us think about it in entirely new ways. There were none of
the expected lectures about what will happen should the bomb be dropped.
Instead, Miss Akalaitis bombarded us with films, actors, sound and visual
effects, as well as an avalanche of documentary materials, to create a corrosive
comic vision of the doomsday that is already here. As ''Dead End Kids''
provocatively had it, the bomb's cultural fallout - in our language, humor,
sexual obsessions, government propaganda and pop music - is traumatizing our
minds and sensibilities even before its radioactive fallout can decimate our
bodies.

If ''Dead End Kids'' was a sprawling, busy carnival of a show, Miss Akalaitis's
other directorial triumph is the exact reverse in style, if not impact. In
staging ''Request Concert,'' a play without dialogue by the young avant-garde
German writer Franz Xaver Kroetz, she had to work with a single character set
against a landscape of silence. That character is a solitary working-class woman
(perfectly embodied by Joan MacIntosh) who returns home to her apartment after a
day at her job and prepares herself for bed. For 70 minutes we watch the woman
engage in such mundane activities as getting undressed, going to the bathroom,
cooking dinner, watching television and reading a paperback novel.

But Miss Akalaitis finds a horrible poetry in the mundane by executing Mr.
Kroetz's script with the same attention to precise, telling details that she
brought to ''Dead End Kids.'' As the heroine fastidiously carries out her daily
rituals - spraying air freshener in the bathroom or embroidering a wall hanging
from a store-bought kit - we are struck by the utter emptiness of a life that is
totally sanitized and imprisoned by the material fruits of 20th-century
capitalism. ''Request Concert'' is currently running at the Interart Theater.

Not that Miss Akalaitis had a monopoly on political theater. In ''How I Got That
Story,'' a play by Amlin Gray at the Second Stage, the wounds of Vietnam were
opened yet again in a most startling fashion. A green reporter goes to cover the
war, and, in a series of short, biting scenes, gradually finds that the war is
covering him.  Mr. Gray hit upon the crucial nexus of the American catastrophe
in Asia - the brutal collision of two alien and totally antithetical cultures -
and found a brilliant way to dramatize it. The 21 characters the reporter meets
in his travels, from a bar prostitute to a jungle guerrilla to a shell-shocked
war photographer, are all assigned to the same actor, who's labeled the
''Historical Event.'' With the help of Carole Rothman's endlessly resourceful
staging, Bob Gunton zipped in and out of these 21 roles with a daredevil's
virtuosity. As he did so, a small play miraculously summoned up the tragedy,
moral chaos and sick humor of a long and complex war.

Like ''Request Concert,'' there were other outstanding, off-center political
plays from abroad that received flawless productions with American casts. In
Stephen Poliakoff's ''American Days,'' directed by Jacques Levy at the Manhattan
Theater Club, a gaggle of lonely, young proletarian punk rockers audition for a
manipulative London record magnate who works for an American conglomerate; by
the time the audition is over, the playwright has forced the audience to
confront both his rage and grief about an England that has sold its soul and
culture to the highest bidder.

Mustapha Matura's ''Meetings,'' directed by Gerald Gutierrez at the Phoenix, was
a blisteringly funny account of an upwardly mobile, conspicuously consumptive
Third World couple (hilariously played by Michele Shay and Carl Lumbly) who try
unsuccessfully to bury their roots by shilling for foreign corporations in
Trinidad. The playwright, a Trinidadian who has long lived in London, could well
be the theater's answer to V.S. Naipaul.

Brian Friel's ''Translations'' (at the Manhattan Theater Club), David Hare's
''Knuckle'' (at the Hudson Guild) and Wolfgang Hildesheimer's scabrous version
of ''Mary Stuart'' (at the Public) were uneven political comedies from Europe,
but all contained inspired moments in their New York incarnations. Daniel
Gerroll contributed witty performances to the first two - as did Barnard Hughes
and Jarlath Conroy to ''Translations.'' Roberta Maxwell's portrayal of the
clownish Queen Mary, as giddily directed by Des McAnuff, was one of the season's
grandest displays of pure farcical insanity.

David Henry Hwang's ''The Dance and the Railroad,'' which turned up briefly at
the Henry Street Settlement, is in part a political play, but it defies simple
descriptions. A 24-year-old Chinese-American playwright from Los Angeles, Mr.
Hwang told the story of a pair of homesick Chinese laborers who are torn by big
American dreams while toiling to build the transcontinental railroad in
California in 1867. But he told it in dramatic terms drawn from both Chinese
opera and contemporary American theater. Like ''F.O.B.,'' his successful play at
the Public last season, ''The Dance and the Railroad'' combines humor and pain
as effortlessly as it mixes its cultures. Both plays starred John Lone, a
princely young actor who has both the emotional and acrobatic resources that Mr.
Hwang's original style requires. A new Hwang play, ''Family Devotions,'' is
listed on the Public's schedule for next season.

Those playwrights who didn't have politics on the brain were preoccupied with
the psychology of sexual identity. Three comedies - Charles Ludlam's ''Reverse
Psychology,'' Christopher Durang's ''Beyond Therapy'' and Caryl Churchill's
''Cloud 9'' - gave us characters whose sexual preferences remained a matter of
debate until the final curtain, if not beyond. Both Mr. Durang and Mr.  Ludlam
also provided antic psychiatrists who tried to straighten things out - usually
to no avail. The shrinks were at least as cuckoo as the analysands.

Inconsistent as these farces were, they did erupt with some of the season's
funniest jokes. In ''Cloud 9,'' which just began its run at the Theater De Lys,
there's another dividend: director Tommy Tune proves that he can bring the same
polish to a straight play that he's brought to the dance numbers of the current
Broadway musicals ''The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas'' and ''A Day in
Hollywood/A Night in the Ukraine.'' His entire cast - seven actors playing more
than twice that many roles - is exemplary.

An equally polished, if radically different, directorial feat was pulled off by
Richard Foreman in ''Penguin Touquet,'' still another tale of a psychiatrist
(David Warrilow) and patient (Kate Manheim).  For this Ontological-Hysteric
Theater piece at the Public, Mr.  Foreman choreographed a floating galaxy of
abstract images - rocks, spinning Belle Epoque waiters, gold nuggets, nosebleeds
and, yes, penguins - into a Magritte-like vision of the psyche. Introverted and
mysterious as ''Penguin Touquet'' often was, it always had its own beautiful and
sometimes touching internal dramatic logic.

With all due respect to Mr. Foreman, Mr. Ludlam and Mr. Durang, I've saved my
favorite psychiatrist for last. His name is Mendel, and, as played with zippy
abandon by Chip Zien, he's the screwy axis of William Finn's mini-musical,
''March of the Falsettos.'' Mr.  Finn's show, too, is at least in part about
sexual confusion - but, unlike the rest, it's told entirely in song. And what
songs! Mr.  Finn can write unexpected, tricky comic odes (''Four Jews in a Room
Bitching'') and heart-stopping emotional refrains (''Love Is Blind'') with
almost equal dexterity. In ''March of the Falsettos,'' one hears the first new
gifted composer-lyricist to write for the musical theater in a very long time.
One also finds a director, James Lapine, who stirs five performers and a few
props together to create more theatrical pleasure than did all the legions who
worked on, say, ''Woman of the Year.''

That's not to say that ''March of the Falsettos'' should be on Broadway. It's a
65-minute show with limited ambitions and no book; it was just right for the
75-seat cubbyhole where it began upstairs at Playwrights Horizons. (It's since
moved to the 150-seat theater down below.) As is the case with many of the other
shows I've mentioned, ''Falsettos'' is to be prized for what it is, where it is,
and for what it promises from its creators for seasons to come.  Don't miss the
fun when Broadway celebrates its past and present next Sunday - but rest assured
that the theater's future is alive and well at tiny playhouses all over the rest
of town.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of S. Bogardus, M. Rupert and A. Fraser in 'March
of the photo of Ellen McElduff in 'Dead End Kids' photo of Keith Gordon in
'ALbum' photo of Shelly Desai and K. Manheim in 'Penguin Touquet' photo of L.
Mackay, M. Hurt, B. Henley in 'Crimes of the Heart'

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEWARE OF REAGAN'S MILITARY SPENDING

BYLINE: By Lester C. Thurow

SECTION: Section 3; Page 3, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1223 words


H AVING started the debate about the economic impact of President Reagan's
military spending in the New York Review of Books last month, let me respond to
the points made by the economic defenders of the Reagan military budget.

The President plans to raise military spending to $343 billion a year in fiscal
year 1986, from $162 billion a year in fiscal 1981.  In that earlier article, I
contended that, ranked in descending order of their probability, this increase
in military spending would severely weaken this country's high-technology
civilian industries as materials, equipment and skilled personnel are moved from
civilian to military pursuits; produce shortages of materials, equipment and
skilled personnel that will create ''bottleneck'' inflation in the sectors where
the shortages occur, and stimulate general excess demand inflation in the rest
of the economy just as it did during the Vietnam War.

Perhaps because there is no counterargument, the economic defenders of the
Reagan Administration's defense budget have been completely silent when it comes
to the first point. Since our high-technology civilian industries exist in the
same regions of the country and demand the same equipment and personnel as our
military industries, a rapid military buildup can only occur by taking resources
out of the high-technolgy civilian sectors.

The effects are going to be particularly severe in the semiconductor industry
since it is going to be facing a Japanese onslaught during the next three years.
Since our military allies but economic competitors - mainly West Germany and
Japan - are not planning to increase their defense spending, our computer
industry will be hemorrhaging personnel just when it needs its best brains to
survive.

Engineers and skilled blue-collar workers will be moving from civilian computer
companies, such as Wang Laboratories, to military contractors, such as the
Raytheon Company, in the Boston area.

The economic defenders of the Reagan Administration's defense budget also
concede that bottleneck inflation will exist, but argue that it will be small.
Bottleneck inflation added 1.2 percentage points to the nation's inflation rate
during the first two years of the Vietnam War. Although it is true that 1.2
percentage points looks larger relative to a 1.7 percent inflation rate in 1965
than it does relative to 12.4 percent in 1980, it is still important.

There is also every reason to believe that the economy has become more
inflationary-prone with the experience of the past 15 years and that the same
bottleneck would create more inflation in 1982 than it did in 1966.

Bottlenecks depend upon how fast resources are being transferred from the
civilian to the military economy. In the Reagan defense budget, military
spending is to rise 9.1 percent a year after correcting for inflation. Given the
time it takes to train new skilled blue-collar workers and engineers, there is
no way that the supply of skills can keep up with this growth rate.

There is also every reason to believe that the President has underestimated his
defense budget. Whatever happens in the rest of the economy, demand will push up
prices for military hardware. It will take more money than is now estimated to
buy the equipment that the Defense Department wants. In addition, the
President's budget has not allowed for the increased training and personnel
costs that will be necessary to man all this new equipment.

V IEWED as the fraction of the gross national product that must be reallocated
to defense, the size of the burden depends upon whether you do or do not believe
in the President's supply-side miracle - a much higher rate of growth in the
G.N.P. According to the President's economic projection, the economy's real
growth rate will average 4.4 percent from 1982 through 1986. If this occurs, the
higher military budget will rise from 5.7 to 7.1 percent of the G.N.P.

But in order for the economy to grow at 4.4 percent a year, productivity has to
grow 3 percent. But productivity growth has been below 3 percent for the last 16
years, and actually falling in the last three years. Productivity will not
recover quickly. New factories, better-trained workers, and new management
techniques will all be necessary.

Suppose that productivity were to stop falling but did not rebound, leaving the
economy's growth rate at only 1.4 percent a year. In this case, the military
budget would rise an extra 2.4 percentage points, to 8.1 percent of the G.N.P.,
from 5.7. At its peak, Vietnam required an extra 1.8 percent of G.N.P.

The economic defenders of the Reagan military budget are correct in saying that
general inflationary pressures can be controlled if we raise taxes and cut
civilian spending enough. But is Mr. Reagan planning to do so?

In President Reagan's projections, the Federal budget is to be balanced in 1984,
with a $28 billion surplus in 1986. But this movement toward a balanced budget
depends upon the supply-side miracle and that instantaneous recovery in
productivity growth. If productivity does not recover and the economy's real
growth rate is 3 percentage points less than Mr. Reagan predicts, there will be
a $55 billion deficit in 1984 and an $86 billion deficit in 1986. In addition,
the Congressional Budget Office estimates that the President is underestimating
1982 expenditures by $25 billion. Add $25 billion to spending and you have a
deficit of $111 billion in fiscal 1986.

President Reagan's economic defenders also point out that unemployment is higher
and capacity utilization lower in 1982 than it was in 1965. Those unemployed
resources could be absorbed to expand defense production.

But there is a problem. Those unemployed resources are not in the right
geographic areas, industries or occupations necessary to expand defense
production. There is also a question whether there is a lot of excess capacity
on an inflation-adjusted basis. More than 7 percent of the population is
unemployed, but up to now we have been told that more unemployment was necessary
to stop inflation.

I have a lot of sympathy for the view that America's inflation was not caused by
excess aggregate demand and that more unemployment will not cure inflation, but
it is interesting to note that those who just a few months ago were arguing that
more unemployment was necessary to stop inflation are today arguing that the
unemployed can be put to work in defense industries without creating inflation.

One wonders what conservatives would be saying about inflation if President
Reagan were planning to expand nondefense spending by $181 billion a year by
1986.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Lester C. Thurow is Professor of Economics and Management at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology and author of ''The Zero-Sum Society.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Graph of military spending

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The Nation In Summary;
Reagan Message Is Peace With a Sword

BYLINE: By Caroline Rand Herron, Michael Wright and Don Wycliff

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 5; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 268 words


The Reagan Administration, in trouble with Congress over its Social Security and
tax-cut plans and yet to enunciate an overall foreign policy, last week played
the cards it's confident are strong. One is the President's popularity - two out
of three Americans rate him favorably, according to the latest Gallup Poll. The
other, not unrelated, is a clear and consistent position on defense.

The moment was an address by the Commander in Chief himself, to West Point's 906
graduating officers and an attendant audience of 26,000. It reiterated the
Reagan doctrine of the minimal central state and the virtues of peace through
strength. The message came on occasion through exact echoes from campaign
speeches -''There have been four wars in my lifetime, and none of them came
about because we were too strong,'' Mr. Reagan said - and on occasion through
restatements of achievement. There was one mention of Vietnam. ''The Vietnam
syndrome,'' Mr. Reagan called it, referring not to the United States role in
Southeast Asia, but to a domestic disrespect for the military to which the war
led and which now, he asserted, is dispelled.

Not unexpectedly, the martial language provoked its own ritual response, in a
stern Tass dispatch objecting to Mr. Reagan's characterization of Moscow as an
''evil force,'' his vow of a continued defense buildup and his mere nod to arms
control negotiations. Renewing the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks has not been
an Administration priority.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOW HAIG IS RECASTING HIS IMAGE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 23, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6199 words


Leslie H. Gelb is The Times's national security correspondent, based in the
Washington bureau. He served as a senior official in the State Department from
January 1977 to July 1979.
By Leslie H. Gelb The late-afternoon sun barely penetrated the sedate office,
with its wood-paneled walls and Colonial-style furniture, as the Secretary of
State mused on America's situation in the world. ''I think we've got more going
for us,'' he said during the course of a 90-minute interview, ''than we've had
historically in the last 30 years.'' The ''beleaguered'' Russian leaders, he
added, must understand that ''there are hopes for arms control, hopes for the
West to assist them in solving their dilemmas in the economic and agricultural
spheres.'' Of course, there would be a price - ''some reining in of what has
been a hemorrhaging of risk-taking.''

The now-famous hard-line voice of Alexander Meigs Haig Jr. was still there, the
voice that has spent the last four months sounding the alarums about America's
military weakness and lashing the Soviet Union for its contributions to
international terrorism. But as he sat in his shirtsleeves, reaching for another
cigarette, he seemed to be trying out a second voice, less abrasive, more
balanced, edging toward the political center that has been the traditional home
of American Secretaries of State. And the new voice was in keeping with other
recent moves he has made - increased personal contacts with key lawmakers, for
example - seemingly aimed at developing a new public support system.

What's more, these changes are matched by a dramatic switch in Mr.  Haig's
cavalier treatment of his colleagues in the Reagan Administration. (Officials
present at an early Cabinet meeting recall his response to a question from
Secretary of Agriculture John R.  Block: ''I have no reason to discuss that with
you; it's our issue.'') Worse, the White House came to believe that Mr. Haig was
trying to usurp the authority of the President himself, and Presidential aides
meted out a harsh public punishment. Both the embattled Mr. Haig and his
attackers declare that the feuding is over, but clearly it is nothing more than
a truce, and Reagan aides privately refer to ''a trial period.''

The bloodletting was a strange kind of problem for Mr. Haig, whose previous
career in the Army and as Presidential chief of staff under Richard Nixon made
him appear to be the consummate inside man. Yet there is much that is
incongruous about Al Haig and his position today.  He is a steadfast
conservative who was pushed for his post by conservative Senator Jesse A. Helms,
Republican of North Carolina - but he is clearly to the left of most of
President Reagan's top aides. (''Imagine my being the 'liberal' in any
Administration!'' he has said.) In fact, his hard-line pronouncements to date
have simply alienated the center without satisfying the right. He and his aides
are preoccupied with forestalling attacks from that quarter.  He can look
forward, just by the nature of his job, to alienating the political aides around
the President. For it is the Secretary's task, as one associate said, ''to take
the interests of other countries into account and to argue the national interest
over political interests. That would have to put him into some conflict with the
White House.'' He must have political support to accomplish his policy goals -
but he has no power base of his own, no constituency in the Congress or among
the public, no strong personal relationship with the President. He is said to be
a recipient of advice and support from the circle around Henry A. Kissinger, who
was Mr. Haig's boss as national security adviser under Mr. Nixon (Mr. Kissinger
is believed to be among those who counseled the Secretary to make his rhetoric
less strident) - but that is not an association Mr. Haig publicly acknowledges.
Mr. Kissinger's popularity among the Reagan aides is distinctly limited. ''We
haven't got any friends,'' one senior State Department official lamented, ''and
we need them.'' He must create a coherent, long-range foreign policy - but up to
now, the Administration has been operating on an ad hoc basis, shifting its
stance with each decision, and creating considerable confusion. The hitch is
that the formulation of any coherent policy - just how the military lines should
be drawn against Moscow, for example - would require that Mr. Haig do battle
with the more conservative elements of the Reagan constituency. Yet he cannot
take on the right without destroying the current political and philosophical
unity in the party, and perhaps destroying himself. As many in the White House
have acknowledged privately, it is a dilemma for the Administration as a whole.

A scant four months after Inauguration Day, the political jockeying that forms
the backdrop to policy making is still in its initial stages and few of the
participants even pretend to be confident about what the political landscape
will look like a year from now. There are those who hold that there are,
essentially, three camps, ranging from far right to Kissinger left. Others
believe that this breakdown is irrelevant because, on any given issue, the
shifts from camp to camp are so great.

According to the first analysis, the heart of the far right is in the Senate
with men like Jesse Helms, Jake Garn of Utah and Strom Thurmond of South
Carolina. They believe, for example, that the United States should have nothing
to do with the Soviet Union and simply concentrate on achieving total military
superiority. Their main support in the White House is said to come from Lyn
Nofziger, Presidential Assistant for Political Affairs, who keeps a close eye on
foreign-policy appointments. In the executive departments, those on the far
right do not generally occupy the very top posts but fill many second- and
third-tier jobs. Secretary of the Navy John F.  Lehman Jr. and the former
Harvard professor Richard E. Pipes, of the National Security Council staff, are
often cided as examples of the genre.

In this analysis, the center camp -whose members would deal with Moscow
reluctantly and only from a position of strength - includes Senator Henry M.
Jackson, Democrat of Washington, and a variety of newly minted Republicans
influenced by the philosopher Irving Kristol, of the American Enterprise
Institute, and Norman Podhoretz, editor of Commentary magazine. Others said to
be in the ranks: Assistant Secretary of Defense-designate Richard Perle;
Assistant Secretary of State Elliot Abrams, who is Mr. Podhoretz's son-in-law,
and several other assistant secretaries.

The final group of conservatives, referred to by the others as being on the
''left,'' are those least fearful of dealing with Moscow. They, too, want to
build up military strength, but they are willing to offer some carrots to Moscow
along the way. Mr. Haig supposedly fits into this camp along with many of his
assistant secretaries. No people from this group are said to serve in key
positions in the Pentagon or on the National Security Council staff.

There are experts, however, who view this three-tiered breakdown as misleading
or flat wrong. One Administration insider, for example, offered another analysis
of the political landscape, one that receives considerable support within the
Government.

''There are no groups,'' he said. ''There is a continuum from purists to
pragmatic conservatives, with one and the same person falling in different
places on different issues. The purists are Manichaean in the medieval sense.
They believe the Soviets are the devil, and that you can't bargain with the
devil without losing your soul. The pragmatists take into account the world as
it is.''

In this man's opinion, ''the pragmatists are on the defensive. They have no real
support in Congress. Liberals would back them, but they don't have much weight
in the White House. Charles Percy is not even on the continuum, he's so liberal.
Howard Baker and Bush would be natural allies, but they won't risk their
positions with the right by challenging them on foreign policy. Their approach
is to let the right burn itself out.''

By this analysis, the ideological and political center of gravity within the
Administration seems to be Defense Secretary Caspar W.  Weinberger, Fred C.
Ikle, his Under Secretary for Policy, and Eugene V. Rostow, director-designate
of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. Richard Allen is said to be
sometimes to the right of this thinking but, on most issues, a part of it. And
Al Haig is to the left.

Precisely where Mr. Haig fits on the spectrum, however, is difficult to
pinpoint. One high State Department official distinguished between the
Secretary's inner political feelings and his operating ideals: ''He's on the
moderate side of the Administration because of what he knows and has
experienced, not because of what he believes.''

Mr. Haig's friends and staff constantly emphasize the practicality of the man.
''Al explodes bombshells publicly,'' said a longtime colleague. ''That's his
nature. But in private, he's a pragmatist.'' One aide offered a case in point.
Mr. Haig's instincts probably urged him to use covert military action to get the
Cubans out of Angola, but he actually chose diplomacy as his means.

Mr. Haig is not the only player in the foreign-policy game who lays claim to
being pragmatic. Mr. Reagan's principal aides, the Presidential Counselor, Edwin
Meese 3d, and the White House Chief of Staff, James A. Baker 3d, see themselves
as the balance wheel between Mr. Haig and the political right. Increasingly,
they are playing the role of adjudicators. But apart from keeping all parties in
harness, they do not seem to have yet developed substantive foreign-policy views
of their own.

Early in the Administration, when the White House delayed forwarding to the
Senate the names of the new Secretary's nominees for subordinate posts, some of
the Haig people suspected collusion between the White House staff and Jesse
Helms. But one White House aide offered a very different explanation:

''It's the people on the White House staff who see themselves as the pragmatists
-right of center, to be sure, but pragmatists politically. Helms and Thurmond
give us problems, too, on certain things, but we were not about to burn chips
over getting hearings for a bunch of State Department guys when the fact was
these very guys were able to go off and conduct their business in Europe and in
Africa without being confirmed by the Senate. Also, the White House has to hold
a coalition together that runs from the center to the far right. If Helms says
there are certain people over at State who are not in tune with the Reagan
philisophy, we care about this because we care about the conservative
philosophy. But we were satisified by almost all of the Haig people.''

As events turned out, the White House's waiting game paid off.  Pressure
developed within the Senate itself to act on the nominees.  ''We knew we were
going to lose,'' said one Helms supporter, ''but someone has to hold Reagan's
and Haig's feet to the fire and plant the flag. Reagan didn't get elected all by
himself. The voters chose a philosophy, too.''

Clearly, Mr. Haig is going to need political protection. Currently, he doesn't
have it. His only consistent source of support is from foreign leaders: The
Western Europeans view him as the main source of steadiness in an Administration
of ''loose canons,'' and the Chinese see him as a bulwark against the Taiwan
lobby, one conservative American who wants to keep China a viable threat to the
Soviet Union.

According to his staff, Mr. Haig is starting to go outside to develop a new
political base. He has sought more contact with the press, with business leaders
and key lawmakers. An example of this reaching out was an evening he recently
spent with the Trilateral Commission, an internationalist organization that
holds few charms for the right. These newly sought allies are the traditional
constituency of a Secretary of State.

Policy debates in the Reagan Administration generally seem to begin where they
ended in the Carter Administration. The left-to-right spectrum under Jimmy
Carter ran from the United Nations delegate, Andrew Young, to the national
security adviser, Zbigniew Brzezinski; in the Reagan Administration, Mr.
Brzezinski would probably find himself in most cases on the left. And whereas
the Carter team tended to look at the world through a wide-angle lens that took
in global themes like human rights, the Reagan team uses a telescopic lens,
zeroing in on the Soviet Union and such issues as terrorism.

Yet for all the differences, there is this similarity: The Reagan
Administration, like the Carter Administration before it, has failed to develop
a serious, long-range foreign policy. Many key statements and decisions have
seemed ad hoc and contradictory. The rhetoric toward Moscow, for example, is
unrelievedly hard-line, but the embargo on the sale of grain to the Soviet Union
has been lifted.  Unflinching support for Israel is a cardinal rule, but the
Administration is planning to sell the advanced-radar aircraft known as Awacs to
Saudi Arabia over the protests of the Israelis. What appeared to be a strong
refusal to pursue talks with the Russians about limiting missiles in Europe has
turned into a begrudging agreement to do so.

Interviews with participants in these moves indicate that they do not reflect
any great philosophical confusion but rather tactical and political differences.
Yet there are major, unanswered questions that the Administration has not come
to grips with. And some deal with the central strategic problem as perceived by
almost all the members of the Reagan team.

For several years and throughout the Presidential campaign, Mr.  Reagan and his
key lieutenants have claimed that the Soviet Union is today militarily superior
to the United States. Moscow is so far in the lead, they said, that it would
take a major effort by the United States, lasting six years or more, to achieve
mere equality.

The unanswered questions: If the Russians are so far ahead, why should they wait
for us to catch up? That is, if there is what strategists call a ''window of
vulnerability,'' what is to keep the Russians from jumping through it now,
especially since Moscow knows the Administration's intent to catch up and even
re-establish American superiority? And what is to keep friends and allies of the
United States from tilting toward Moscow at a time when their longtime defender
is in such a weakened state?

Today, there is some diversity in the attitudes of Reagan officials toward this
dilemma. A senior Pentagon official commented, ''There is less risk now of a
small or medium grab like Afghanistan.  The Russians know that moves like these
will not be cost-free from now on. But the basic threats - a nuclear disarming
attack against our land-based missiles, or an attack on the Persian Gulf, or
moving into Poland with force - will remain undiminished.'' His conclusion: ''We
just have to hope that a combination of problems - Afghanistan, Poland,
uncertainties, and the risks of confronting United States power - will deter
them.''

Others have starker suggestions. Edward N. Luttwak, a senior fellow at
Georgetown Univerity's Center for Strategic and International Studies and a
close adviser to many in the Administration, put the case this way: ''The Soviet
window of opportunity is no mere campaign slogan. The Polish crisis still
absorbs Soviet attention and surplus military power, but sooner or later that
crisis will be resolved. And if, in the meantime, American policy has failed to
create situations which effectively absorb Soviet energies, we might well be
faced by challenges against which we will not yet have either a credible
deterrent or a sufficient defense.'' Those who hold such views cite an increase
in American aid to the Afghan guerrillas as one way to ''absorb'' Soviet
energies.

In many parts of the State Department, this line of thinking is considered
dangerously provocative. A veteran American diplomat commented: ''Making trouble
for the Russians is not going to stop or deflect their making trouble for us;
it's likely to make them more troublesome. And it will be easier for them to
make trouble and take advantage of it than it will be for us to solve the
problems.'' The Russians, he said, need to have ''some prospect of rewards from
us for good behavior.''

In his interview with The New York Times, Mr. Haig seemed to be trying for a
blend of the different approaches. He would seek to keep the Russians
off-balance and busy with their own troubles in Afghanistan and Poland while, at
the same time, following the old Nixon-Kissinger policy of offering rewards for
Soviet restraint. His carrots included negotiations looking toward arms control
and a continued flow of American grain in return for a Soviet agreement to
abandon what it sees as its right to bring about political change by forceful
means. He did not explain how he planned to get the Russians to buy this, what
keys he had found that had eluded his predecessors. He preferred to talk about
the general world situation, adding some wrinkles to the new Reagan
Administration line.

The picture that he drew of the world was filled with dangers, but it was also
clearly upbeat for the United States and downbeat for the Soviet Union. He
stressed the range of American political, military, psychological and economic
assets and ''the growing consensus of concern among the nonaligned nations and
our traditional allies.'' He placed heavy emphasis on Soviet domestic economic
problems and on the unrest in Poland that he called ''contagious,'' adding, ''I
think we are witnessing a historic unraveling of Marxist-Leninism in the Soviet
model.''

As for overall Soviet military superiority, Mr. Haig conceded, ''I was alarmist
about trends and the failure to recognize those trends.'' And then he observed,
''We count bullets and beans, and they do too. And whoever is counting the other
guy tends to see him as 10 feet tall.''

Thus far, the Reagan aides have not developed what they, themselves, define as a
foreign policy. There is no evidence to suggest that they have gone through the
demanding discipline of constructing a policy that connects philosophy and
tactics. They have not, for example, made the very tough decisions about the
extent to which they are willing to yield American interests to the needs of our
allies. They have not determined just how much political heat they are willing
to take at home in order to draw military lines against Moscow abroad.

The explanation for this failure varies with the political interest of the
person being interviewed. An Administration adviser said, ''Haig has neglected
policy and focused on politics. The result has been bad politics and no policy.
The reason there is no policy is that Haig hasn't sat down and made it.'' A
White House official, on the other hand, maintained, ''The President made
economic policy his first priority. He was also shot. And we're still not any
slower, really, than most previous Administrations.'' Most analysts see elements
of truth in both views.

There is another explanation, too; some argue that there will be no real foreign
policy until Mr. Reagan is prepared to lock horns with the far right. As long as
there is no policy, as long as the decisions simply are ad hoc and there are no
permanent winners and losers, the President can maintain a high level of
political tranquility and philosophical unity. But without a policy, he always
will want for the kind of coherence in action so central to the Reagan
conception of government.

For all Alexander Haig's experience and skill, he put on a textbook display of
good drama and bad politics during his first months in office. At his
confirmation hearings, he managed to suggest that President Nixon really had
done nothing wrong in the matter of Watergate, and he alienated his senatorial
inquisitors with a tough, argumentative stance. Shortly before the inauguration,
at a meeting with the State Department transition team -most of whose members
had been hand-picked by Richard V. Allen, national security adviserdesignate,
and blessed by Senator Helms - Mr. Haig announced: ''Thank you very much. Your
work is done. You have one minute each to say what you want.''

Mr. Haig proceeded to take on the President, the White House staff and half of
his Cabinet colleagues. While President Reagan was saying that he would make the
key, sub-Cabinet appointments, Mr. Haig was announcing that such posts at the
State Department would be ''my nominations.'' On Inauguration Day, before the
White House could begin to organize the system for making national security
decisions, Mr. Haig presented his own plan, which reserved virtually all
bureaucratic power to the Secretary of State. The move failed and it also
alienated the very highest men in the Administration: Mr. Meese, Mr. Baker and
his deputy, Michael K. Deaver, and Defense Secretary Weinberger, a close
Presidential friend whom Mr. Haig had actually been courting.

The White House staff responded with a standard Washington weapon.  The whole
incident was leaked to the press, a warning shot across Mr. Haig's bow. The
front pages of major newspapers carried articles in which White House sources
complained that Mr. Haig was seeking the limelight for himself, that his
rhetoric about El Salvador was dangerously diverting public attention from the
President's economic program.

But Mr. Haig seemed not to be getting the message. After newspaper articles
reported that Mr. Reagan had decided to put Vice President George H. Bush in
charge of crisis management, Mr. Haig told a House Foreign Affairs subcommittee
of his unhappiness with such a role for Mr. Bush and implied that he would
resign if it came to pass. Later that same day, Mr. Reagan publicly slapped down
his Secretary of State, naming Mr. Bush as the crisis manager without even a
mention of Mr. Haig's role.

The full story of this confrontation will probably never be known; the memories
of the participants are already too exact, too suggestive of a party line, to be
totally reliable. But the evidence suggests a classic tale of ships that pass in
the night. Publicly and privately, the President had said on many occasions that
Mr. Haig would run foreign policy. Mr. Haig liked the sound of the words and of
the newspaper columns saying he would be the most powerful man in the
Administration, and ''naively'' (the word chosen by his friends) assumed that
they were true. The members of the White House staff looked up one day, came to
the conclusion that the general was running away with the store and took up the
cudgels.

All parties to the battle agree that there was no effort made to bring the
combatants together to clear the air. Mr. Haig did not want to call Mr. Meese or
Mr. Baker because that would have implied that they could tell him the limits of
his job. They did not call him because they wished to avoid a confrontation and
a direct involvement of the President in the conflict. Mr. Reagan seems to have
his own style in such affairs: He lets them run their own course, stepping in
only as a last resort.

The fireworks are apparently over now, but their effects linger on. The parties
to the struggle have developed attitudes toward one another that will shape
future relations, and Al Haig and others in and out of Government were given
some clear lessons on how to succeed in the Reagan Administration.

Members of the White House staff feel that Mr. Haig is a prima donna, perhaps
ultimately uncontrollable. They point out that, even after the public explosion
over the crisis-manager matter, Mr. Haig still got out in front of the President
on three high-profile issues. The Secretary let it be known that he opposed Mr.
Reagan's decisions to cancel the embargo on grain sales to the Soviet Union and
to sell the Awacs aircraft to Saudi Arabia. And after the attempted
assassination of the President, Mr. Haig seemed to be taking a lot upon himself
in his tense television appearance during which he proclaimed his now famous
line, ''I'm in control here.''

Meanwhile, Mr. Haig's people have reached their own conclusions about the White
House staff. They have become convinced that James Baker is their main opponent
there; they hold that Mr. Baker, a former campaign chief for Mr. Bush, might be
trying to advance the Vice President's Presidential aspirations. (Mr. Haig has
had his own aspirations in the same direction.) Other parties to the battles,
however, insist that Mr. Baker was not acting on his own but in full concert
with Mr. Meese and Mr. Deaver.

The Haig staff initially felt that, though the national security adviser is,
traditionally, a natural competitor of the Secretary of State, the incumbent,
Richard Allen, was harmless. They came to believe otherwise. Several people, for
example, both inside and outside the Government, report that Mr. Allen has told
them that Mr.  Haig is not, truly, a friend of Israel. They also say that Mr.
Allen has given doctors as his authorities for claiming that patients who
undergo bypass heart surgery, which Mr. Haig experienced, develop an
uncontrollable urge to dominate other people. An aide to Mr. Haig characterizes
both statements as ''preposterous,'' and medical authorities deny that bypass
surgery causes such an urge to dominate. Mr. Allen has chosen not to respond to
inquiries about the statements.

Mr. Haig, himself, has not kept his bitterness hidden. Some aides say they have
frequently heard from the Secretary's lips a familiar refrain from his days in
the Nixon White House: ''So and so is trying to do a number on me.'' Mr. Haig
has made no bones, for example, about telling friends and associates that the
''three-headed hydra monster'' running the White House is not very efficient or
professional. He often treated questions from reporters as unfriendly
challenges, and his relations with the press became strained.

The public beating Mr. Haig received at the hands of the White House was
virtually unprecedented, and he and his aides like to pretend that it was the
work of that errant trio, not of the President himself. Yet it is clear that Mr.
Reagan did little to defend his Secretary of State during the battle.

The central lesson is that the President is prepared to go very far to see that
his rules of teamwork are enforced. Two of Mr. Haig's main rivals, Mr. Allen and
Mr. Bush, have won increased trust and influence by becoming stalwart team
players. One senior Administration official, who knows the President well, said
of the recent problems of Secretary Haig: ''Ron Reagan doesn't want any one of
his key people out in front of anyone else. If someone does get out in front, he
gets sawed off. People learned to be careful not to elbow one another. Al wanted
to put his mark on the tree and got out in front.''

According to Senator Paul Laxalt, Republican of Nevada and a close friend and
adviser to the President, the internal feuding over foreign policy has ended. In
an interview, the Senator said: ''The President and everyone were preoccupied
with the economy. Al moved into the vacuum, as he should have. But he had just
been commander of NATO, and that's as near being treated like God as you can get
in this world. So, Al had to adjust.'' As of now, Senator Laxalt concluded, Mr.
Haig ''has developed a closer personal rapport with the President, and he
finally realizes that all he has to do to meet or speak with the President,
one-on-one, is to pick up the phone and call him.''

There are others close to the White House who reach a similar conclusion: For
the forseeable future, Mr. Haig is likely to keep his job. But their perspective
is less friendly. The judgment has been reached, they say, that it would be too
messy to discharge Mr. Haig.  There is general agreement that he remains the
most knowledgeable and experienced foreign-affairs person in the Administration
and the only one with a strong reputation abroad. And no one, they add, has come
up with a plausible replacement.

The facts of Alexander Haig's climb to power are familiar enough.  But buried in
the bare elements of the resume are two formative aspects of the man: First, his
life has been imbedded in conservative institutions; second, he has made his
climb to the top as a bureaucrat to the stars and not as a star himself.

His strong Roman Catholic upbringing and his career at West Point and in the
Army have left him a preserver of traditional personal and cultural values, a
patriot and a determined anti-Communist. He has shown a soldier's instincts on
foreign policy. As a key aide to President Nixon and Henry Kissinger, for
example, he made plain his belief that the 1973 Vietnam cease-fire agreement was
little more than the abandonment of an ally. In sum, he was more conservative
than his conservative bosses.

It was as a kind of Thomas Cromwell to those in power - the aide who makes the
trains run on time, who takes care of messy situations, who settles matters
without having to bother the boss - that Mr. Haig excelled. He never did win
plaudits as a conceptualizer, an idea man. The leaders he worked for included
Gen. Douglas MacArthur and Cyrus R. Vance, as well as Mr. Kissinger and Mr.
Nixon.

Mr. Haig's first real out-front leadership role was as Supreme Commander of
NATO, and he was almost universally considered to be doing an excellent job. In
fact, the general thought his position was so solid that he didn't bother to
hide his dislike of and disagreement with his President and Commander in Chief,
Jimmy Carter. He even floated his own Presidential balloon in 1979. When it
fizzled, he took on the presidency of United Technologies Corporation. Reagan
aides say that even though the future President had met him only a few times,
the general was his only choice for the State Department post.

During these years, Al Haig made a lot of enemies and a very few friends, but he
won a host of admirers. He knew how to inspire those feelings of intimacy and
anxiety that would lead others to do his will, or his boss's will. Many have
come away more than a little afraid of him, worried about how far he might be
willing to go to achieve his ends. Thus, in order to persuade Congress to resume
American arms aid to Argentina, Mr. Haig recently maintained that there was a
compatibility of views between the authoritarian Argentinian regime and the
United States. Pressed to prove his point, he said they shared ''a belief in
God.''

This general and bureaucrat, whose life has been caught up in some of the most
important events of the last two decades, has reached a new pinnacle. As
Secretary of State, his office regimen begins at 8 A.M., the start of a 12-hour
working day. His first meeting, a halfhour later, is with his principal staff
members. They are, by and large, his own selections, the notable exception being
his deputy, William P. Clark. Mr. Clark has no particular expertise in foreign
affairs, but he is a close friend of the President's from California, and he has
begun to play a critical role as Mr. Haig's liaison with the White House. Other
top aides include Walter J. Stoessel Jr., a senior Foreign Service officer and
former Ambassador to Moscow and Bonn, Undersecretary for Political Affairs; Myer
Rashish, a strong backer of free trade, Undersecretary for Economic Affairs;
James L.  Buckley, the former Senator from New York, Undersecretary for Security
Assistance, Science and Technology, and Robert C.  MacFarlane, a former career
officer in the Marines, departmental counselor. These men and the principal
Assistant Secretaries of State, many of whom worked under Mr. Haig during his
Kissinger days, are generally viewed as pragmatic conservatives.

The Secretary's day is punctuated with what his staff calls ''reading time,''
during which he plows through paperwork and sees a few key aides. He considers
these conversations very private - so much so that he often insists that the
senior people personally follow up on what was decided rather than delegating
the work to their staffs. Aides also say that he usually starts off thinking
about a problem in stereotypes, but quickly moves on to practical questions.

Secretary Haig moves through his days in a disciplined, organized manner. A
recent, typical day included morning meetings with the United Nations General
Secretary, Kurt Waldheim, and the National Security Council (the topic: an
update on the plan to put new American missiles in Europe). In the afternoon,
Mr. Haig met with leaders of the Congressional Black Caucus to discuss United
States policy in Africa. And the Secretary ended his day in the John Quincy
Adams Room on the eighth floor, where he and his wife of 31 years, the former
Patricia Fox, were hosts at a reception for diplomats from Latin America and the
Caribbean.

Al Haig is not a relaxed man. He has become overweight of late, and he is
unhappy about it. ''I'm going to lose it soon,'' he commented during the
interview in his office. As he talked, he leaned forward, his head hunkered down
between his shoulders in a characteristic pose. His voice worked in a range from
soft to insistent, and his steel-blue eyes stayed fixed upon his listener,
willing him to agree. ''You believe me,'' he said at frequent intervals, the
emphasis on the middle word. ''You believe me.''

There is considerable nervousness, particularly in the State Department, about
the power of the far right. The most conservative leaders will go very far to
oppose the return of old faces and old policies, the people and programs they
feel have led to the decline of American power in the world over the last 20
years. Yet, even with such very real differences in perspective, there is an
almost unprecedented degree of ideological uniformity on the substance of
foreign issues compared with that of any Administration over that period of
time. It represents something a Secretary of State can build on, assuming he has
a President behind him and the skill and perseverance to do the job.

During the interview, Mr. Haig insisted that he does indeed now have Mr.
Reagan's support. Yet the general view in the Administration and Congress is
less optimistic. Mr. Haig has yet to prove that he can control his ambitions and
be a team player. The President's support of his Secretary's person and policies
is yet to be established. And so far, Mr. Haig has not demonstrated the
conceptual ability to formulate a foreign policy or the leaderhip skills to
build a working political constituency.

''You're late, Mr. Secretary,'' an aide said. It was the second time he had
interrupted the interview. ''They're all waiting upstairs for your speech,'' he
added. But Alexander Haig lingered, as if one more sentence, one more dose of
his own conviction and intensity, would convert a doubter into a true believer.
He listed what he called the ''flash points'' around the world, the sites where
trouble was brewing - Central America, Poland, down the line. His team had been
doing fine, he'd been saying, but now he paused and added a blunt new thought:
''This is an Administration that hasn't been tested yet.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Haig in 1947 West Point yearbook photo of
protesters at Syracuse University photo of Robert McFarlane, a counselor of
State Department photo of Haig's aides J. Buckley, W. Clark, M. Rashish, W.
Stoessel photo of Haig in Belgium in front of castle where he lived as NATO head
photo of Haig in Cairo

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MEXICAN COKE RAP

BYLINE: By C.D.B. BRYAN; C.D.B. Bryan, author of ''Friendly Fire,'' is currently
at work od a new novel.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 13, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 842 words


THE ULTIMATE GOOD LUCK By Richard Ford.  201 pp. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co.
$9.95.

TARRY QUINN, the Vietnam veteran protagonist of Richard Ford's novel ''The
Ultimate Good Luck,'' is in Mexico to help his girlfriend's brother Sonny out of
an Oaxaca prison. Sonny has been busted for smuggling cocaine. Quinn has hired a
Mexican lawyer named Bernhardt who for $10,000 can bribe a judge to execute a
release document. But there is a hitch: According to the Mexican police, Sonny,
when arrested, was carrying two pounds of cocaine. The Los Angeles dealers for
whom he was ''muling'' the drugs say they paid Sonny for four. Sonny insists he
never weighed the packages, and that what he had was what the police took. It is
the sort of disagreement that forces events to go out of control, which is
''precisely what (Quinn) wanted to stay clear of ... That was trouble. You had
to stay center-on.''

The only way to stay center on was by planning for every contingency. Still, as
Quinn had learned in Vietnam, ''once strangers you couldn't see started shooting
guns at you and trying to set you on fire way up in the sky, plans didn't take
you too far. And the only thing smart you could do was try to stay efficient and
keep (yourself) together.''

Mexico, Quinn of tells us, ''was like Vietnam or L.A., only more
disappointing.'' On the way to the Oaxaca prison to visit Sonny, the lawyer
Bernhardt tells Quinn about a large cocaine interception at the airport the
night before: ''One man, an American serviceman, is shot thirty times. The
police even shoot each other in the excitement.'' They pause at a Mexican Army
checkpoint, where sandbagged M-60 machine guns have been set up on either side
of the road. The soldiers are searching the vehicles for weapons and explosives.

In the line of buses and cars waiting to be inspected is a red Dodge van with
good tires and a gold university seal on its doors.  Inside sit three rows of
American college girls all talking at once and staring out the dusty windows at
the soldiers searching the bus passengers' belongings; the soldiers make the
Indian women lift their skirts while the men stand with their arms over their
heads. Quinn and the Mexican lawyer are waved through. When, several hours
later, returning from the prison, Quinn and Bernhardt slow for the checkpoint
again, the red Dodge van has been pulled over next to the soldiers' hut. All its
windows are broken, the seats torn out. The American college girls are nowhere
to be seen. We never learn what happened to them.  An American tourist family
crosses the square towards cafe tables in the Portal: a big-bellied man,
sweating in his T-shirt; his wife, wearing blue bermuda shorts; and their bored
teen-aged daughter. The family pauses outside a Baskin-Robbins to look up at a
chiropractor's neon sign. A bomb explodes inside the ice cream store; the
tourist family is blown to bits. We never know who planted the bomb or why.  We
are simply witnesses to its having occurred.

''In the war,'' Quinn tells us, ''you maintained your crucial distance from
things and that kept you alive, and kept everything out in front of you and
locatable.'' Richard Ford keeps the crucial distance in his writing, too. His
prose has a taut cinematic quality that permits him to record the color, the
architecture, the movement, the violence occurring in front of him with the
Cyclopean detachment of a wide-angle lens affixed to a camera on an exploratory
spacecraft landing on an alien planet. It is a style that bathes his story with
the same hot, flat, mercilessly white light that scorches Mexico, and it
captures exactly that disquieting sense of menace one often feels lurking there
just off the road.

Richard Ford's cool portrait of Quinn, the Vietnam vet whose alienation from the
past and dislocation from the future render him incapable of emotional
commitment beyond the here and now, seems exactly right, too. There is something
comfortingly familiar about Quinn, a hint of the disillusioned, hard-boiled big
city cop/newspaperman/private-eye hero of film and fiction we've come across
before. Take this passage, for example, where Quinn is pondering what he's doing
in Mexico trying to help Sonny get out of jail: ''It was nuts, he thought, to be
tied to somebody, two counting Bernhardt, you had no feeling about, but who
somehow made all the difference. That was the essence of the modern predicament.
The guy who had it in for you was the guy you'd never seen. The one you loved
was the one you couldn't be understood by. The one you paid to trust was the one
you were sure would cut and run. The best you could think of was maybe you'd get
lucky, and come out with some skin still left on.'' One can imagine at least
half a dozen different tough guys delivering those lines.

If Richard Ford's novel were to achieve the wide audience it richly deserves and
a thoughtful, careful film version did result, then ''The Ultimate Good Luck''
could do for Mexico what the Paul Newman film ''Fort Apache'' has done for the
South Bronx.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS FOR VACATION READING

SECTION: Section 7; Page 15, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 8158 words


THE following list has been selected from titles reviewed since the Christmas
Issue of December 1980. Such a list can only suggest the high points in the main
fields of reader interest. Books are arranged alphabetically under subject
headings. Quoted comments are from the Book Review.

Autobiography & Biography

THE ALCOTTS. Biography of a Family. By Madelon Bedell. (Clarkson Potter.
$15.95.) A ''charming popular biography'' of Bronson Alcott - the noted
abolitionist and educator who was a friend of Emerson, Thoreau and Channing -
and of his wife, Abigail May, and their daughter, Louisa May, the author of
''Little Women.''

ALICE JAMES. A Biography. By Jean Strouse. (Houghton Mifflin. $15.) A
''judicious and beautifully written'' full-length study of the neurasthenic
sister of William and Henry James, the only daughter in the talented, eccentric
American family.

AMERICA, LOST & FOUND. By Anthony Bailey. (Random House. $9.95.) A memoir -
''tender as it is truthful, and as amusing as it is unpretentious'' - of the
author's youth as an English exile in America during World War II.

BERTOLT BRECHT IN AMERICA. By James K. Lyon. (Princeton. $19.75.) A
''fascinating study,'' written with ''empathy and reverence,'' of the German
playwright's six years in the United States, 1941-47.

BLOOMING. A Small-Town Girlhood. By Susan Allen Toth. (Little, Brown. $10.95.) A
''tender and finely textured memoir of growing up'' in Ames, Iowa as a young
girl in the 1950's.

CATHERINE THE GREAT. By Henri Troyat. (Dutton. $15.95.) A ''compelling,
brilliantly written'' biography of the Russian Empress.  COSIMA WAGNER'S
DIARIES. Volume II, 1878-1883. Edited and annotated by Martin Gregor-Dellin and
Dietrich Mack. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $35.) ''Extraordinary and
captivating'' details of the composer's life emerge from this second volume of
his wife's voluminous journal.

DAVID O. SELZNICK'S HOLLYWOOD. By Ronald Haver. (Knopf. $85.) An outsized,
lavishly illustrated tome that is a ''spectacular pop culture stunt ... full of
facts and judgments'' about the legendary movie-maker.

THE DIARY OF RICHARD WAGNER, 1865-1882. The Brown Book. Presented and annotated
by Joachim Bergfeld. (Cambridge. $15.95.) A ''singularly personal document''
containing the composer's addresses, poems, drafts and prose sketches - ''of
importance to a specialized and committed readership.''

THE ENIGMA OF FELIX FRANKFURTER. By H. N. Hirsch. (Basic. $14.95.) ''A brilliant
and sure-to-be-controversial'' biography of the late Supreme Court Justice.

THE FROG PRINCE. An Autobiography. By Maurice Girodias. (Crown.  $14.95.) The
''prince of pornography,'' who founded the Olympia Press in Paris, offers the
first volume of his memoirs - ''a funny book'' that is also full of ''embittered
social observation.''

GEORGE ORWELL. A Life. By Bernard Crick.  (Atlantic-Little, Brown. $17.95.)
''The first full biographical account'' of Orwell to be written with the
cooperation of his late widow and unlimited access to the Orwell archives.

GRANT. A Biography. By William S. McFeely. (Norton. $19.95.) A ''fascinating
account'' of the magnificent soldier who made one of the worst Chief Executives
in American history. ''Biography at its best.''

HAYDN. Chronicle and Works. By H.C. Robbins Landon. (Indiana.  $248.) This
five-volume, 17-pound ''landmark study ... should take its place on the shelf of
indispensable musical biographies.'' It places each piece of Haydn's music in a
social, political and intellectual framework and includes every significant
document.

HENRY JAMES LETTERS. Volume III, 1883-1895. Edited by Leon Edel.  (Harvard.
$20.) This third volume of Leon Edel's distinguished edition of Henry James's
correspondence covers the years of his sister Alice's death and the writing of
such novels as ''The Bostonians'' and ''The Princess Casamassima.''

I REALLY SHOULD BE PRACTICING. By Gary Graffman. (Doubleday.  $14.95.) ''Wryly
observed disasters and compensatory wonders'' as remembered by Mr. Graffman, the
concert pianist who ''turns out to be a marvelously lightfingered memoirist''
and a sharp observer of the piano and ''its all-but-human quirks.''

JOURNEY AROUND MY ROOM. The Autobiography of Louise Bogan.  (Viking. $13.95.) An
''imaginative construction'' - a ''mosaic'' assembled by Ruth Limmer from the
poet's journals, poems, criticism.

A LIFE IN OUR TIMES. Memoirs. By John Kenneth Galbraith. (Houghton Mifflin.
$16.95.) The famed economist's 22nd book once again reveals him as a ''raconteur
and a literary stylist,'' though he is ''curiously unrevealing about his inner
life.'' A ''total success'' as entertainment, the book, as history, is a
''modest addition to the public record.''

A LIFE IN TWO CENTURIES. An Autobiography. By Bertram D. Wolfe.  (Stein & Day.
$29.95.) A posthumous autobiography by one of the leading theoreticians of
Bolshevism, who ''is always attentive, often perceptive and occasionally
insightful.''

THE LIFE OF JOHN O'HARA. By Frank MacShane. (Dutton. $15.95.) A ''thorough''
biography of the novelist and chronicler of the American Dream.

MAKING SCENES. A Personal History of the Turbulent Years at Yale, 1966-1979. By
Robert Brustein. (Random House. $15.) Mr. Brustein remembers the 13 years when
he was dean of the Yale Drama School and artistic director of its Repertory
Theater. Though riddled with ''ancient quarrels'' and reports on ''every good,
bad and indifferent production staged by the Rep,'' his book communicates a
deeply felt passion for the theater.

MARIA CALLAS. The Woman Behind the Legend. By Arianna Stassinopoulos. (Simon &
Schuster. $15.95). A ''lively'' biography, ''loaded with detail'' and containing
''the elements of a juicy libretto,'' that clarifies the tragic elements in the
life of one of the most exciting opera singers of our time.

NAKED AT THE FEAST. A Biography of Josephine Baker. By Lynn Haney.  (Dodd, Mead.
$17.95.) A ''brisk and brassy'' biography of the great chanteuse from her early
work as a Dixie Stepper to her triumphs in Paris and later troubles. ''Written
with Hollywood in mind and - quite probably - with Diana Ross slated for the
starring role.''

NATIVE REALM. A Search for Self-Definition. By Czeslaw Milosz.  (Doubleday.
$12.95.) The ''beautifully written, elegantly translated'' autobiography of the
Lithuanian-Polish poet who won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1980.

NOTABLE AMERICAN WOMEN. The Modern Period. A Biographical Dictionary. Edited by
Barbara Sicherman and Carol Hurd Green, with Ilene Kantrov and Harriette Walker.
(Belknap/Harvard. $35.) Biographical essays about more than 400 American women
distinguished in many fields, all of whom died between 1951-1975. A
''surprisingly well-written'' reference work that is sometimes ''witty'' and
''positively moving.''

PALM SUNDAY. An Autobiographical Collage. By Kurt Vonnegut.  (Delacorte.
$13.95.) An ''odd miscellany'' of prefaces, introductions, letters, talks,
reflections and ''what might generally be described as bathtub singing'' by the
popular American novelist.

A ROMANTIC EDUCATION. By Patricia Hampl. (Houghton Mifflin.  $11.95.) An
autobiographical memoir by a young poet who came of age in the 1960's: ''Its
prose is strong, at times even brilliant ... a quarry of richly imaged lines.''

ROWING TOWARD EDEN. By Ted Morgan. (Houghton Mifflin. $10.95.) ''Enchanting''
fragments of the Pulitzer Prize-winning writer's life in Europe and America.

SELF-PORTRAIT OF A HERO. The Letters of Jonathan Netanyahu (1963-1976). (Random
House. $12.95.) The ''witty, poignant and even lyrical'' correspondence,
spanning 13 years, of a distinguished Israeli soldier who was killed leading the
Entebbe raid.

SHOUT! The Beatles in Their Generation. By Philip Norman.  (Fireside/Simon &
Schuster. Cloth, $19.95. Paper, $9.95.) A ''meticulously detailed ... definitive
biography,'' by a correspondent for The Sunday Times of London who covered the
Fab Four from the earliest days of Beatlemania.

SIGMUND FREUD. By Ralph Steadman. (Touchstone/ Simon & Schuster.  Paper, $6.95.)
A ''riotous'' illustrated ''tribute to Freud'': 51 tableaux fusing ''intuitive
force, linear grace and comic outrage.''

TENNYSON. The Unquiet Heart. By Robert Bernard Martin. (Oxford.  $29.95.) An
''authoritative and shrewd'' portrait of the great Victorian poet, ''an
eccentric utterly lacking in manners, a brooding unkempt genius.''

TIME CHANGE. An Autobiography. By Hope Cooke. (Simon & Schuster.  $14.95.) An
''intense, assertive monologue'' by the American-born former Queen of Sikkim,
who in this book shows herself to be ''a writer of intelligence, natural talent
... and unstinting candor.''

TOWARDS THE MOUNTAIN. An Autobiography. By Alan Paton. (Scribner's. $16.95.) The
first volume of autobiography by the author of ''Cry, the Beloved Country'' -the
''champion of the oppressed'' in his native South Africa.

TWELVE YEARS. An American Boyhood in East Germany. By Joel Agee.  (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux. $14.95.) A chronicle of the journey through adolescence and
into young manhood, told in a ''neat prose style seasoned with just the right
amount of lyrical effusion'' by James Agee's son.

UNRELIABLE MEMOIRS. By Clive James. (Knopf. $10.) A ''splendid'' autobiography
by ''one of the brightest figures in contemporary English intellectual
journalism.''

WAYS OF ESCAPE. By Graham Greene. (Simon & Schuster. $12.95.) ''The crucial
episodes'' of the author's life: the ''incessant quest for adventure'' in the
''exotic, shabby outposts of Africa, Haiti, Latin America the Far East.''

WOODY GUTHRIE. A Life. By Joe Klein. (Knopf. $15.95.) ''The legend and the
life'' of the influential folksinger ''are intertwined ...  into a superbly
balanced biography.''

CHILDREN'S BOOKS

A FABULOUS CREATURE. By Zilpha Keatley Snyder. (Atheneum. $9.95.  Ages 11 to
15.) A richly textured novel set in the Sierras, where a boy and a girl combine
to save a magnificent stag.

HOMECOMING. By Cynthia Voigt. (Atheneum. $12.95. Ages 12 to 16.) A family of
four abandoned children, ages 6 to 13, with little money or adult help, journeys
from Rhode Island to Maryland in search of a home. A solid first novel.

JUMANJI. Written and illustrated by Chris Van Allsburg. (Houghton Mifflin.
$9.95. Ages 5 to 9.) Parents away, two children play a magic board game that
produces a rhino stampede in the living room, monkey havoc in the kitchen and
other bizarre occurrences. A superb balancing of light and shadow in the precise
draftsmanship.

LESTER'S TURN. By Jan Slepian. (Macmillan. $8.95. Ages 12 to 15.) In a touching
and sensitive story, a young cerebral palsy victim and his friends set out to
''rescue'' retarded Alfie from an institution. A sequel to ''The Alfred
Summer.''

THE MARZIPAN MOON. By Nancy Willard. Illustrated by Marcia Sewall.  (Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich. Cloth, $9.95; paper, $4.95. Ages 7 to 10.) Wry, contemporary
fairytale about a poor priest, a poor parish, a magic crock and a covetous
bishop. Marcia Sewall ''provides just the right laid-back graphic
accompaniment.''

McGOOGAN MOVES THE MIGHTY ROCK. Written and illustrated by Dick Gackenbach.
(Harper & Row. $8.95. Ages 6 to 9.) A balladeer and a rock with a heart of gold
travel to the sea in this tale of generosity and friendship, ''told with a lilt,
cadence and brogue approaching those of the master storytellers.'' Jaunty,
amusing and expressive illustrations.

ON MARKET STREET. By Arnold Lobel. Illustrated by Anita Lobel.  (Greenwillow.
$8.95. Ages 4 to 7.) Adapting the style of 17th-century French trade engravings,
Anita Lobel offers an alphabetical tour de force: M is a man made of musical
instruments, N a lady of noodles.  Decorative and dazzling.

OUTSIDE OVER THERE. Written and illustrated by Maurice Sendak.  (Harper & Row/
Nordstrom. $12.95. Ages 5 and up.) Lyrical, dreamlike, symbolic tale in which a
little girl, with the aid of a ''wonder horn,'' saves her baby sister from
goblins. With sly echoes of great master painters in the illustrations, the book
is an endless marvel to look at and ''a profound work of art.''

RAINBOW JORDAN. By Alice Childress. (Coward, McCann. $8.95. Ages 13 and up.) A
tough, proud 14-year-old black girl tries to make her way despite an
often-absent mother. ''A heartbreakingly sturdy character ... in a beautiful
book.''

THE SNUG LITTLE HOUSE. By Eils Moorhouse Lewis. Illustrated by Elise Primavera.
(Atheneum/McElderry. $8.95. Ages 3 to 5.) A battered chair and a broken-legged
table meet other castoffs, in repetitive encounters, before ending up living
''happily ever after.'' A book of simple, deceptive charm, and adroitly
sketched, for the very youngest.

CRIME

DEATH AND THE GOOD LIFE. By Richard Hugo. (St. Martin's. $10.95.) Montana is the
locale of this police procedural, in which a sensitive and even softhearted cop
investigates some ax murders. Plenty of suspense and action, a surprise ending
and a believable group of characters.

DEATH BED. By Stephen Greenleaf. (Dial. $10.95.) A San Francisco private-eye
novel featuring John Tanner. The concept and writing refer back to Hammett and,
more recently, Ross Macdonald. But within the cliches of the genre - and Mr.
Greenleaf knows all of them -this is a sturdy, well-plotted piece of work in
which the author handles a very complicated plot with unusual finesse.

DEATH OF A LITERARY WIDOW. By Robert Barnard. (Scribner's. $8.95.) The
traditional British mystery lives in Mr. Barnard's books. This one is witty and
civilized, written along classic lines, with an ingenious ending. Among the nice
things in the book is a marvelous parody of American academic literary
criticism.

DOUBLE NEGATIVE. By David Carkett. (Dial. $9.95.) A fine first novel from a
professor of linguistics about a linguistics scholar.  There are some unusual
ideas in this book. The solution to a murder is literally out of the mouth of a
babe - a 16-month-old infant.  Along the way are some funny, jaundiced views of
scholars and scholarship.

THE MORDIDA MAN. By Ross Thomas. (Simon & Schuster. $13.95.) Mr.  Thomas is one
of America's best storytellers, and this book is a tour de force even for him.
The wild plot involves the kidnapping of the President's brother, Libyan
terrorists, the C.I.A., an expatriate millionaire and fancy double-dealing. All
this is put together into a tingling, nonstop race to the finish line.

MURDER MYSTERY. By Gene Thompson. (Random House. $9.95.) Introducing a new
investigator - Dade Cooley, a peppery, 60-year-old, homespun, smart lawyer from
San Francisco. (His wife is pretty sharp, too.) In plotting and construction,
this book harks back to the traditional puzzle mystery. But its pungent talk is
very much of our own day.

PEOPLE OF DARKNESS. By Tony Hillerman. (Harper & Row. $9.95.) Another of Mr.
Hillerman's looks at modern Indian culture, as represented by the Navajo Sgt.
Jim Chee and a varied cast. A cool, menacing hired killer threads his way
through the action. But of equal interest is the sensitive equation that
balances Indians against whites.

PHOTO FINISH. By Ngaio Marsh. (Little, Brown. $10.95.) A typically expert job,
featuring Supt. Roderick Alleyn and his wife Troy. This classic British mystery
is set in New Zealand, with a house party, a tempestuous soprano, a locked-room
puzzle and plenty of quiet humor.  Dame Ngaio remains an Old Master.

Current Affairs & Social Comment

THE BATTLE FOR PEACE. By Ezer Weizman. (Bantam. $15.95.) The former Israeli
Minister of Defense's ''explosively indiscreet and savagely revealing'' memoirs
of the period from the Likud's electoral victory in May 1977 to the Camp David
accords of September 1979.

BEGINNING TO SEE THE LIGHT. Pieces of a Decade. By Ellen Willis.  (Knopf.
$12.95.) ''A stimulating and satisfying collection,'' spanning a decade and a
half, by The New Yorker/Village Voice/Rolling Stone writer.

THE BIGGEST COMPANY ON EARTH. A Profile of A.T.& T. By Sonny Kleinfield. (Holt,
Rinehart & Winston. $14.95.) A mosaic portrait of the giant corporation - its
employees (of which there are more than a million), its customers, its history,
its technology and its future - as seen by a financial news reporter for The New
York Times.

DEBACLE. The American Failure in Iran. By Michael Ledeen and William Lewis.
(Knopf. $14.95.) An analysis of a sorry chapter in American diplomacy, based
heavily on confidential comments and leaked cables, expanded from an article
that appeared in the Washington Quarterly in the spring of 1980.

DECADE OF DECISION. The Crisis of the American System. By Michael Harrington.
(Simon & Schuster. $11.95.) A ''humane and open-minded'' socialist analysis of
our current socio-economic plight.

FLOWERS OF EMPTINESS. Reflections on an Ashram. By Sally Belfrage.  (Dial.
$10.95.) An ''honest'' account by an ''intelligent and humorous journalist and
critic'' about her experiences in a religioius commune in India.

HARVARD ENCYCLOPEDIA OF AMERICAN ETHNIC GROUPS. Stephan Thernstrom, Editor.
(Harvard. $60.) ''Not just a book to sit on a reference shelf,'' this work is
''designed for a broad and varied audience.''

HIGH IN AMERICA. The True Story Behind NORML and the Politics of Marijuana. By
Patrick Anderson. (Viking. $13.95.) A ''fascinating portrait'' of Keith Stroup,
the founder of the National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws, and
of his efforts to decriminalize marijuana possession - a private war that was
''fundamentally about personal liberty.''

HIGH SCHOOL. By David Owen. (Viking. $12.95.) ''An odd but often very funny and
appealing book'' by a former editor of the Harvard Lampoon who infiltrated the
senior class of an upstate New York high school to ''find out what teen-agers
are up to these days.'' ''Timewarp anthropology.''

PAPER MONEY. By Adam Smith. (Summit. $13.95.) George J.W. Goodman, a.k.a. Adam
Smith, author of ''The Money Game'' and ''Supermoney,'' tells the story of how
our money got to be worth so little. Among the topics covered are the tyranny of
OPEC, skyrocketing housing prices, monstrous wars and banking catastrophes.

PHILOSOPHY AND PUBLIC POLICY. By Sidney Hook. (Southern Illinois.  $17.50.)
''Exemplary and admonitory'' essays - spanning 35 years and such diverse
subjects as T.S. Eliot, Leon Trotsky, human rights and reverse discrimination -
by the distinguished philosopher.

PRISONER WITHOUT A NAME, CELL WITHOUT A NUMBER. By Jacobo Timerman. (Knopf.
$10.95.) ''An extraordinary book'' by the former editor of a leading Buenos
Aires daily newspaper, who was imprisoned and tortured as a victim of Argentine
anti-Semitism in 1977: ''Not just autobiography, or political analysis, or a
victim's cry in the night ... the effect is devastating.''

RADICAL PRINCIPLES. Reflections of an Unreconstructed Democrat. By Michael
Walzer. (Basic. $15.) Eighteen ''graceful'' essays on politics and philosophy by
a forthright egalitarian.

''WATCH OUT FOR THE FOREIGN GUESTS!'' China Encounters the West. By Orville
Schell. (Pantheon. $8.95.) ''Entertaining'' reporting of China's reaction to its
recent encounters with the West.

WEALTH AND POVERTY. By George Gilder. (Basic. $16.95.) A ''creed for capitalism
worthy of intelligent people.''

Essays and Criticism

AMBITION. The Secret Passion. By Joseph Epstein. (Dutton. $13.95.) A ''clear,
straightforward analysis'' of ''the fuel of achievement'' by the editor of The
American Scholar.

THE CAMERA AGE. Essays on Television. By Michael J. Arlen.  (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux. $13.95.) A collection of ''witty, intelligent, restrained'' essays by
The New Yorker's television critic.

DOES GOD EXIST? An Answer for Today. By Hans Kung. Translated by Edward Quinn.
(Doubleday. $17.50.) A ''major work by a major theologian'' on the great
perennial question of philosophy.

A DOUBLE DYING. Reflections on Holocaust Literature. By Alvin H.  Rosenfeld.
(Indiana. $17.50.) An ''exemplary series of critical essays, ... lucid enough
for a general audience and detailed enough for academics,'' about the unique
hold of the Holocaust on the artistic imagination.

ERNEST HEMINGWAY: SELECTED LETTERS. 1917-1961. Edited by Carlos Baker.
(Scribner's. $27.50.) This ''gigantic collection of letters to wives, lovers,
friends, enemies, generals, writers and strangers'' reveals the ''fearful
division'' of the man and the writer, and the deterioration from youth
-''sensitive, brave, generous and extremely intelligent'' - to ''Papa, the
darling of gossip columnists.''

THE ESSAYS OF MARK VAN DOREN. (1924-1972). Selected with an Introduction by
William Claire. (Greenwood. $25.) A ''fine strawberry patch'' of a collection
that emphasizes the breadth of the late critic's interests - from Shakespeare
and Emily Dickinson to Thomas Merton, Walt Whitman, Delmore Schwartz and John
Berryman.

LETTERS FROM THE COUNTRY. By Carol Bly. (Harper & Row. $12.95.) A collection of
31 essays - ''a very readable mixture of sociology, secular sermons and good
stories'' - about life in the small Minnesota town to which poet Robert Bly took
his young wife some 25 years ago.

MASTERS. Portraits of Great Teachers. Edited by Joseph Epstein.  (Basic.
$14.95.) A collection of 16 essays that originally appeared in The American
Scholar about great teachers ranging from Nadia Boulanger and F.O. Matthiessen
to J. Robert Oppenheimer and Ruth Benedict, as remembered by some famous
students.

MEMORIES OF THE MODERNS. By Harry Levin. (New Directions. $15.95.) Essays,
introductions, book reviews and lectures by a distinguished critic ''with a true
style.''

THE NEW GROVE DICTIONARY OF MUSIC AND MUSICIANS. Edited by Stanley Sadie. (St.
Martin's. $1,900.) Twenty volumes, 12 years in the making, with 22,500 articles
written by 2,300 contributors: ''A triumph of contemporary musicology ... the
most ambitious and comprehensive musical dictionary and encyclopedia ever
attempted ...  a brilliant success.''

PERSONAL IMPRESSIONS. By Isaiah Berlin. (Viking. $13.95.) The fourth and final
volume of essays by ''one of the great thinkers and writers of our age'' -
essays on Russian writers, Churchill, Roosevelt and others.

PREOCCUPATIONS. Selected Prose 1968-78. By Seamus Heaney. (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux. $15.) ''Nimble and elegant'' lectures and reviews by the gifted Irish
poet.

SHAKESPEARE'S DIVISION OF EXPERIENCE. By Marilyn French. (Summit.  $15.95.) Miss
French, who was known primarily as a Joycean scholar before her novel ''The
Women's Room'' brought her fame, turns her critical eye to Shakespeare: A
''provocative'' study of the division of experience in his plays according to
principles of gender.

THE SHOCK OF THE NEW. By Robert Hughes. (Knopf. $29.95.) A ''consistently
entertaining and informative'' survey of modern art by the art critic of Time
magazine.

TOO OLD TO CRY. By Paul Hemphill. (Viking. $11.95.) ''Appealing'' essays and
reporting on American life by a Southern journalist - a ''true professional.''

VIEWS FROM A WINDOW. Conversations with Gore Vidal. Edited by Robert J. Stanton
and Gore Vidal. (Lyle Stuart. $14.95.) Selections from interviews with the
novelist and critic, covering sex, education, writers and writing.

Fiction

AMERICAN ROSE. By Julia Markus. (Houghton Mifflin. $11.95.) In her second novel,
the author of ''Uncle'' follows several generations of a French-Jewish family in
Europe and America. A family saga in which day-to-day lives are depicted with
''particular sensitivity.''

THE ART OF LIVING. And Other Stories. By John Gardner. (Knopf.  $12.95.) Ten
stories that ''develop the common theme of art and its vexed relation to life''
by the author of ''October Light'' and ''On Moral Fiction.''

BLACK MOUNTAIN BREAKDOWN. By Lee Smith. (Putnam's. $10.95.) The ''sweet, sharp
sensations of a life-hungry adolescent'' named Crystal Spangler, whose
''trajectory'' from Black Rock, Va. to New York City and back is well described.

THE BOOK OF EBENEZER LE PAGE. By G.B. Edwards. (Knopf. $13.95.) A ''Proustian''
novel, set in the Channel Island of Guernsey. Ebenezer Le Page is a ''classic
bachelor ... the ironic observer of his constrained, ingrown little society.''
The first of a projected trilogy cut short by the author's death.

THE CAT AND THE KING. By Louis Auchincloss. (Houghton Mifflin.  $10.95.) A
''stylish book, spare and elegantly written'' by the prolific novelist: An
imaginary continuation of the memoirs of the Duc de Saint-Simon at the court of
Louis XIV.

THE CHANEYSVILLE INCIDENT. By David Bradley. (Harper & Row.  $12.95.) A young
black history professor discovers himself and the real meaning of history as he
examines the mysterious suicide of 13 black runaway slaves and clarifies his
relationship with his white girlfriend and with an aging and eccentric friend of
his deceased father.

THE COLLECTED STORIES OF CAROLINE GORDON. Introduction by Robert Penn Warren.
(Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $17.95.) A half-century of stories set mostly in
Kentucky, including the Aleck Maury tales. They display ''crisp vitality and her
constant alertness to the natural world.''

CITIES OF THE RED NIGHT. By William S. Burroughs. (Holt, Rinehart.  $14.95.) If
you missed ''Naked Lunch'' in 1959 and are excited by descriptions of hangings
and garrotings, this should prove a veritable ''gallows of delight.''

THE COLLECTED STORIES OF ELIZABETH BOWEN. (Knopf. $17.95.) A memorial tribute to
the Anglo-Irish novelist, critic and short story writer who died in 1973: 79
stories written over a period of 50 years. ''Her art was turned full range upon
a subject: human relationships.''

THE COMPANY OF WOMEN. By Mary Gordon. (Random. $12.95.) The story of the growth
and maturation of the only child of a widowed parent and of her relationship to
the priest who is her surrogate father.  This second novel by the author of
''Final Payments'' is ''steeped in ethnic realism'' and demonstrates that Miss
Gordon has become a ''preeminent novelist of Roman Catholic mores and manners.''
-THE CRATER. By Richard Slotkin. (Atheneum. $17.95.) A fictional account - by a
young American historian - of a disastrous Civil War battle in which 4,000 Union
Army troops (black and white) were slaughtered as they emerged from a
500-foot-long tunnel they had dug beneath enemy territory. The writing is
''tough, vigorous and lyrical.''

CREATION. By Gore Vidal. (Random House. $15.95.) This memoirautobiography of one
Cyrus Spitama, a half-Persian, half-Greek grandson of the prophet Zoroaster,
offers the prolific novelist the opportunity to display his capacity for erudite
historical commentary as well as entertainment.

DARCONVILLE'S CAT. By Alexander Theroux. (Doubleday. $15.95.) The author of
''Three Wogs'' has written a very long and rhetorically extravagant novel about
a 29-year-old English professor and his ruinous love affair at a small women's
college in Virginia.

DARLIN' BILL. A Love Story of the Wild West. By Jerome Charyn.  (Arbor House.
$11.95.) A comic historical novel that follows its heroine from Texas to
Oklahoma in pursuit of her drifter lover.  ''Zany ... shrewd, tough, funny and
triumphantly detailed.''

DEATH IN A TENURED POSITION. By Amanda Cross. (Dutton. $10.50.) Kate Fansler,
modern feminist detective, finds herself aiding the first tenured woman
professor in the Harvard English department. An angry novel masquerading as a
simple mystery.

EARTHLY POWERS. By Anthony Burgess. (Simon & Schuster. $15.95.) A long novel
that recounts the life of Kenneth Toomey - an 81-year-old homosexual Roman
Catholic - and meshes real events and real people with Toomey's personal history
of the 20th century. ''Spacious and intricate in design,'' and ''bursting with
manic erudition, garlicky puns, omnilingual jokes.''

ELLIS ISLAND. And Other Stories. By Mark Helprin.  (Delacorte/Seymour Lawrence.
$10.95.) An ambitious collection of stories that range from the turn of the
century to the present and from a mythical Alpine village to a farcical New York
City. The author's ''technical confidence and his admirable concern for
texture'' are ''compelling.''

EXERCISES IN STYLE. By Raymond Queneau. Translated with an introduction by
Barbara Wright.(New Directions. Cloth, $12.95.  Paper, $4.95.) First published
in France in 1947, this volume recounts in 99 different versions a simple
anecdote about two passengers arguing on a Parisian bus. The author, who died in
1976, demonstrates ''the infinite fluidity of language'' while staying
''discreetly within his own range of quiet humor and quirky psychological
observation.''

FAULT LINES. By James Carroll. (Little, Brown. $11.95.) A gripping thriller in
which three characters wind up on an isolated Maine island and settle a lifetime
of accounts.

A FEW GREEN LEAVES. By Barbara Pym. (Dutton. $10.95.) The final book by the late
English novelist who could coax ''comedy and sadness from the most banal moments
without ever managing to be dull.'' The setting is an Oxfordshire village with
the old-fashioned social structure typical of all her fiction.

A GIFT HORSE. And Other Stories. By Kate Cruise O'Brien.  (Braziller. $8.95.)
Fifteen stories set in contemporary Ireland that ''acquire the gravity ... of a
sustained novel or memoir.'' In this first collection the author ''writes with a
spare, conversational and lightly sardonic touch.''

GOD EMPEROR OF DUNE. By Frank Herbert. (Putnam's. $12.95.) The theme in this,
the fourth volume in the author's science fiction Dune series, is ''the nature
of godhead and what happens to men who reach for it.'' But the ''real
fascination'' is the planet Dune itself and the author's thorough working out of
the ''interactions of man and beast and geography.''

GORKY PARK. By Martin Cruz Smith. (Random House. $13.95.) A police procedural,
set in the Soviet Union, that mixes ''the gritty atmosphere of a Moscow police
squad room with a story of detection as neatly done as any English manor-house
puzzlement.''

THE HANGWOMAN. By Pavel Kohout. Translated by Kaca Polakova-Henley. (Putnam's.
$14.95.) ''Gallows humor, Czech-Style - combining the domestic and fantastic,
the common touch with the bizarre twist ... What was Kafka's prophecy is
Kohout's bad news.''

HOUSEKEEPING. By Marilynne Robinson. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux.  $10.95.) A
melancholy tale of a young girl who, through the tragedies of her youth, ''comes
to savor the perishable pleasures.'' A first novel that is ''generous in its
accomplishments.''

HOW GERMAN IS IT. By Walter Abish. (New Directions. Cloth, $14.95.  Paper,
$5.95.) The contradictions and dualities of language are the real focus in this
satire on the new Germany by a writer who delights in assaulting ''the
reassuring familiarity of everyday things.''

LIFETIME. By Scott Sommer. (Random House. $9.95.) An ''impressive collection''
of two novellas and three stories, informed by a ''hip, post-1960's despair ...
all relationships in the corrupted world of these fictions are transient.''

THE LONE PILGRIM. By Laurie Colwin. (Knopf. $9.95.) A collection of stories in
which the author's ''tireless enthusiasm'' and ''adroitly concocted''
observations compensate for the stereotypical romantic situations.

MACHO CAMACHO'S BEAT. By Luis Rafael Sanchez. (Pantheon. $10.95.) A ''funny,
mordant'' first novel by the Puerto Rican playwright and essayist. ''An
extended, raucous song'' set in contemporary San Juan.

THE MEETING AT TELGTE. By Gunter Grass. Translated by Ralph Manheim. (Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich. $9.95.) ''An imaginative tribute'' to the founder of Group 47,
the postwar writers' group that became one of the most powerful forces on the
German literary scene.  It takes the form of a complex historical analogy - a
fictitious writers' meeting of 1647 and is written in ''psuedo-Baroque prose.''

THE MEN'S CLUB. By Leonard Michaels. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux.  $10.95.) A
''short, funny and discomforting novel,'' by the distinguished short story
writer, about seven middle-aged, middleclass men in Berkeley, Calif. who form
their own consciousnessraising group and tell stories about the women in their
lives. One of the best novels of the season.

MIDNIGHT'S CHILDREN. By Salman Rushdie. (Knopf. $13.95.) An extraordinary novel
about modern India from Independence Day in 1947 to the present. The book
encompasses comedy, farce, Indian pop culture and the bitter politics of the
Pakistan wars.

THE MISSING PERSON. By Doris Grumbach. (Putnam's. $11.95.) A Hollywood novel, a
Marilyn Monroe novel, whose tone ''lies midway between realistic piety and
satiric scorn,'' by the author of ''Chamber Music.''

NUNS AND SOLDIERS. By Iris Murdoch. (Viking. $14.95.) In this, Miss Murdoch's
20th novel, the religious, sexual, social and philosophical games and the
elaborate contortions and interminglings of the characters' lives and loves are
as dextrous and mannered as ever.

THE OFFICERS' WIVES. By Thomas Fleming. (Doubleday. $15.95.) A ''satisfying ...
sprawling tale of military life'' from the Korean War to the aftermath of
Vietnam as seen through the lives of three West Point military couples.

ORIGINAL SINS. By Lisa Alther. (Knopf. $13.95.) Five Southern children and how
they grew. The second novel by the author of ''Kinflicks'' and nowhere near so
funny.

OTHER PEOPLE'S WORLDS. By William Trevor. (Viking. $10.95.) The Dublin-born
novelist's tale of an unsuspecting widow's involvement with a ''bounder'' and
her subsequent discovery of his unsavory background - ''filled with narrative
surprises and shrewd social observation.''

THE PARACHUTISTS. By Edward Klein. (Doubleday. $12.95.) A ''whatif'' novel by
the editor of The New York Times Magazine that begins with a small team of
parachutists dropped into partisan Yugoslavia in the summer of 1944 and smuggled
into occupied Hungary with orders to assassinate Eichmann.

PEACE BREAKS OUT. By John Knowles. (Holt, Rinehart. $10.95.) A sequel of sorts
to ''A Separate Peace'' that follows the senior class at the Devon School in
1946. ''The prose is spare, the plotting skillful.''

THE POLYGAMIST. By B.H. Friedman. (Atlantic-Little, Brown. $11.95.) A professor
of Islamic studies is guided through his affairs with two women by the ghost of
his ex-wife - ''a droll anecdote about the magic that keeps life going.''

THE RADIANT FUTURE. By Alexander Zinoviev. Translated by Gordon Clough. (Random
House. $13.95.) A spirited novel of ideas ''in the form of dialogues and
intellectual confessions and anecdotes by an unnamed narrator.'' By the Soviet
born author of ''The Yawning Heights.''

REFLEX. By Dick Francis. (Putnam's. $11.95.) In his 19th thriller, the former
jockey continues ''writing about the thrills, spills and chills of horse racing
.. (with) all the verve shown in his first book, 'Dead Cert.' ''

SAINT AUGUSTINE'S PIGEON. By Evan S. Connell. (North Point Press.  $12.50.)
Collected stories by the author of ''Mrs. Bridge'' that are distinguished by a
''delicate modulation of mood'' and the ''firmness and grace'' of the language.

THE SECOND CHANCE. And Other Stories. By Alan Sillitoe. (Simon & Schuster.
$12.95.) Fiction written from an astute working class perspective by the author
of ''Saturday Night and Sunday Morning'' and 24 other books.

A SENTIMENTAL EDUCATION: Stories. By Joyce Carol Oates. (Dutton.  $11.95.) The
settings for these six stories are the suburban ranch houses and colonial homes
of the Midwest and East Coast where tormented characters, ''dazed by the steady
flow of catastrophe,'' live out their lives ''on the brink of exhaustion.''
Written with an ''unmistakably American voice'' and ''an impressive eye for
concrete detail.''

THE SIRIAN EXPERIMENTS. The Report by Ambien II, of the Five.  Canopus in Argos:
Archives. By Doris Lessing. (Knopf. $11.95.) The third in the author's series of
''space fictions'' set in the galactic empire of Canopus. ''A combination of
fantasy and morality'' by a writer who earned her ''reputation as one of the
most intelligent and discriminating English novelists'' in the traditional
realistic mode.

SISTER WOLF. By Ann Arensberg. (Knopf. $9.95.) An eccentric daughter of
Hungarian emigres has turned her Berkshire estate into a sanctuary for wild
animals and becomes involved with a mysterious stranger. An eerie, demonic first
novel written with ''grace and power.''

THE SOURCE OF LIGHT. By Reynolds Price. (Atheneum. $13.95.) A ''richly detailed
and intensely romantic'' novel covering one year in the life of Hutchins
Mayfield, a 25-year-old North Carolina poet. A continuation of ''The Surface of
Earth.''

STORE UP THE ANGER. By Wessel Ebersohn. (Doubleday. $12.95.) A white South
African writer gives a controversial version of the Steve Biko case - the
murderous maltreatment of a political prisoner by security police. The
restrained style makes the novel more than a polemical tract.

THE STORIES OF ELIZABETH SPENCER. (Doubleday. $14.95.) ''Stories of width, depth
and shapeliness'' in which a ''fairly narrow band of life -the Southern
bourgeois female - is seen as a sufficient mirror of the world.''

STORYTELLER. By Leslie Marmon Silko. (Seaver. Cloth, $17.95.  Paper, $9.95.) A
collection of Native American short stories, anecdotes, folk tales, poems,
historical and autobiographical notes and photographs celebrating the author's
Pueblo and Mexican heritage and the ''ancient and sacred'' art of storytelling.

SWEETSIR. By Helen Yglesias. (Simon & Schuster. $13.95.) A ''novel about a
small-town working-class woman (that) neither simplifies nor patronizes her.''
Sally Sweetsir accidentally murdered her husband, and the author ''lets us hear
a real, anguished voice in the act of self-discovery.''

TAR BABY. By Toni Morrison. (Knopf. $11.95.) In this lush novel set mostly on a
Caribbean island, the author of ''Sula'' and ''Song of Solomon'' ''has succeeded
in writing about race and women symbolically.''

TICKETS. By Richard P. Brickner. (Simon & Schuster. $12.95.) Alan, ''a
well-accounted, opera-obsessed newsmagazine reporter'' meets Betsy, ''a talented
fiction writer, genuinely troubled by her husband's determination to push her
career.'' The result is ''for most of its length, a flawless contemporary
romance.''

TSOTSI. By Athol Fugard. (Random. $8.95.) A ''relentless and claustrophobic''
novel by the South African playwright that traces the self-awakening of a black
gang leader and drifter.

THE WATER CASTLE. By Ingeborg Lauterstein. (Houghton Mifflin.  $12.95.) In this
first novel, a tough young girl survives the chaos and confusion of Austria in
1937 and comes to early maturity. The tale ''transcends pedestrian historical
fiction and eschews simplifications about the holocaust and its prelude.''

WINTER GARDEN. By Beryl Bainbridge. (Braziller. $8.95.) A ''graceful, disturbing
thriller'' about the search for an English sculptor who mysteriously disappears
after arriving in Russia.  ''Typically English in her distance from her
characters,'' the author successfully uses comic dialogue and ''leaves one on
the tantalizing edge of understanding.''

WHAT WE TALK ABOUT WHEN WE TALK ABOUT LOVE. By Raymond Carver.  (Knopf. $9.95.)
A remarkable collection of 17 tales that are ''a set of variations on the themes
of marriage, infidelity and the disquieting tricks of human affection'' in
suburban and lower-middleclass America.

WHERE THE JACKALS HOWL. And Other Stories. By Amos Oz. Translated by Nicholas de
Lange and Philip Simpson. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.  $12.95.) A harsh and
brooding set of eight stories of kibbutz life by the distinguished young Israeli
writer. A ''strong, beautiful, disturbing book.''

THE WHITE HOTEL. By D. M. Thomas. (Viking. $12.95.) A remarkably ambitious novel
by an English poet that attempts ''the diagnosis of our epoch through the
experience of an individual,'' - Lisa Erdman, a fictional patient of Sigmund
Freud, who perishes at Babi Yar.

WONDERS. Writings and Drawings for the Child in Us All. Edited by Jonathan Cott
and Mary Gimbel. (Rolling Stone/Summit. $17.95.) Stories, poems, fables and
fantasies contributed by 147 ''major literary figures,'' with illustrations by
equally prestigious artists, intended to ''explode our sense of what children's
literature is or can be.''

YOU CAN'T KEEP A GOOD WOMAN DOWN. By Alice Walker. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
$10.95.) Collected stories in which ''the noted black poet and novelist'' dares
to ''engage in fictional terms ... some of the major racial-sexual-political
issues of our time.''

History

AMERICAN EDUCATION. The National Experience, 1783-1876. By Lawrence A. Cremin.
(Harper & Row. $29.95.) The second volume of the historian's account of the
social forces that shaped the development of the American school.

ANCIENT SLAVERY AND MODERN IDEOLOGY. By M.I. Finley. (Viking.  $13.95.) A
scholarly study, by a distinguished classicist, of slavery in the ancient world
and modern efforts to understand it.

COMING ALIVE. China After Mao. By Roger Garside. (McGraw-Hill.  $12.95.) ''One
of the most cogent and elegant accounts of revolutionary China to have appeared
in the West,'' by a former First Secretary of the British Embassy in Peking.

EXPLAINING AMERICA: THE FEDERALIST. By Garry Wills. (Doubleday.  $14.95.) Part
Two of the author's ''America's Political Enlightenment'' - an ''inventive''
interpretation of Madison and The Federalist papers.

THE HOUR OF OUR DEATH. By Philippe Aries. (Knopf. $20.) A ''profoundly learned,
richly detailed history of death in the West during the past thousand years.''

MARY CHESNUT'S CIVIL WAR. Edited by C. Vann Woodward. (Yale.  $29.95.) The
fullest version ever published - and ''editorially the most careful by far'' -
of the Civil War diaries made famous by Edmund Wilson in ''Patriotic Gore.''
Though Mr. Woodward, the noted Southern historian, refuses to label the diaries
a hoax, he discloses that Mrs. Chesnut actually composed them between 1881 and
1884.

PIONEER WOMEN. Voices From the Kansas Frontier. By Joanna L.  Stratton. (Simon &
Schuster. $16.95.) Memoirs of some 800 women - women who led lives of quiet hard
work, courage, endurance, fear, isolation and loneliness in Kansas between 1854
and 1890 - discovered by the editor under the eaves of her great-grandmother's
house in Topeka.

RUSSIA IN THE AGE OF CATHERINE THE GREAT. By Isabel de Madariaga.  (Yale. $40.)
A ''panoramic view of Russia's social, political, economic and cultural
development'' during the 34-year reign of Catherine the Great, whom the author
particularly admires for her diplomatic and administrative skills.

SURPASSING THE LOVE OF MEN. Romantic Friendship and Love Between Women From the
Renaissance to the Present. By Lillian Faderman.  (Morrow. Cloth, $18.95. Paper,
$10.95.) A ''welcome and needed'' history of ''women who loved other women and
proclaimed that love in passionately expressive letters, diaries, poetry and
fiction.''

THE TERRIBLE SECRET. Suppression of the Truth About Hitler's ''Final Solution.''
By Walter Laqueur. (Little, Brown. $12.95.) ''Few come out ... unblemished'' in
this thorough account of how news of the Holocaust was disseminated and ignored
during World War II.

WHITE SUPREMACY. A Comparative Study in American and South African History. By
George M. Frederickson. (Oxford. $19.95.) ''One of the most brilliant and
successful studies in comparative history ever written'' - race relations on
both sides of the Atlantic.

POETRY

BEFORE SLEEP. By Philip Booth. (Viking. Cloth, $12.95. Paper, $5.95.) A unified
book about coming to terms with age and death.  These poems ''for all their
spareness, have substance enough.''

A COAST OF TREES. By A.R. Ammons. (Norton. Cloth, $12.95. Paper, $4.95.) The
voice is that of a ''reflective, perambulatory naturalist.'' The diction is a
mix of ''lofty argument and plain wordplay; botany, metaphysics, punning and
alliteration tumble freely one after another through the poems.''

THE COMPLETE POEMS OF MARIANNE MOORE. (Macmillan/Viking, $16.95.) The definitive
edition. As the poet wrote, ''Ecstasy affords/ the occasion and expediency
determines the form.''

FROM THE COUNTRY OF EIGHT ISLANDS. An Anthology of Japanese Poetry. Edited and
translated by Hiroaki Sato and Burton Watson. (University of Washington. Cloth,
$17.50. Anchor/Doubleday. Paper, $9.95.) A selection spanning 1,300 years and
the work of over 80 poets.

PAUL CELAN: POEMS. A Bilingual Edition. Selected, translated and introduced by
Michael Hamburger. (Persea. $20.) Contains ''some of the most intriguing,
paradoxical, pure and anomalous poems in the German language.'' The poet was a
survivor of the Holocaust who killed himself in Paris in 1970.

PEACE MARCH: Nagasaki to Hiroshima. By Millen Brand. (Countryman.  Cloth,
$12.95. Paper, $6.95.) In 1977 the late Millen Brand put his ''aging body on the
roads of Japan'' and, in the spirit of Basho, wrote this verse journal.

THE RED COAL. By Gerald Stern. (Houghton Mifflin. Cloth, $12.95.  Paper, $5.95.)
Master of the midlife crisis lyric, Mr. Stern ''aims at imaginative and
emotional renovation through a heightened consciousness of loss.''

SELECTED POEMS. By Mark Strand. (Atheneum. $10.95.) Depressiveness set down with
''sturdy clarity, lurking wit, impeccable grooming and tuning.''

TRUTH BARRIERS. Poems by Tomas Transtromer. Translated and introduced by Robert
Bly. (Sierra Club. Cloth, $9.95. Paper, $5.95.) The most recent volume (1978) of
a Swedish poet who has the ability to reach through modern life to a universe of
natural revelation.

Science & Social Science

BASIN AND RANGE. By John McPhee. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux.$10.95.) Another
''dizzyingly competent'' foray by The New Yorker's ''veritable master of
expertise'' - this time into the geology of the American continent.

COSMOS. By Carl Sagan. (Random House. $19.95.) ''A cleverly written,
imaginatively illustrated summary'' of the author's ''geological,
anthropological, biological, historical and astronomical ruminations about our
universe.''

THE ETHNIC MYTH. Race, Ethnicity and Class in America. By Stephen Steinberg.
(Atheneum. $14.95.) A defense of the melting-pot theory against the ethnic
pluralists who would debunk it. ''Useful for its clarity and persuasiveness ...
and its robust good sense.''

FORMS OF TALK. By Erving Goffman. (University of Pennsylvania.  Cloth, $20.
Paper, $7.95.) Five essays dealing with the varieties of ordinary discourse -
including breakfast table theatrics. Mr. Goffman uses his ''considerable gifts
for rendering the everyday as bizarre and amusing,'' so that one comes away
''seeing artifice and histrionics everywhere.''

GALAXIES. By Timothy Ferris. (Sierra Club. $75.) A ''stunningly beautiful,''
lavishly illustrated large-format book that summarizes our current knowledge
about galaxies.

AN IMAGINED WORLD. A Story of Scientific Discovery. By June Goodfield. (Harper &
Row. $12.95.) For almost five years, June Goodfield followed the daily steps of
an immunologist, hoping to capture the essence of the scientific process. The
result is an ''authentic and deeply stirring portrait of the workings of a
scientist's mind.''

THE LITIGIOUS SOCIETY. By Jethro K. Lieberman. (Basic. $13.95.) A ''lucid and
balanced analysis'' of lawsuits that have recently commanded the attention of
the courts -cases involving product liability, medical malpractice,
environmental protection, public institutions and governmental immunity. It
shows that ''we are a litigious society because litigation works for our
society.''

LUCY. The Beginnings of Humankind. By Donald C. Johanson and Maitland A. Edey.
(Simon & Schuster. $16.95.) An ''engaging'' account of the discovery of the
oldest and most complete specimen of a two-legged ancestor - ''Lucy,'' the
four-foot-tall prehuman who walked the African plains nearly 4 million years
ago.

THE MAPMAKERS. By John Noble Wilford. (Knopf. $20.) The story of cartography
from its beginnings in Egypt to its complicated (and often computer-based)
manifestations today in the charting of space and of the oceans. ''Thoroughly
absorbing science and history,'' by a science correspondent for The New York
Times.

THE OPPRESSED MIDDLE. Politics of Middle Management. Scenes From Corporate Life.
By Earl Shorris. (Anchor/Doubleday. $13.95.) In a ''scary and valuable'' book,
''seething ... with half-suppressed outrage,'' Earl Shorris applies the theories
of totalitarianism to the modern American corporation and suggests that workers
must either reassert their separateness from the corporation or risk ''lawless
loneliness.''

SAND RIVERS. By Peter Matthiessen. (Viking. $19.95.) Another ''clear triumph''
based on a safari into the Selous Game Reserve in Southern Tanzania by the man
who has ''taken the earth ... as his literary territory.''

THE UNITY OF NATURE. By Carl Friedrich von Weizsacker. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux.
Cloth, $20. Paper, $12.95.) An able physicist, turned philosopher of science,
proposes that physics is approaching its goal of unifying science. An
''exhilarating glimpse of a strong mind at work.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawings

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 1, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Hanoi Calls U.S. Tie Welcome

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 66 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, May 31


Deputy Foreign Minister Vo Dong Giang says that Washington is welcome to open an
embassy in Hanoi immediately despite the Reagan Administration's ''shameful''
attempts to deny Vietnam international development aid. The statement was made
in an interview Friday. Technical difficulties held up transmission until today.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 1, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THE EDITORIAL NOTEBOOK;
MUCK'S MONUMENT TO FREEDOM

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 643 words


How could anyone have objected to the Minnesota law that the Supreme Court
struck down 50 years ago today? It said obscene, lewd, lascivious, malicious,
scandalous or defamatory newspapers and magazines were a public nuisance ''and
all persons guilty of such nuisance may be enjoined'' from printing or selling
them. Who but a liar or rascal could object when the law so generously exempted
anyone who printed the truth with ''good motives and for justifiable ends?''

The fact is that the nation's press was sharply divided about the wisdom of
challenging that gag law. Only the stubbornest (or most outrageous) factions can
claim credit for forcing the Supreme Court to erect a monument of American
liberty, a crucial and workable definition of press freedom.

The case of Near v. Minnesota established that Government may not restrain any
expression prior to publication except when the nation's safety is clearly
threatened. Libel, damage and other complaints could be punished - after the
presses roll. The ruling has withstood the test of decades; it was the decisive
precedent in the Pentagon Papers case, when President Nixon tried to stop the
publication of the Defense Department's Vietnam history ten years ago this
month.

As Fred Friendly recounts in a

How the Vilest Rag Freed America's Press 50 Years Ago Today
colorful new social history of the ''Minnesota Rag'' affair, the ruling in Near
grew out of crackdown on a muckraking, racist Minneapolis scandal sheet called
The Saturday Press. The publisher, a shady and impecunious character named Jay
Near, was silenced because he had smeared every official in sight. He finally
prevailed in the Supreme Court, with the sympathy and financial support of Col.
Robert McCormick, the crusty publisher of The Chicago Tribune. The Colonel
didn't just champion Near; he agreed with him that Minneapolis was corrupt and
that the mainstream press was sitting idle.

Mr. Friendly shows that the state's major newspapers were as hostile to Near's
rights as to his journalism. Incredibly, from the perspective of 1981, they
failed to recognize their stake in his fate. The gag law's sponsors even boasted
that respected newspapers helped write it.

The case produced other odd alignments. Notwithstanding Near's hateful writings
(''Practically every vendor of vile hootch, every owner of a moonshine still,
every snake-faced gangster and embryonic yegg in the Twin Cities is a Jew''), he
had the support of the American Civil Liberties Union, just as the Skokie Nazis
did in recent years. The high court's only Jewish member, Louis Brandeis, joined
the majority opinion of Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes, which lifted the
injunction against Near's rag. The Court's contemptible, anti-semitic justice,
James McReynolds, was one of four dissenters who would have kept Near gagged.

Newspapers and broadcasters still quarrel about what's fair and foul journalism.
Some severely criticized The Times for publishing the ''secret'' Pentagon
Papers. Still more jumped all over The Progressive for wanting to publish
nuclear bomb information - even when the Justice Department failed to prove any
security threat.

But almost all now recognize the Court's vision in perceiving that the power to
stop a press or transmitter ''is the essence'' of the censorship forbidden by
the Constitution. However worthy the instinct to censor, no one can be trusted
to be a censor. Only when scoundrels, too, are free to rant can free speech be
secure. JOHN P.  MacKENZIE

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 2, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

LONG DELAYED U.N. PARLEY ON CAMBODIA SET FOR JULY

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 719 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., June 1


Fresh efforts to press for a withdrawal of Vietnamese troops from Cambodia are
about to be made at the United Nations, Asian diplomats said today.

Secretary General Kurt Waldheim is to announce that a long-delayed conference on
Cambodia will be held here beginning on July 13. Some 65 nations are expected to
attend but diplomats said that two of the most critical, Vietnam and the Soviet
Union, would boycott the gathering. The conference is expected to establish a
smaller, continuing group that would leave the way open for negotiations with
Hanoi and Moscow when and if they are ready to talk.

At the same time, Southeast Asian nations are discussing a cutoff of United
Nations aid to Vietnam to punish it for defying the General Assembly's demand
that it remove its troops. If the effort succeeds - and the prospects are not
rated highly - Hanoi would lose $10 to $11 million it is due to receive this
year from the United Nations Development Program.

No United Nations member has ever been denied United Nations assistance because
it has defied the world organization, officials said.

U.N. Would Supervise Elections

The conference on Cambodia has the declared aim of negotiating the withdrawal of
Hanoi's forces and providing for United Nationssupervised elections in the
war-ravaged country. It was to be held ''early in 1981,'' according to an
Assembly resolution adopted overwhelmingly last fall.

Both Vietnam and the Soviet Union have strongly opposed any meeting, insisting
that the world must recognize the ''fact'' that Cambodia is governed by the
regime of President Heng Samrin. His Government was installed in Phnom Penh by
Vietnamese troops, who continue to battle the Cambodian foes of Mr. Heng Samrin.

Leading the other side are China and the members of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations - Singapore, Indonesia, the Philippines, Malaysia and Thailand.
They have been pressing for a United Nations conference limited to 30 or 35 of
the principal countries involved in the Cambodian issue.

Mr. Waldheim, who hopes to get a new term as Secretary General when his present
term expires at the end of 198l, has been caught in the middle. In light of last
fall's Assembly resolution, adopted by a vote of 97 to 23 with 22 abstentions,
he had no choice and was ultimately compelled to call a meeting.

144 Countries to Be Invited

But it will be a far more diluted affair than the Chinese-Southeast Asian group
wanted. The Secretary General has told them he intends to send out preliminary
invitations to 144 nations - all of the 142 that took part in last autumn's vote
plus Mexico and Nicaragua, which said they had intended to vote.

Moreover, Mr. Waldheim has further disappointed the Chinese-Southeast Asian
group by rejecting their suggestion that he invite representatives from the Heng
Samrin regime. Although that regime is obviously a key party in this dispute,
its Cambodian foes whose forces are led by former Prime Minister Pol Pot sit in
the country's seat at the United Nations.

One Southeast Asian diplomat said his group was not pressing its demands on the
composition of the meeting, ''because we don't want Mr. Waldheim to suffer in an
election year.''

At most, about 65 countries are expected to attend the meeting.  They plan a
week of speeches and the adoption of a resolution repeating what has been said
before.

Little Practical Consequence

The only practical consequence of all this, a Western diplomat said, will be the
formation of a smaller, continuing body that could eventually negotiate with the
Soviet Union and Vietnam. Other third world nations, even those that have voted
with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations on the Cambodian issue, are
likely to be reluctant to go along in this instance.

The Southeast Asian nations are also attempting to unify the Cambodian
opposition against Heng Samrin. They seek a common front among the Pol Pot
forces that now hold Cambodia's seat here, the Khmer People's National
Liberation Front, led by former Prime Minister Son Sann, and Prince Norodom
Sihanouk, the country's former chief of state.

But Asian diplomats said that it had proved very difficult to get agreement
between the Pol Pot group and Mr. Son Sann's forces, both of which continue to
wage guerrilla warfare in Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 3, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
An article yesterday about a United Nations conference on the Vietnamese
presence in Cambodia incorrectly identifed the Cambodian faction that Secretary
General Kurt Waldheim refused to invite. China and the Association of South East
Asian Nations had asked for an invitation to representatives of former Prime
Minister Pol Pot.

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 3, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BLACK POLITICAL INFLUENCE IS LOWEST IN TWO DECADES

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 2760 words


The political influence of blacks in America has fallen to its lowest level in
two decades. Black leaders, confronting a popular Administration that is
determined to cut the Government programs they hold dear, lack wholehearted
support from liberal allies they once counted on.

Population shifts away from black, inner-city districts may reduce the numbers
of blacks in the House of Representatives below the present level of 18 and are
This is the second of two articles on economic and political forces affecting
black Americans.
likely to reduce representation in the legislatures of most Northern states.

The blame for this erosion, depending on who is assessing it, is placed in
varying degrees on white racism, selfishness or impatience; the persistent
poverty and crime among the so-called black underclass; a perception that black
leaders have lost touch with the very poor; black rhetoric, and the changing
political process, especially the near-extinction of the big-city political
machines that once made immigrant leaders and their impoverished followers
mutually dependent.

Tough Problems and Times

Whatever the underlying causes, according to black and white leaders interviewed
in cities around the nation, the decline is being aggravated by a difficult
combination of more complex problems and harder economic times.

Benjamin C. Hooks, executive director of the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People, says that problems related to jobs are far more
thorny than those involved in changing segregation laws. ''You may not want to
step aside from your job as quickly as you did from the water fountain,'' he
says.

One prominent House Democrat, who refused to be quoted by name, says that in the
1960's most of his colleagues saw black demands as simple issues of conscience.
Now, says the legislator, who is white, the rights and wrongs of redressing past
discrimination by giving blacks special advancement are ''very murky'' to most
Congressmen.

Vernon E. Jordan Jr., president of the National Urban League, said that the
essential difference between the 80's and the 60's was that ''this is the first
time that we've not had enough'' resources to do everything the nation wanted to
do for its most impoverished citizens. Mr. Hooks, arguing that the problem was
not so severe, said that the N.A.A.C.P.'s membership of about 160,000
contributors was as high as ever.

But signs of a continuing decline in black influence are clear.  Early this
month, only 51 white colleagues, considerably fewer, Congressional leaders said,
than could have been expected a few years ago, gave the Black Caucus symbolic
support in voting on an alternative budget proposal in the House.

Around the nation, fewer than a dozen blacks won statewide elections from 1970
to 1980, not counting boards or judgeships. The list included one Senator and
two Lieutenant Governors who were defeated later in the decade.

But this is only one measure of black political influence.  Historically, a
greater source of strength has been been found in alliances, most of all with
the Democratic Party, to which blacks have remained loyal while other groups
deserted. Last fall blacks cast one of every five votes that President Carter
got.

Erosion of Democratic Party

The Democratic Party is much weaker than it used to be. The reasons, according
to a recent New York Times/CBS News Poll, include a belief that it has been too
concerned with blacks. The decline in the party's influence translates directly
into a decline in support for black interests, at least as those interests have
been defined in the last few decades.

And internal divisions are also plaguing the diminished Democrats.  They are
reflected most bitterly, perhaps, in contention between Jews and blacks over
quotas for jobs and educational places, and in hostility toward Israel among
some blacks. That tension emerged again this year in the Michigan Democratic
Party, long one of the nation's most liberal, where rivalry over a new seat on
the party's National Committee exploded into mutual accusations of racism and a
black boycott of party functions.

Quota Issue as a Key

A Northeastern Democratic Senator, who asked that he not be named, said in an
interview that the quota issue was the major source of disagreement between
blacks and white liberals, but he added two other difficulties. He said he
believed that the riots of the 1960's had cut into the influence of black
leaders in two ways, because of the riots' impact of fear and because some black
leaders had, in effect, predicted more riots in response to political moves they
opposed. He said that the argument, ''If you don't pass my bill, there will be a
riot,'' had diminished respect for black politicians.

Two leading black politicians offered a different perspective.  Representative
Parren J. Mitchell of Maryland, widely regarded as one of the ablest black
Congressmen, contended that the visibility of some blacks in high places had
persuaded liberals that the problems had been solved for all blacks. He said he
considered self-doubt among white liberals about their own political interests
to be a key factor.

But Mr. Mitchell also acknowledged that what he called an ''extreme degree of
assertiveness'' had obviously ''turned off some people.'' He said that ''the
flagellation of whites,'' which other blacks scornfully referred to as ''60's
talk,'' was counterproductive.

Party's Counsel Sees Selfishness

Ron Brown, counsel to the Democratic National Committee and a former top aide to
Senator Edward M. Kennedy, cited an economic situation that emphasized
selfishness, which in turn reinforced the attitude that ''we've done enough,
it's not our fault, we shouldn't have to pay our grandfathers' dues.''

Black leaders, he said, had failed to gain two key objectives: making their case
that the costs to whites resulting from affirmative action for blacks had been
greatly exaggerated, and making it clear that programs to help the poor were not
''black programs.'' The Black Caucus tried the latter tactic in proposing its
alternative budget in Congress, but it did not convince its colleagues in the
House.

The very poor, the generation-to-generation welfare recipients whom some
sociologists call ''the underclass,'' are not playing any active role in
national debate over reducing or eliminating domestic social programs. But the
voices of the slums generally convey a feeling of distance, and often distrust,
from both the leadership and the Government.

''Here she is from downtown, the probation office must have sent her,'' Hazel
Dukes, head of the New York State N.A.A.C.P., said she heard teen-agers saying
about her when she arrived not long ago at a high-rise housing project, with a
suit and a briefcase, for voter registration work.

A Widow, 81, Shrugs at Leaders

The need to take a taxi to buy food stamps makes them seem not worth the effort
to Mamie Johnson, an 81-year-old Atlanta widow living on a little over $200 a
month in Social Security. She says that except for the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther
King Jr., who was assassinated in 1968, black leaders are irrelevant to her
life: ''I watch them on TV.''

Charles Freeman, 32, a pool hall operator and part-time barber in Atlanta,
scoffed at the help that veterans' counselors gave him when he returned from
Vietnam. ''All I could get into was cosmetology school,'' he said. As for black
leaders, among whom are many wellknown Atlantans, he says they do not affect his
life: ''They follow the cameras. The only time they come around is when the
cameras are out there.''

At Brooklyn's Bushwick Stuyvesant Heights Community Development program, Ocie
Davis said that the black youths whom he tries to train to renovate houses think
black leaders ''aren't doing anything for them and they don't think they will
ever do anything for them.''

As to progress in recent years, Mr. Davis rejected the very idea: ''Those few
blacks, middle-class people, that did make it, very few were at the lowest ebb
themselves.'' Progress, he said, has been ''a great illusion for the black
underclass.''

Black leaders contend that there has been progress, that programs to aid blacks
have been a success, even if a nation used to meeting deadlines has grown weary
of this struggle long before its end. And they deeply resent suggestions that
their interest is somehow elitist, focused on the black middle class, not the
black poor.

Keeping and Losing Touch

Hazel Dukes angrily rejected ''the myth that they've tried to create about us,
that once we achieve leadership, we leave the black community.'' Mr. Brown and
Mr. Mitchell argued that while any group might lose touch with its poor cousins
when it moved to the suburbs, blacks were more conscious of their origins and
their ties than any other American ethnic group.

''Every fight we fight is for all black people,'' Mr. Hooks insisted. At the
least, he argued, the programs that his organization defends have given blacks
locked in poverty ''some help.''

''They live a little longer, live a little better,'' he said. In addition, he
went on, ''you'll find hundreds of thousands of blacks in jobs they never had 25
years ago.''

Bernice, a 52-year-old Detroit woman who was on welfare from 1935 to 1974 and
who asked that her last name not be used, entered a New Careers programs in 1974
and is now a city welfare worker. She owns her own home. ''I definitely think
it's a beautiful program,'' she said. Reagan Administration budget cuts would
kill it.

Mr. Jordan, of the Urban League, said that the distance between the leadership
and the poor was greatly exaggerated and that the argument that the programs had
failed was a ''racist argument,'' an argument that, ''God damn it, we did what
we were going to do for them in the 60's.'' The various Federal programs now
being cut, he said, ''were under-funded,'' were tried for too short a time, and
moreover, ''most of the programs worked, from food stamps to Head Start to the
Job Corps.''

The white middle class, he said, was created by the New Deal and by post-World
War II programs. Now, when there seems to be less to go around, whites are
''unwilling to set another place at the table,'' he said. ''It's our time and
people are saying, 'You have to pull yourself up by your own bootstraps.' ''

A Class That Ignores the Poor

Even as they spurn the argument that their efforts have been irrelevant and deny
the suggestion that they do not care much about the poor, many blacks in
positions of influence concede that things are not perfect.

Booker Tall, administrative assistant to Cleveland's Mayor George Voinovich, a
Republican, says, ''Even in the black community, you're getting an upper middle
class that turns the back on the poor.'' He says that black doctors, like whites
in comparable positions, are saying: ''I never had a scholarship. I worked my
way all the way through. Why can't they?''

Mr. Jordan does not concede any lack of effort to maintain ties to the
underclass, but he acknowledges that ''one of our failures has been an inability
to penetrate and reach them in large numbers.'' A program of his organization of
which he is proud, training young blacks in construction trades - ''mean, hard
kids, some of the men on drugs'' - reaches 5,000 a year. ''We only get our hands
on 5,000 across the country in 40 cities,'' he said.

Like other black leaders, he scoffed at the argument that crime and poverty
persisting among many blacks despite Federal programs caused white indifference.
He said the reason was racism. But he conceded: ''It does not help when some
guy's car is standing at 121st Street and First Avenue waiting to get on the
Triborough Bridge, and he is thinking about dinner with his wife after a hard
day, with his arm out of the window listening to the radio, and some black kid
comes along and snatches his watch off. That may not change any views, but it
reinforces racism.''

Assemblyman Herman D. Farrell of Manhattan, a black who is the new head of the
borough's Democratic organization, says he never hears from the truly poor. He
says he votes for welfare increases, for example, because he thinks he should,
not because it is demanded of him. ''I've never had anyone say, 'I'm on welfare
- you've got to give me an increase,' '' he said.

Mr. Farrell may head what was once Tammany Hall. But 75 years ago, even a
district leader, such as George Washington Plunkitt, had more to offer than he
does in terms of jobs, of influence, or of the ability to provide food or coal
in return for a vote. Except for Chicago, where the Democratic machine lives on,
weakened but still real, this is a common situation.

The Days of the Irish 'Underclass'

The very poor, Mr. Farrell said one day as he practiced his own personal
politics for no fee in Landlord and Tenants Court, ''are not even attuned to the
political system, to use it for themselves.''

When the Irish were the underclass in New York, he said, ''you had a way to
force the underclass to be political.'' Help was available seven days a week in
political clubs, he went on, ''but you didn't walk in to a club to get help
unless your captain brought you in. And he didn't bring anyone in who wasn't
registered -whose whole family wasn't registered.''

In Cleveland, Ken Johnson, a newly elected City Councilman who won his office
with the help of the votes of poor blacks (and well-off white liberals as well)
indicates that he cherishes modest-sounding achievements, but he says they do
make a difference: two new playgrounds, dozens of new sidewalks and a foot
patrol by policemen on Buckeye Avenue.

He works, however, through his position on the Council, not through the ward
politics that once decided things in Cleveland. One of his predecessors, a
Democrat of Hungarian descent with the Anglicized name of Jack Russell, used to
refuse to speak to anyone who was not a registered voter.

George Forbes, president of Cleveland's City Council, says, ''I don't have 10
jobs to fill.'' Similarly, there are no more Christmas baskets of food from the
clubhouse, he said, because ''a guy can go to welfare and get on food stamps.''

Mr. Farrell acknowledged that the Depression required government to take over
welfare when its problems were too much for private charity, politically and
otherwise. But he and other politicians contend that the change away from that
mutual dependence of rising ethnic politician and slum-dweller takes away from
the very poor an obvious incentive to political participation. And they say it
denies politicians the influence that bigger black vote totals would give them:
the chance to contend for the mayoralty in New York, for example.

A Cleveland Call Brings Free Coal

Without that involvement, the Government faces little political deterrent to
shifting away from the programs of the late 60's and 70's primarily aimed at
helping very poor blacks.

Social services are not vanishing, of course, and there is some connection
between poor blacks and government. But it is chancy and unpredictable. In
Nashville, for example, Anna Fitzpatrick, the 76-year-old wife of a retired
janitor, got a calendar in the mail from Mayor Richard Fulton last winter, and
because of that decided to call City Hall when the family was too poor to buy
coal. They got their coal free.

In Atlanta, Leon Hall, director of community and consumer affairs for Mayor
Maynard Jackson, is the man people see when they turn up at City Hall looking
for help. The homeless can be sent for 10 days to Help House, a shelter near
City Hall. It is something, he says, but the city official, who is 34 years old,
feels little of the exhilaration he once felt as an aide to the Rev. Dr. Martin
Luther King Jr.

''All of the punch has gone out of what we do,'' he said. ''There is no
consistent anger left to combat racism.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Vernon Jordan (Page B8) Photo of Parren
Mitchell (Page B8) Photo of Benjamin Hooks (Page B8)

TYPE: series

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 3, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CONFEREES TIGHTEN RULES THAT RESTRICT MEDICAID ABORTIONS

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 927 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 2


House and Senate conferees tonight ratified the most stringent restrictions ever
placed on Medicaid abortions after rejecting a measure passed by the House that
would have forbidden medical insurance payments for abortions for Federal
employees..

The conferees also rejected a House proposal to prohibit the use of Federal
funds to carry out affirmative action programs.  The action occurred as the
conferees approved supplemental appropriations of $13 billion needed to keep the
Government operating for the rest of this fiscal year, which ends Sept. 30. The
exact amount will be determined later by conference aides, although the
conferees were confident that the amount was well within the limits of the
budget approved by both houses and endorsed by President Reagan.

Payment Allowed in Special Cases

The abortion restrictions would be in effect until at least the end of
September. Then they would have to be approved again by both houses of Congress
as part of new legislation. In the past, such approval has often been granted to
measures previously added to supplemental appropriations bills.

Under the bill, Medicaid funds cannot be used to pay for abortions except when
they are necessary to save the life of the mother. Under present law, those
funds can also be used for abortions in cases of incest and in cases of rape
reported within three days.

Although supplemental appropriation bills nominally deal only with Federal
spending commitments, they have been used to break new ground in legislation.
Such bills were used in that way to stop paying for the Vietnam War, for earlier
restrictions on the use of Federal funds for abortions and to prohibit the use
of Federal funds for school busing to achieve desegregation.

Conferees Resolved 429 Differences

In other action, House and Senate committees have approved proposals that would
make sweeping cutbacks in welfare and health care for the poor.  (Page B8.)

The House and Senate conferees took 10 hours to iron out 429 differences in the
two versions of the supplemental appropriations bills, which had identical
provisions on abortion.

A major difference involved defense spending. The House had appropriated $2.2
billion less than the Senate, largely on the basis of a lower projection of the
cost of programs. The Senate, on the other hand, believed that inflation would
drive up the costs.

In the end, the conferees agreed on a figure $800,000 higher than the House
figure, and $1.4 billion lower than the Senate figure. Here too, however, the
exact numbers are to be worked out in the next 24 hours by committee aides,
although they are said to be in the neighborhood of $10 billion.

The conferees rejected a measure approved by the House that would have
eliminated abortion coverage in health insurance plans for Federal employees.
The measure, sponsored by Representative John M.  Ashbrook, Republican of Ohio,
had passed the House by a vote of 242 to 155.

Senator Mark O. Hatfield, Republican of Oregon, chairman of the Senate
Appropriations Committee, told the conferees that he had voted for restrictions
on the use of Medicaid funds for abortions, and had even introduced a
constitutional amendment to restrict abortions.

''But I do not believe this is the place to legislate,'' the Senator said of the
supplemental appropriations bill. ''It does not belong in this bill.''

He Notes Source of Funds

Senator Hatfield noted that ''these are funds contributed by employees as well
as by Government.'' He then said: ''We're legislating on labor-management
relations.'' h

No House conferees rose in support of the House position, although
Representative Edward R. Roybal, Democrat of California, said that the House
conferees were willing to modify the Ashbrook amendment by allowing health plans
to pay for abortions for Federal employees when the mother's life was in
jeopardy. Under the House amendment, no such exception was allowed.

The conferees also rejected the House proposal that would have barred the use of
supplemental funds for affirmative action programs. The measure, sponsored by
Representative Robert S. Walker, Republican of Pennsylvania, had been approved
by the House on a voice vote.

Senator Harrison J. Schmitt, Republican of New Mexico, urged rejection of the
Walker amendment because, he said, ''This is legislation on an appropriations
bill.''

Financing of Waste Disposal Plant

Representative William H. Natcher, Democrat of Kentucky, chairman of the
Appropriations Subcommittee on Labor, Health, Education and Welfare, asked Mr.
Schmitt, ''Are you going to insist that this come out of the bill?''

''I insist,'' Mr. Schmitt said.  ''All right, we in the House recede,'' Mr.
Nacher said.  The entire discussion took two minutes.  Senator Alfonse M.
D'Amato, Republican of New York, one of the conferees, succeeded in preserving
funds for the West Valley nuclear waste disposal project, 30 miles south of
Buffalo.

In the supplemental appropriations for the military, the House and Senate
conferees agreed to withdraw all items related to the MX missile. The reason,
the conferees said, was that those funds were not urgently needed between now
and the end of the fiscal year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 3, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Amnesty Group Reports On Mission to Vietnam

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 253 words


Amnesty International issued a report yesterday on a 1979 mission to Vietnam and
a subsequent exchange of memorandums in which it urged Hanoi to close
''long-term re-education camps'' for thousands of prisoners still detained
without formal charges or trials.

In one of the memorandums, dated September 1980, the Vietnamese said that about
one million people had attended short-term reeducation courses ''and enjoyed
freedom'' after the fall of the old South Vietnamese Government in April 1975.
''Only 40,000 persons'' were detained for long-term rehabilitation, and 20,000
of them have since been released, the Hanoi authorities reported.

Amnesty International called for an end to detention without trial and an
independent commission to examine the reasons for it and to free those against
whom no criminal charges could be made. The amnesty group sent a delegation to
Vietnam in December 1979, and its members visited three camps and one prison.

A spokesman for Amnesty International, Larry Cox, said that while many prisoners
had been in responsible positions under the old regime, ''many appear to be held
because of current security considerations'' under the new. Mr. Cox said his
group considered Hanoi's responses ''very good.''

The Vietnamese mission to the United Nations yesterday referred inquiries about
the report to its counselor, Cu Dinh Ba, but said that he was ''not available''
and could not be reached.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 3, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

HOUSE BACKS AID IN DEFOLIANT CASES

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 279 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 2


The House unanimously passed today a bill directing the Veterans Administration
to provide hospital care and medical attention to Vietnam War veterans whose
health problems may have arisen from exposure to the herbicide Agent Orange.

The action marked the first formal finding by a house of Congress that veterans'
health may have been impaired by contact with the herbicide, which contains
dioxin, a highly toxic chemical substance. The measure, approved by a vote of
388 to 0, now goes to the Senate.

The Veterans Administration has taken the position that no scientific evidence
has been found to show that contact with Agent Orange damaged the health of
United States troops in Vietnam. But the agency says that it provides medical
care to any veteran needing it, regardless of the cause of their problems.

In a report accompanying the bill, the House Veterans Affairs Committee said
that the purpose of the bill was to indicate clearly that, until scientists were
able to show a cause-and-effect relationship of the toxic herbicides used in the
Vietnam War, the Veterans Administration ''should do everything possible'' for
veterans whose health might have been affected by the spray.

During the war, 12 million gallons of the herbicide were sprayed on jungles and
farming areas in an effort to deny food and hiding places to Communist forces.
Veterans have attributed a variety of ailments, from cancer to birth defects in
their offspring, to dioxin, but the veterans agency said that it had found no
evidence linking the spray to any disease except chloracne, a skin disorder.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 3, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 55 words


An article yesterday about a United Nations conference on the Vietnamese
presence in Cambodia incorrectly identifed the Cambodian faction that Secretary
General Kurt Waldheim refused to invite. China and the Association of South East
Asian Nations had asked for an invitation to representatives of former Prime
Minister Pol Pot.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: correction

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 3, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ECONOMIC SCENE;
MONETARISM: DISSENT GROWS

BYLINE: By Leonard Silk

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 903 words


THE struggle between President Reagan and the Democrats in Congress over the tax
bill has become a war of maneuver for political advantage more than a debate
over economic policy. Mr.  Reagan appears to have dug in deeply on the
''principle'' of three consecutive years of tax cuts, to which he committed
himself during the election campaign. The Democrats are split by uncertainty
over whether they can maximize their potential political gains (or minimize
their potential losses) by fighting the President or compromising with him.

House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. is growling ''Fight!'' while Representative
Dan Rostenkowski, the Democratic leader of the House Ways and Means Committee,
says, ''Compromise!''

Mr. Reagan's willingness to scale down the first-year tax cut to 5 percent from
10 and delay it until Oct. 1 may be motivated primarily by his desire to reduce
budget deficits in the fiscal years 1981 and 1982, and to provide some
reassurance to a skittish public and anxiety-ridden Wall Street. The President
has criticized Wall Street's powers of perception but, as in past
Administrations, when Wall Street talks, Presidents listen.

The reverse is also true, although thus far the markets seem singularly
unimpressed with the President's economic plan or the minimal changes he now
says he would make in it. Indeed, the scaling down of the first-year tax cut
would scarcely change its economic impact. The President's own economic advisers
at the Treasury have been proclaiming that budget deficits have nothing to do
with inflation anyway; their theory is that it is only the rate of growth of the
money supply that causes or curbs inflation.

But whether one subscribes to this monetarist doctrine or not, it seems apparent
that the President's proposal to scale down the tax bill for next year by 5
percent, less than $15 billion, will have slight effect on a country whose gross
national product is likely to run over $3,300 billion in 1982.

The modest proposed changes in the President's tax bill must be seen within the
context of his entire budget and fiscal program, which appears to be, after
spending cuts are offset against tax cuts, roughly neutral.

The Administration can make it more disinflationary, if it so chooses, by
slowing down the buildup in defense spending. Some economists, such as Lester
Thurow of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, have been warning that
defense spending is inherently highly inflationary and that the Reagan defense
buildup would put an even greater burden on the economy than did the Johnson
Vietnam guns-and-butter spending binge.

But James Tobin of Yale University, who was a member of the Council of Economic
Advisers in the Kennedy Administration, thinks that drawing an analogy between
the Johnson and Reagan buildups is, as he says, far from perfect: ''This defense
buildup,'' Mr. Tobin says, ''starts in an economy with a much larger amount of
slack than there was in January 1966. And it lacks the compulsion to disregard
costs and budget constraints that an actual war engenders.''

Mr. Tobin is bemused by the ironies of the political parties' current reversal
of roles. Now, he observes, it is the Republicans who defend planned deficits
against Democratic attack, advocate tax cuts not just to arrest recession but to
sustain incipient recovery, and resist Democratic proposals to tilt tax
reduction further toward business at the expense of individuals. ''The final
irony,'' he says, ''is that it is a Republican budget, proposed by a President
who is a free enterprise hero, to which the securities markets are currently
registering a vote of no-confidence.''

Although public attention is now focused on President Reagan's budget and fiscal
program, it is almost certainly the monetary policy that the Federal Reserve is
pursuing - and that the Administration is determined shall be made even tighter
- that holds the key to the economic outlook, as the securities markets realize.
While Wall Street's economic philosophy remains predominantly monetarist, the
dissenters, alarmed over very high interest rates and the threat to financial
institutions, are growing in number.

As one dissenter against monetarism, Ashley Bladen, senior vice president for
investments of the Guardian Life Insurance Company, puts it, ''Monetarism
asserts that inflation can be wrung out of the system more or less painlessly
over a period of years by gradually reducing the rate of growth of the money
supply - in spite of the fact that the Fed has tried that four times during the
last decade and a half and each time has failed miserably.''

A growing number of dissenters are pointing to what they regard as an even more
dramatic failure of monetarism: Britain's economic decay and postwar-record
unemployment of more than 10 percent, stemming from Prime Minister Margaret
Thatcher's heavy reliance on monetarism as the answer to stagflation. That
record is haunting the Reagan Administration.

Yet it appears most improbable that the Reagan Administration is yet ready to
move away from its own monetarism. And, if the Administration will not change
its approach, neither can the Fed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: cartoon of donkey and elephants

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 4, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Renews Offer to Thailand For a Partial Pullout in Cambodia

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 153 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 3


Vietnam renewed its offer today to withdraw some of its 200,000 troops in
Cambodia if Thailand severs ties with Communist guerrillas fighting the
Vietnamese-backed Cambodian regime, Radio Hanoi reported.

Vietnam sent the troops into Cambodia to help rebels oust the Pol Pot Government
in January 1979. Pol Pot went into the jungle, where his forces have waged
guerrilla war against the Vietnamese. Thailand has been supporting the 30,000 to
40,000 guerrillas loyal to the Pol Pot cause, although it has denied allowing
them to use its territory.

''A part of Vietnamese forces will be withdrawn from Cambodia if Thailand puts
an end to all hostile activities against Cambodia and stops allowing the use of
Thai territory as a sanctuary for Pol Pot remnants and other reactionary
forces,'' Radio Hanoi said in a broadcast monitored here.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 5, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Around the World;
Group at U.N. Said to Want To Invite Phnom Penh Chief

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 167 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., June 4


A Southeast Asian diplomat said today that the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations wanted to invite Heng Samrin, head of the Vietnamese-installed
Government in Phnom Penh, to a United Nations conference on Cambodia tentatively
scheduled to begin here on July 13.

The diplomat, who asked that his name not be used, told reporters that an
overwhelming majority of nations that refuse to recognize the legitimacy of Mr.
Heng Samrin's rule nevertheless hope that representatives of his regime will
appear to take part in negotiations

The United States, he said, is among those favoring this course. It is opposed
by China and the Peking-backed Pol Pot faction that the Vietnamese troops drove
from power. Secretary General Kurt Waldheim has declined to invite the Heng
Samrin group because it is not recognized by the United Nations, and he instead
invited the Pekingbacked group.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 5, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Around the Nation;
2 Veterans Who Collapsed Press for Reagan Interview

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 132 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, June 4


Two veterans of the Vietnam War who collapsed in their hunger strike vowed today
to go without food until President Reagan listened to their demands for action
on veterans' problems.

They and a dozen other veterans have set up a tent city on the lawn of the
Wadsworth Veterans Administration Hospitalin west Los Angeles and have been on a
hunger strike for two weeks.

Max Inglett, 29 years old, a holder of the Silver Star, started fasting, taking
only water, on May 25. Chuck Bass, 38, is on a liquids-only diet. Both are
paraplegics and they, with the others, demand that President Reagan meet
personally with them.

They collapsed on the lawn of the hospital yesterday and were taken inside for
treatment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 5, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PROMOTERS OF VIOLENCE

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 431 words


To the Editor:

The assassination attempt on President Reagan evoked widespread interest
regarding the level of violence in the United States. However, without a
willingness to acknowledge how extensively this phenomenon premeates our
society, the present concern will prove as superficial and short-lived as it has
in the past.

F.B.I. statistics reveal that more than one million violent crimes are committed
yearly, with an annual murder rate exceeding 20,000.  During the last three
years, more Americans were murdered than were killed in the entire Vietnam War.

Violence is a common theme, so evident in the nightly orgy of television
programs where murder is treated in a sterile and commonplace manner that has to
confuse young minds. Hollywood also turns out a steady supply of movies based on
terror and often sadism depicted in gruesome detail, usually with women as the
victims.

Even in sports, a former harmless (probably healthy) roughness has degenerated
into violence, where the intent is to injure and disable the opponent. Moreover,
the offenders are highly rewarded, particularly in professional football and
hockey.

At the other end of the social spectrum - Government policy - we have violence
supreme manifested in the nuclear arms race, where genocidal weapons are turned
out in unending numbers. Contrary to current conservative propaganda, this is an
area that our nation led from the beginning of the nuclear era, and continues to
lead today.

This country is also the leading distributor of arms, selling more weapons on
the world market than the rest of the countries combined.  We continue as the
main supporter of represssive right-wing regimes, ostensibly because they
profess anti-Communism but in reality because they favor U.S. business
interests.

Many factors lead to a high crime rate, including unemployment, discrimination,
decay of the cities, prison policy and the judical system itself. However, the
phenomenal rate of domestic violence and crime has its root cause in the loss of
national ideals and purpose, so evident in the Government policies previously
stated.

It is folly to believe this level of violence will decrease without a dramatic
change in national priorities. The present problem is that the proposed budgets
of the Reagan Administration indicate a desire to change the primary role of the
Government from meeting our social needs to supplying money and resources to the
Pentagon. In summary, a massive escalation of the programs that brought us to
the present dilemma.
DOUGLAS MATTERN, Palo Alto, Calif., June 1, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 353 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 6, 1981 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

VIETNAM IN FICTION

BYLINE: By Janet Maslin

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Cultural Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 440 words


Anyone enticed into seeing ''Search and Destroy'' by the two nastylooking
sluggers on the movie's poster is going to be sorely disappointed. ''Search and
Destroy,'' which opened yesterday at the Cinerama 1, is reasonably tame. Aside
from one of the more anticlimactic endings in cinema history, it has little to
make it memorable. Oh, yes -there's the moment when the hero hands his imperiled
girlfriend a gun and tells her ''If anything happens, just pretend it's a camera
and shoot.''

The story, which is short and should have been shorter, concerns a couple of
Vietnam veterans who are stalked by a former Vietnamese official skilled in the
martial arts. The Vietnamese man, known in the credits only as ''Assassin,''
believes that the American soldiers, who were supposed to be his armed escort,
deserted him in the jungle. Ten years later he is still unforgiving, so he kills
two of the four veterans and tracks the others to the area around Niagara Falls.
The Vietnamese scenes, presented as brief flashbacks, present the soldiers
wriggling through terrain apparently near Buffalo.

The assassin almost never speaks, so as a villain he's a bore. The chief veteran
(Perry King) is perpetually indignant, and livelier than anyone else in the
cast. His girlfriend is played by Tisa Farrow, whose delicate beauty helps
divert attention from her listlessness. The other principal is Don Stroud, who
has a couple of amiable scenes with Mr. King before the film gives itself over
to chase scenes. William Fruet, the director, fares better with conversation
than he does with action, which he stages somewhat confusingly.

The police inspector on the case is played by George Kennedy, who may never
again be taken seriously by anyone who's seen him in Albert Brooks's ''Modern
Romance.'' Here is Mr. Kennedy once again playing the sort of earnest, doltish
leader of men that Mr. Brooks's movie made fun of. ''No confirm, no deny,'' Mr.
Kennedy says to someone from the press. ''We're not gonna say anything till we
get the guy. Did you notice that that rhymed?''

''Search and Destroy'' is rated PG (''Parental Guidance Suggested''). It
contains some mild gore. Janet Maslin

The Cast

SEARCH & DESTROY, directed by William Fruet; written by Don Enright; music by
FM; produced by James Margellos; a Jack Barry and Dan Enright presentation; an
R. Ben Efraim production; a Film Ventures International release. At the Cinerama
1, Broadway and West 47th Street; the Gramercy, East 23d Street near Lexington
Avenue, and other theaters. Running time: 93 minutes. This film is rated PG.

WITH: Perry King, Don Stroud, Tisa Farrow, Park Jong Soo and George Kennedy.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 6, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM WAR MEMORIAL TO CAPTURE ANGUISH OF A DECADE OF DOUBT;
An Appraisal

BYLINE: By PAUL GOLDBERGER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 148 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


There was quite a flutter here recently when the winner of the nationwide
competition to design a memorial to veterans of the Vietnam War was announced.
The competition, the largest design competition ever held in the United States,
was won not by a nationally known architect, or even by a practicing architect
at all, but by a 21-year-old architectural student from Yale University.

So it was perhaps no surprise that the winner, Maya Ying Lin, became something
of an instant celebrity. Someone without an architectural degree had came in
first in a field of 1,420 entries.  The jury, as in all architectural
competitions, had made its choice on the basis of the design alone. Its members
had no idea who had designed the winning entry until the decision was complete.
pu x x x The surprise of having a 21-year-old

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Maya Ying Lin

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 6, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM VETERANS SET UP PROTEST CAMP

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 775 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, June 5


Tony Reyes went to Vietnam when he was 18 years old. Sixteen years later, he
said today, he still has nightmares in which he sees babies whose heads have
been blown off.

Mr. Reyes began to sob as he sat on the lawn outside the Wadsworth Veterans
Medical Center, where, along with more than 40 other veterans of the Vietnam
War, he has been camped for the last 16 days.

''Nobody can see the scars in your heart,'' he said, ''but everybody here has
them, everybody who went to Vietnam has them. But people don't care; they've
swept us under the carpet.''

The veterans say that they set up the camp, a dozen or so orange, khaki, red and
blue tents pitched on a lawn in front of the hospital, to protest what they
contend is inadequate care by the Veterans Administration.

But a common thread running through the veterans' comments suggests that there
is a deeper motive for the demonstration: a belief that the nation has not only
forgotten the Vietnam veteran but also blames him for the national trauma
created by the Vietnam War.

'A Very Self-Righteous Place'

Richard Weinberg, a native of Lynn, Mass., who said he served in the 75th
Rangers in Vietnam, was asked why he was taking part in the demonstration. In a
phrase that was heard repeatedly, with variations, from the veterans, he
replied: ''To be treated like a human being.''

''A bullet took part of my head off -there's a steel plate in it, '' he said.
''But when I came home people looked at me as if to say, 'You deserved it.' ''

''I didn't start the war,'' Mr. Weinberg continued. ''But they look at you and
blame you for it. America is a very self-righteous place.''

The veterans' protest began after the apparent suicide last month of James
Hopkins, a 32-year-old former marine. Two months before his death, Mr. Hopkins
drove a jeep through the plate- glass window of the hospital's lobby and fired
several shots into a wall. He described the incident as a gesture to call
attention to what he said was Veterans Administration neglect of a hearing
problem that he had and of other ailments he attributed to service in Vietnam.

Protesters List 4 Demands

The demonstrators, including a dozen who say they are on a hunger strike, spend
the time talking among themsevles and with reporters and other visitors,
including several young women who have enlisted in their demonstration.

They say they will stay where they are until President Reagan meets with them,
an investigation of Mr. Hopkins's experience with the V.A. is conducted, more
efforts are made to determine the long-term effects of Agent Orange and other
toxic herbicides used in Vietnam, and a program is put into effect to screen
Vietnam veterans for stress-related problems stemming from their experiences in
the war.

Today, with Los Angeles sweltering in nearly 90-degree heat and smothered by a
layer of smog, the veterans sought shelter in their tents and under the few
trees near their camp and talked about their experience in Vietnam and how it
had affected their lives.

''We have a right to live like human beings,'' said John Avalos, a 34-year-old
former Marine corporal, who said he had a back problem that the Veterans
Administration refused to treat as service-related. ''The V.A. doesn't give a
damn for us. When I went to Vietnam, I accepted the fact that I was laying my
life on the line. But now I want something for it, to be respected.''

Vietnam Experience Recalled

''My best friend lasted 10 minutes in Vietnam,'' said Mr. Reyes, who was
standing nearby. ''You'd arrive in Vietnam and the next day you'd walk into a
village and see a bunch of Vietcong hanging from the trees. What do you think
that does to 18-, 19-year-old kids?

''Once a Vietnamese came up to me,'' Mr. Reyes recalled, ''and said that he had
three babies in the back of his truck who had been blown up after they had
played with a rocket dud, and he wanted me to take them from him.

'' I went to the bed of the truck, and saw that two of them were dead. The third
was still alive, but her insides were all torn out, and all I could do was place
my poncho over her stomach to keep out the air.

''How do you live with this kind of memory? People don't want to hear about it;
they don't want to talk about the war. People say I cry all the time - I do. But
all I want is some love and compassion for all my brothers and sisters who were
there. Some of us are walking around with no stitches on us, but we're bleeding
inside.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Viet Nam Vets

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 6, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SCREEN: A DOCUMENTARY ON VIETNAM

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 13, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 603 words


Robert Richter, who narrates his film ''Vietnam: An American Journey,'' has a
boyish voice filled with curiosity and enthusiasm.  His film is a record of a
voyage that, as Mr. Richter conceives it, smacks of adventure. In 1978 Mr.
Richter spent seven Governmentsupervised weeks in Vietnam, examining social and
physical changes wrought by the war. His record of the trip is an interested but
somewhat unquestioning documentary, filled with evidence of damage, painful
memories and proof of a concerted national effort to rebuild.

One city, according to Mr. Richter, has ''more motorized vehicles'' than
another, ''and the women dress differently.'' His observations tend not to be
keen. But he approaches his task energetically, and his film has the informative
tenor of a television documentary, which is what Mr. Richter reportedly hoped it
would be. He was never able to market it to the networks - not because it was
controversial, but perhaps because it wasn't. ''Vietnam: An American Journey''
will be shown today through Monday at the Art Theater.

One of the best ways to measure the changes in Vietnam is of course to contrast
old footage with new, and Mr. Richter skillfully incorporates wartime scenes. He
also visits some of the most unforgettable battlegrounds, including My Lai,
which now looks placid and serene. The ditch into which massacre victims were
thrown is now used for irrigation, and a simple statue marks the spot. Mr.
Richter interviews a woman who survived the calamity by hiding under the bodies
of her relatives, and who cannot tell her story without weeping. Another woman
remembers My Lai as a turning point, because the massacre induced her to join
the resistance and become a guerrilla fighter. Now she is a paraplegic. Mr.
Richter's camera watches her at a physical-therapy session.

There are visits to all sorts of rehabilitation centers - for the maimed, for
former prostitutes, for those who were inadvertently injured (one crippled
little girl in a hospital is ''considered a war victim because polio vaccine was
not distributed in the South during the war''). The camera watches two
one-legged men plop down on a park bench simultaneously. It provides aerial
views of the bomb craters that are now small lakes or large puddles. And it
finds abandoned tanks at a beach that is now used entirely for recreation.  The
contrasts in such scenes are more eerie and disturbing than the more obvious
details that the camera also finds.

Mr. Richter seems encouraged by the evidence of recovery in Vietnam, and in many
ways his film seems optimistic about that nation's future. He also feels that
the rebuilding of Vietnam is a process in which the United States ought to be
involved. The film is more intent on observing than on recommending change,
though, and it is seldom colored by strong opinion. It serves simply as a record
that cannot be ignored.

The Program
VIETNAM: AN AMERICAN JOURNEY, documen- tary directed by Robert Richter; written
by Mr.  Richter and Peter Kinoy; edited by Mr. Kinoy; sound by Mr. Richter and
Morning Pastorok; produced by Mr. Richter; released by Richter McBride
Productions. At the Art Theater, Eighth Street, east of Fifth Avenue.  Running
time: 85 minutes. This film is not rated.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 6, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK;
Time to Put Westway Away

BYLINE: By Sydney H. Schanberg

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 919 words


The fight for and against Westway has gone on so long that it has come to
resemble nothing so much as an ideological war, the urban equivalent of doves
versus hawks on Vietnam.

The supporters of the immense superhighway, landfill, park and development
project on Manhattan's Lower West Side waterfront say it's a rare chance for New
York to raise a phoenix from the ashes of the fiscal debacle, to regain our
self-esteem and credibility, to prove that we can overcome the defeatists among
us, emerge from the age of doubt and do things in a big way again.

The opponents say it's an outrageous misuse of public funds at a time when such
funds are shrinking, a grab by real-estate builders to fatten their coffers, a
turning away from the more critical need of saving the city's mass transit
system from collapse.

Over the years the opposing camps must have given employment to hundreds of
lumberjacks, who would seem to be constantly chopping down entire stands of
Douglas fir to provide the pulp for the endless press releases and position
papers. Concerned as I am about jobs for timber cutters, a decade is long enough
for any civic morality play to last. It's time for a decision to be made and for
us to move on to our next crusade.

I don't think we can afford Westway.  If our pockets were ajingle with money, as
we thought they were in the 1960's and early 1970's, then Westway would be a
nice luxury, even perhaps another modest jewel in the city's skyline and
development crown. But from all the available fiscal and eyeball evidence, we
need the money desperately for the crumbling mass transit system, in particular
a subway system that has been allowed to decay close to peril.

Only someone who has been visiting relatives in the Seychelles for six or seven
years can be excused from knowing that subway breakdowns have become
commonplace, that serious disruptions of entire routes are now possible and that
if that should happen the city simply could not function for any length of time.

What is the actual price tag on Westway? Depending on whom you talk to, it's
$1.7 billion or $2.3 billion - or something in between.  Privately,
transportation officials say that because it would take the better part of a
decade to build, the eventual cost, with inflation, could reach $4 billion or
higher. And though Westway supporters like to gloss over the subject, some
elements of the project, such as parks, would not be covered by Federal funding,
and these expenses could run into the hundreds of millions of dollars.

Curiously, the business leaders who have been championing the 4.2-mile
underground highway and its grand accouterments are among the loudest of the
voices telling the citizenry that this is a time of austerity and lowered
expectations. They see no paradox, for they argue that while money for Westway
exists in the special Highway Trust Fund for interstate highways, little or no
money will be available from Congress for a trade-in. Trade-in is the
bureaucratic argot for the practice of changing your mind about building an
interstate highway and using the dollars instead - though they must come from a
different source, general funds - for mass transit.

White House officials, differing with the Westway backers, say that trading in
the funds is a real alternative as long as Governor Carey and Mayor Koch agree
on this approach. However, the Administration also says (President Reagan having
lauded Westway in a pitch for local construction-worker votes during his
campaign) that it supports the Westway concept as long as the Governor and Mayor
are in agreement.

Confusing? Well, confusion is the single consistent and mandatory theme of
Westway.  The Mayor, who says Westway is a pragmatic and not a philosophical
issue for him, has taken many positions on it - multiple variations of yes, no
and maybe. His present stance goes something like this: If he can get both
Westway and an equivalent amount of money for mass transit, then he will take
both. But if he can't get both he will opt for the mass transit trade-in (with a
more modest boulevard to substitute for Westway and thus satisfy the original
need, to replace the long-ruined West Side Highway).

How can we possibly get both? If Westway is built, there can be no trade-in
funds, and any mass-transit money will have to come from taxpayers - us.

But wait: the Governor, who is the leading advocate for Westway, will dispel the
confusion. He has an unequivocal position. He says Westway is the greatest thing
to happen to the world since Saran Wrap and he will brook no criticism of the
visionary scheme. It's going to be built, if he has to lay the bricks. He
absolutely refuses to listen to any of the opposition arguments.

And some of them are truly eloquent: ''In our urban centers, the time has come
when we must say the biggest is not necessarily the best. This ill-conceived
interstate designation seriously violates the principle of traffic and
air-quality control. We must cease to be swayed by the siren song of
highway-trust money in the planning of our cities.''

Who said that? Why, Hugh L. Carey, when he was running for Governor in 1974.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 6, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1128 words


U.S. ready to support Waldheim for a third term 2
Polish labor leader cheered at I.L.O. meeting in Geneva 3
Killings by Civil Guard test Span- ish regime 3
Around the World 4
Campaigning and coping in the Sinai Desert 6
Associates believe Iranian Presi- dent may soon be ousted 6
38 Islamic countries ask for cease- fire in Lebanon 6
U.S. to protest U.N. dsitribution of funds to newspapers 24

Government/Politics
House leader in eye of storm on Social Security 9
Democrats cut size of 1982 confer- ence, restoring leaders' power 9
Kennedys gather for a tribute from Reagan 9
Postal Service governors planning wider role 10
Republican leaders discuss their endorsement of Koch 25
Carey proposes statewide fire and building code 26
A Jersey order to auto insurance companies is blocked in court 26

General
Around the Nation 7
Forty Vietnam War veterans in third week of protest on Coast 7
Paul Goldberger discusses design of Vietnam War memorial 7
Woman hurt in Pope's shooting is moved to Buffalo 19
A judge rules Siamese twins were neglected in a hospital 20
Gasoline components found in wells in Putnam County 26
Portman project developers near- ing control of 2 theaters 27

Industry/Labor
Williams speaks of threats to labor as Teamsters adjourn 8
Carpenters' strike in Jersey halts many major projects 26

Arts/Entertainment
Rufino Tamayo Museum opens in Mexico City 12
International theater festival opens today in Baltimore 12
Schubert dominates pair of Carne- gie Hall Festival concerts 12
''Oh!'' by Mary Robison is re- viewed 13
City Ballet's Tchaikovsky Festi- val opens 13
Documentary film, ''Vietnam: An American Journey'' 13
''Search and Destroy'' opens at the Cinerama 1 13
Alexis De Veaux's ''No'' staged at New Federal Theater 14
Carol Conway dances ''Gesture of the Heart'' 14
Jerry Brainard and Battery Dance Company perform Bach 14
Budgets of Federal arts endow- ment unfrozen 48

Health/Science
Pair with heart-lung transplants face a brighter future 20

Style
Consumer Saturday 21
Orchard Street: A bargain bazaar 21
A party for Brooklyn at age 356 21
De Gustibus: Measuring outrage over food prices 21

Obituaries
Dr. Carleton S. Coon, pioneer in social anthropology 19

Sports
Pleasant Colony heavy favorite to win Belmont and Triple Crown 15
Trainers discuss the rigors of a Triple Crown campaign 15
13-1 Wayward Lass wins Mother Goose for fillies 15
Yanks wins in 12th, 6-5 15
Ryan and Astros beat Mets, 3-0 15
Borg, Lendl gain French final 15
Lewis wins long jump, 100-meter dash at N.C.A.A. meet 17
Red Smith on barnyard talk at Belmont 17
Valentine, on a 65, takes 2-shot lead in Atlanta golf 17
Bowman will take up Sabre coach- ing reins again 17
Baseball negotiators respond to call of mediator but don't meet 18

Features/Notes
Saturday News Quiz 13
Going Out Guide 14
About New York 25
Notes on People 48

News Analysis
Henry Scott Stokes on the nuclear furor in Japan 2

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials 22

Why sell the Trade Center?  Hunger strikes people Lightning, and light, in
Ireland Letters 22
Russell Baker: and they painted the room 23
Sydney H. Schanberg: time to put Westway away 23
Roda M. Gilinsky: a June day, the bride wore white ...  23
Paul T. Hornak: the man who bet $100 that he would never marry 23
Muriel Spanier: Wei Wei, and Kwang 23

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

INDONESIA PUTS AIRFIELD ON ISLAND SOUTH OF VIETNAM

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 10, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 490 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, June 6


Indonesia has taken another important step in strengthening its perimeter
defenses by opening a new airfield in the remote Natuna Islands south of Vietnam
and Cambodia in the South China Sea.

The move takes on added significance because the surrounding waters are believed
to be rich in oil and gas and a dispute between Vietnam and Indonesia on their
exploitation remains to be settled.

The 2,250-yard-long Ranai Airfield, opened last month by Defense Minister
Mohammed Jusuf, will allow sophisticated jet combat planes to fly in and out of
one of the archipelago's most distant points.

It should also mean easier access to services for American oil companies brought
in by the Indonesian Government to prospect in offshore areas.

The companies have already found some oil and large quantities of gas, though
there are still problems to be solved in its exploitation, including ways to
eliminate some noxious gases that have been found mixed with the natural gas.

Will Reduce Islanders' Isolation

The airfield will also reduce the isolation of the Natuna Islands' 10,000
far-flung people.  Vietnam has long claimed rights to the waters near the Natuna
Islands, though not to the islands themselves. New talks between officials on
both sides here last month failed to resolve the dispute, which has dragged on
for several years.

Vietnam also appears anxious to prospect in the area, which geologists believe
may hold huge deposits of oil and gas, and has already invited the Soviet Union
to help.

The Indonesian Foreign Minister, Mochtar Kusumaatmadja, has said that he
believes the Vietnamese will eventually compromise on where to draw the ocean
boundaries. But some officials are less optimistic than the Foreign Minister,
who said before the last round of talks began that he believed the matter could
be settled in ''one or two more sessions.''

Political Issues Unresolved

He also emphasized that the talks had so far been strictly technical. Political
differences on international and regional issues had not yet been brought up, he
added.

Some diplomats believe that the conflict of attitudes toward Cambodia by the
Indochina countries, led by Vietnam on one side and the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations on the other, must influence the speed at which Hanoi will allow
its representatives to reach a compromise. Indonesia is a member of the
association.

Even if the officials of the two sides can agree on principles, any formal
accord on boundary lines would still require political decisions for
ratification.

New naval facilities are also planned for the area. Like the airfield, these can
be justified by the need to help the civilian population, to protect internal
security and to prevent smuggling.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of Indonesia's airfield on Ranai can accommodate jet
combat planes

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WORLDWIDE TOTAL OF REFUGEES IS PUT AT 12.6 MILLION

BYLINE: By United Press International

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 680 words


A total of 12.6 million people were refugees from their homelands or displaced
from their homes within their native countries at the beginning of 1981,
according to a report by the U.S. Committee for Refugees.

The committee, a nonprofit information agency, released its yearly survey of the
worldwide refugee situation on Thursday.  The committee's report also said that
the focus of the world refugee problem was shifting from Southeast Asia to
Africa and that conditions for refugees in Africa had reached
''life-threatening'' proportions.

The worldwide refugee total dropped 3.4 million over the last year, the
committee said, because of the improving situation in Southeast Asia, where
millions of Cambodians who were displaced by war and famine have returned to
their farms.

Major Increase in Africa

But in Africa, amid political turmoil and drought, the number of refugees and
displaced persons jumped from 4 million to 6.3 million.  Another crisis spot is
Pakistan, where about a million Afghans who fled after the Soviet intervention
are living ''in miserable condition with no solution in sight,'' said Wells
Klein, executive director of the committee.

The report ''does not mean we're out of the woods in Asia,'' Mr.  Klein said,
''but the situation in Cambodia itself is far better than it was a year ago.''

Cambodia, devastated by war and social upheaval, had its first successful
harvest in a decade in 1980. ''If conditions do not deteriorate during 1981, it
is possible Cambodia will again become self-sufficient in rice after the end of
the year harvest,'' the report said.

There are still about 250,000 Cambodian refugees in camps in Thailand and on the
Thai-Cambodian border. Mr. Klein said the ''vast majority'' of the refugees
would return to Cambodia if the Thai and Cambodian Governments, which do not
recognize each other, could agree on a way to transport them back.

Vietnamese Still Leaving

Refugees continue to leave Vietnam whenever the ocean is calm enough for
sailing, he said, adding, ''The number this spring is double last year.''

Unlike the earlier waves of ''boat people,'' ethnic Chinese whom the Government
encouraged to leave, ''the newer refugees are primarily ethnic Vietnamese,'' he
said.

The refugee camps in Southeast Asia, set up during a decade of turmoil, now have
sufficient food and basic sanitation and medical care, Mr. Klein said. ''There's
nothing romantic about a border refugee camp. They're pretty dismal, but they
aren't starving.''

The problems in Africa are compounded by the poverty of the areas to which
refugees from war and drought are fleeing, he said.  ''One positive factor is
that historically, the African countries and their people have been incredibly
hospitable to refugees coming from other areas,'' he added. ''That is the single
largest factor that has avoided total catastrophe.

Border Guards Unusual

''The whole attitude of the people is not one of send them back where they came
from. It just wouldn't occur to them - unless there are traditional ethnic
hostilities - to set up border guards.''

Impoverished Somalia now has one refugee for every three Somalians, Mr. Klein
said.  Although the United States contributes more money than any other nation
to refugee aid, the effort is not necessarily greater than that of other
countries, the committee said.

On a per capita basis, the United States ranked 12th in its financial
contribution, according to the report. Sweden and Norway ranked highest. The
United States accepted more refugees - 677,000 - than any other country, but
ranked fifth on a per capita basis.  Israel accepted one refugee for every 37
residents, and Malaysia, Australia and Canada also accepted more refugees per
capita than the United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

COLLEGE ROLE GIVES MCGOVERN CHANCE TO KEEP POLITICAL VIEWS SHARP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 27, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 565 words

DATELINE: EVANSTON, Ill., June 6


''I've had a love affair with college students for 30 years,'' says former
Senator George McGovern, and the attraction seems to be mutual.

Mr. McGovern's class on ''American Foreign Policy Since 1945,'' which ended last
Tuesday, drew 800 Northwestern University students, nearly one-tenth of the
undergraduates, before college officials halted registration for the course.

''I've always maintained a close liaison with the colleges, so this was an
easier transition than you might imagine,'' Mr. McGovern, 58 years old, said
recently. ''Frankly, I didn't leave politics voluntarily. I felt that if I left
voluntarily I might later feel selfrecriminations. But I was beaten and so now
I'm free. Now that I've given up political life, I love the feeling.''

Northwestern asked Mr. McGovern to teach the course late last year, soon after
he was defeated by James Abnor, a conservative Republican, in his bid for
re-election to the Senate from South Dakota. In the next academic year, the
former Senator will teach at American University in Washington and at the
University of New Orleans.

Critical Eye on Cold War

Mr. McGovern's course this spring traced American foreign policy from the Truman
Doctrine through the Vietnam War to the current aid to El Salvador, with a
particularly critical eye cast on the cold war.

''I would hope my students come out of the class free of the preconceptions that
have plagued foreign policy,'' Mr. McGovern said. ''We must have some
accommodation with the superpowers so the United States and Russia don't blow up
the world. I don't want the class to agree with everything I say, but I do want
them to question that our $200 billion military budget is the only glue holding
us together.''

But both Mr. McGovern and his students agreed that his message fell on more
skeptical ears than those that heard his criticisms of the Vietnam War in
decades past.

Northwestern is an expensive private college, one where fraternities and
sororities never lost their popularity. Almost all the students here now were
under 12 years old when Mr. McGovern ran unsuccessfully for President in 1972.

Something of 'a Relic'

''To a certain extent, he's a relic from the past,'' said Mary C.  Manemann, a
19-year-old freshman from St. Charles, Minn. ''I would say there is a
willingness to listen to him, but there is a trend towards more conservatism,
and Northwestern is a more conservative college than most.''

''We joke how by the end of the term either I'll be a Democrat or he'll be a
Republican,'' Virginia S. Sayles, a 21-year-old junior from Long Grove, Ill.,
who voted for President Reagan said before the semester ended. ''He has moved
people from the right to the middle. I'm not a liberal by any means but I've
become more independent, and if he ran again I'd vote for him.''

Mr. McGovern has not entirely abandoned politics. He sought to interest his
students in a new group he is leading, Americans for Common Sense, which he
described as a ''citizens' counterforce'' to the New Right. He spoke in many
campus forums about such issues as gun control, - President Reagan was shot on
the morning of his first lecture - and United States relations with South
Africa.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BYLINE: By JO THOMAS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 32, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2230 words

DATELINE: ROSEAU, Dominica


The plot was so bizarre and the conspirators so ill-assorted that the newspaper
here called it a ''comic-book escapade.'' In New Orleans, where even the Federal
judge hearing the case isn't sure how to pronounce ''Dominica,'' they call the
affair the ''Bayou of Pigs.''

Rightist white mercenaries drawn from the Ku Klux Klan in the United States and
Canada planned to join black terrorists and disgruntled soldiers in taking over
the small, poor Caribbean island of Dominica and setting up what investigators
have described as a drug, gambling and offshore banking empire under a
left-of-center prime minister.

The invaders had automatic weapons, a Nazi flag, a rubber raft and bad luck: A
Dominica army officer inadvertently gave away the plot in a note he tried to
smuggle out of jail, and a disabled Vietnam veteran, the only hero of this
story, helped Federal agents trap the invaders before they left Louisiana.

On Dominica, the 99-member army has been dissolved, the police have taken 11
persons into custody, including Patrick R. John, the former prime minister, and
the authorities are still hunting terrorists in the bush. In Louisiana, seven
persons have pleaded guilty to planning the invasion, three others face trial
June 15, and a Federal jury is expected afterward to indict the money men behind
the scheme.

Meanwhile, the much-publicized invasion attempt has introduced a new and
unsettling element into life in Dominica, whose voters last July overwhelmingly
elected a conservative, pro-Western government.  Dominicans, who are mostly
blacks, now seem wary and sometimes genuinely afraid of American and Canadian
whites.

Bananas and Marijuana

Dominica (pronounced DOM-in-EE-ka) is a 300-square-mile island lying between the
French islands of Guadeloupe and Martinique, 400 miles southeast of San Juan,
P.R. The English-speaking nation became independent from Britain in November
1978.

Most of the people here grow bananas, although the isolated mountain slopes are
also ideal for marijuana, a crop whose trafficking the Government estimates at
$10 million a year, or roughly half the country's annual budget.

''It's much easier to grow $300 worth of marijuana than $300 worth of bananas,''
said Prime Minister Mary Eugenia Charles, who has been trying to fight the drug
smugglers. Dominica has no airplanes and one very slow police boat.

Looking for alternatives to bananas, Mr. John had begun, after independence, to
seek industrial development, but his efforts brought down his Government in a
month.

First, it was disclosed that he intended to take land from small farmers to set
up a free port run by Americans that would be a virtual state within a state.
Then the British Broadcasting Corporation disclosed that Mr. John's
representatives were trying to purchase oil on behalf of South Africa.

An Ouster and a Plot

The political crisis, made worse when members of the army fired into a crowd of
outraged citizens, killing one, ended in June 1979 with the ouster of Mr. John.

The plan to bring Mr. John back to power by force apparently began that summer,
although it was not until Sept. 20, 1980, according to an indictment handed up
in Louisiana, that Mr. John signed a contract with Michael E. Perdue, 32 years
old, a truck driver living in Houston, Tex., who was to execute the plan.

According to the indictment, Mr. Perdue agreed to set Mr. John up as prime
minister again in exchange for $150,000, a high-level government position and
the right to train and oversee an expanded army.

In addition, Mr. Perdue would be the agent for Nortic Enterprises, a concern
that would construct an airport, direct tourism and gambling, and control
agriculture and forestry. ''Mike had a lot of big plans over the years,'' Mr.
Perdue's brother, William, said recently, ''and we never took him seriously.
This is the first time he actually tried to carry one of them through.''

According to his brother, Michael Perdue had been involved with the Ku Klux Klan
as a high school student and had been to Dominica ''several times.''

''He said there were a group of politicians and bankers who were backing him -
Americans they were,'' William Perdue said. ''Mike traveled all over the United
States and Canada. We never did find out who was backing him.''

Introduced to the Dreads

Oliver N. Phillip, the Dominica police commissioner, said that one of those whom
Michael Perdue had met in Dominica was Mr. John, who ''took him to the hills
where he was introduced to Dreads.''

''Dreads'' are what Dominicans call members of the Rastafarian cult who wear
their hair in long locks, live in the bush and grow and smuggle marijuana.
Unlike members of this cult elsewhere, who are generally pacific, the Dreads in
Dominica have been engaged since 1974 in murders, kidnappings, robberies and
shootouts with the police, after which they melt away into the dense forests
where they live.

The Dominican authorities, who had known that top-ranking army officers were
regular smokers of marijuana, grew more alarmed last winter when they realized
that soldiers were training the Dreads and had met with leaders of both
opposition political parties.

In December, when Prime Minister Charles asked for legislation that would allow
members of the army to be court-martialed, 36 soldiers in uniform stormed up the
stairs to her office to protest. She looked the door, called the police and had
all 36 suspended from service.

Then in January, two Dreads, August Lloyd, 16, and Robert Eugene, 23, were
sentenced to hang for the 1980 murder of a 65-year-old farmer they hacked to
death with cutlasses after telling him, according to a witness, that God had
sent them ''to put him right.''

At about the same time, residents of Dominica's isolated mountain villages began
to complain that the Dreads were stealing their crops and threatening to kidnap
their daughters. A police patrol sent out to investigate the complaints came
under such heavy fire that it was forced to retreat.

Two Killed in Police Raid

On Feb. 12, two Dreads were shot to death by the police when the police raided a
Dread camp in search of weapons. Within hours, the Dreads retaliated by
kidnapping Ted Honychurch, 57, his wife and two servants from their farm near
the village of Giraudel and burning their home to the ground. Mr. Honychurch's
son, Lennox, is the Government's press secretary.

Mrs. Honychurch and the servants were let go with a note demanding the release
of Mr. Lloyd and Mr. Eugene. The Government refused, and Mr. Honychurch, a
kindly farmer who had befriended the Dreads, was not heard from again.

(This week, Eric Joseph, a Dread, confessed that he shot Mr.  Honychurch in the
head the day after the kidnapping on orders from Leroy Etienne, a gang leader.
Afterward, Mr. Joseph said, the body was burned.)

As the Dominica police combed the forests for Mr. Honychurch, they found
evidence of a plot to disrupt the island's main annual social event, Carnival,
in early March. Capt. Malcolm Reid, second in command of the army, and Sgt.
Ronnie Roberts were ordered detained in connection with the plot.

A few days later in Louisiana, on Feb. 23, Michael Perdue approached Michael S.
Howell, a disabled Vietnam War veteran who operates a 52-foot charter boat from
New Orleans, the Manana, and asked him to take a group of mercenaries to invade
Dominica.

'Said He Was With the C.I.A.'

''This guy said he was with the C.I.A.,'' Mr. Howell said in an interview. ''He
sounded hokey. I didn't think we were doing covert overthrows anymore.''

Mr. Howell said he called the State Department and a friend of his at the
Treasury Department's Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms. Mr. Howell then
managed to intrdouce John L. Osburg, a bureau agent posing as a crew member of
the boat, to Mr. Perdue. In the weeks that followed, Mr. Osburg, who
tape-recorded everything, picked up $17,200 in payments from Mr. Perdue toward
the charter.

Meanwhile in Dominica, which has neither a courthouse nor a prison, Captain
Reid, one of the officers detained after the Carnival plot became known, had
tried to hasten the invasion from his cell at police headquarters by asking a
policeman to take a note to Maj. Fred Newton, the commander of the army.

The note, which the police later allowed to be published in the local newspaper,
urged Major Newton to telephone Mr. Perdue, to proceed with the invasion and to
strike the police station first.  ''Don't PANIC we must make it!!'' the note
concluded.

Major Newton and Mr. John were locked up, along with three soldiers and two
civilians, including the former manager of the Dominica broadcasting service,
Dennis Joseph.

''We just couldn't let them go ahead,'' Prime Minister Charles explained. ''It
never dawned on me that the people abroad would continue to plan.''

A Plan to Disembark

But in New Orleans, preparations did continue. On April 26, Mr.  Perdue and
Wolfgang W. Droege, a Ku Klux Klan leader from Toronto, told the undercover
agent that the entire group planned to disembark the following day, according to
the indictment.

On the night of April 27, the 10 mercenaries, now accompanied by three
undercover agents from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, met at Fort
Pike State Park in New Orleans, put their weapons in a truck and climbed into a
closed van for a ride to a nearby marina to meet the Manana.

When they arrived, police weapons teams from the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, agents from the firearms bureau and the Customs Service, and the
police were waiting to take them to jail.

The officers confiscated eight Bushmaster automatic rifles, 10 shotguns, five
rifles, 10 handguns, 10 pounds of dynamite and 5,246 rounds of ammunition.

''A lot of people would have died,'' Miss Charles said. ''I'm not saying they
could have held our country for two days. Other countries would have come to our
defense.''

Among the equipment for the invasion, called Operation Red Dog, was a large red
and black Nazi flag. Many of those arrested have had ties with the Ku Klux Klan
or neo-Nazi organizations, although the Federal authorities do not believe these
groups sponsored the effort.

''It was strictly economic,'' said Bob Guthrie, the Customs agent working on the
case. ''They had visions of grandeur and beaucoup money to be made.'' According
to the indictment, the initial payment was to be $3,000 apiece.

Violated the Neutrality Act

Seven persons, including Mr. Perdue and Mr. Droege, have pleaded guilty to
violating the Neutrality Act, which forbids assaults on nations with which the
United States is not at war.

Others who have pleaded guilty and agreed to testify for the Government include
George T. Malvaney, 21, who left the Navy after organizing a Klan rally in
Virginia Beach in 1979 and now lives in Jackson, Miss.; Robert Prichard, 30, of
Raleigh, N.C., a member of the National Socialist White People's Party of
America; William B.  Waldrop Jr., 33, of Braxton, Miss.; Larry L. Jacklin, 22,
of Listowel, Ontario, and Christopher B. Anderson, 41, a bus driver from
Oklahoma City who once was the police chief of Kiowa, Kan.

The three still facing trial are Michael S. Norris, 21, a security guard from
Tuscaloosa, Ala., who said in an interview that he left the Klan about 18 months
ago to join the National Alliance, a white supremacist group; Stephen Don Black,
a former Grand Wizard of the White Knights of the Ku Klux Klan from Birmingham,
Ala.; and Joe D.  Hawkins, 37, a former Klan member from Jackson, Miss.

Two days after the arrests in New Orleans, a Toronto woman, Mary Anne McGuire,
was arrested in Dominica after the receptionist in her hotel became alarmed by a
telephone message that said, ''Alexander is dead,'' meaning, Miss McGuire
explained later, that the invasion had failed and she should return home.

Miss McGuire has admitted her role as a gatherer of intelligence for the
operation and is facing three criminal conspiracy charges in Dominica. Another
Canadian, Harold Woods, arrested in Dominica on charges of trying to rescue Miss
McGuire, is also awaiting trial.

No charges have been filed against the Dominicans who are being detained,
although their cases have been reviewed by a tribunal. The authorities said they
were waiting to see what additional evidence might evolve from the investigation
in New Orleans.

In May three more Dreads were shot dead by the police, but the two leaders of
the cult, Mr. Etienne and Mal Esprit, are still being sought. And in Giraudel,
Mr. Honychurch's neighbors live in terror.

''They kill the village,'' said one of them, Eugenia Alfred, as she paused from
her gardening while curtains of rain swept along the mountain. At night, she
said, ''if the dog bark, I get up and listen, listen, listen.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of federal agents escorting suspects into a New
Orleans Jai, map of the Caribbean, showing Dominica

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Votes in Congress;
Last Week's Tally for the Metropolitan Area

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 48, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 528 words


Senate

1. Bill to liminate application requirements for community development grants,
require tenants of federally subsidized public housing to pay a higher
proportion of their income for rent and prohibit construction of housing in
communities that have rent control laws. Includes authorization for about $18
billion to finance 150,000 units of low-income housing in the fiscal year 1982.
Passed, 65 to 24, June 3.
                           1
NEW YORK
D'Amato (R)                Y
Moynihan (D)               N

NEW JERSEY
Bradley (D)                N
Williams (D)               N

CONNECTICUT
Dodd (D)                   N
Weicker (R)                Y


House

1. Bill directing the Veterans Administration to provide hospital care and
medical attention to Vietnam War veterans whose health problems may have arisen
from exposure to the herbicide Agent Orange, passed, 388 to 0, June 2.

2. Bill to extend for two years the eligibility of Vietnam veterans for
on-the-job training and establish a program to provide direct or guaranteed
business loans up to $200,000 to Vietnam veterans, passed, 352 to 41, June 2.

3. Bill to extend for one year a program to help provide employment for
teen-agers, passed, 309 to 84, June 2.

4. Bill to authorize $6.98 billion for construction at military installations
for fiscal 1982, passed, 311 to 36, June 4.
                           1   2   3   4
NEW YORK
 1. Carney (R)             A   A   A   A
 2. Downey (D)             Y   Y   Y   N
 3. Carman (R)             Y   Y   Y   Y
 4. Lent (R)               Y   Y   Y   Y
 5. McGrath (R)            Y   Y   Y   Y
 6. Leboutillier (R)       Y   Y   N   Y
 7. Addabbo (D)            Y   Y   Y   Y
 8.  Rosenthal (D)         Y   Y   Y   N
 9. Ferraro (D)            Y   Y   Y   A
10. Biaggi (D)             Y   Y   Y   A
11. Scheuer (D)            A   Y   Y   N
12. Chisholm (D)           Y   Y   Y   N
13. Solarz (D)             Y   Y   Y   Y
14. Richmond (D)           Y   Y   Y   A
15. Zeferetti (D)          Y   Y   Y   Y
16. Schumer (D)            Y   Y   Y   N
17. Molinari (R)           Y   Y   Y   Y
18. Green (R)              Y   Y   Y   Y
19. Rangel (D)             Y   Y   Y   A
20. Weiss (D)              Y   Y   Y   N
21. Garcia (D)             Y   Y   Y   N
22. Bingham (D)            Y   Y   Y   N
23. Peyser (D)             Y   Y   Y   Y
24. Ottinger (D)           Y   Y   Y   N
25. Fish (R)               Y   Y   Y   A
26. Gilman (R)             Y   Y   Y   Y
27. McHugh (D)             Y   Y   Y   N
28. Stratton (D)           A   A   A   A
29. Solomon (R)            Y   Y   N   Y
30. Martin (R)             Y   Y   Y   Y
31. Mitchell (R)           Y   Y   Y   A
32.  Wortley (R)           Y   Y   Y   Y
33. Lee (R)                Y   Y   N   Y
34. Horton (R)             Y   Y   Y   Y
35. Conable (R)            Y   N   Y   Y
36. LaFalce (D)            Y   Y   Y   A
37. Nowak (D)              Y   Y   Y   Y
38. Kemp (R)               Y   Y   Y   A
39.  Lundine (D)           Y   Y   Y   N

NEW JERSEY
 1. Florio (D)             A   A   A   A
 2. Hughes (D)             Y   Y   Y   Y
 3. Howard (D)             Y   Y   Y   A
 4. Smith (R)              Y   Y   Y   Y
 5. Fenwick (R)            Y   N   Y   Y
 6. Forsythe (R)           Y   Y   Y   Y
 7. Roukema (R)            Y   N   Y   Y
 8. Roe (D)                A   A   A   A
 9. Hollenbeck (R)         Y   Y   Y   N
10. Rodino (D)             Y   Y   Y   Y
11. Minish (D)             Y   Y   Y   Y
12. Rinaldo (R)            Y   Y   Y   Y
13. Courter (R)            Y   Y   Y   Y
14. Guarini (D)            Y   Y   Y   Y
15. Dwyer (D)              Y   Y   Y   Y

CONNECTICUT
 1. Cotter (D)             A   A   A   A
 2. Gejdenson (D)          Y   Y   Y   Y
 3. DeNardis (R)           Y   Y   Y   Y
 4.  McKinney (R)          Y   Y   Y   Y
 5. Ratchford (D)          Y   Y   Y   Y
 6. Moffett (D)            Y   Y   Y   A

KEY
Y - ''yea'';
N - ''nay'';
A - absent or did not vote.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GUILD HALL AND THE GREENING OF EAST HAMPTON

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 2; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 3783 words


It has been called ''the abstract Woodstock,'' ''the rich man's Provincetown,''
even ''the cradle of American art,'' and there is a certain truth to each of
these epithets, for the last few decades have seen the avatars of the
avant-garde as well as some of the foremost practitioners of landscape painting
settle on that narrow strip of land known as the South Fork or East End of Long
Island.  There, amid the dunes and wastes of scrub oak, such artists as Willem
de Kooning, the late Jackson Pollock, Lee Krasner, James Brooks, Adolph
Gottlieb, Franz Kline, Roy Lichtenstein, Alfonso Ossorio, Larry Rivers and James
Rosenquist made their homes and built their studios, and it was there that they
helped redefine American - and 20th-century - art.

Such a community of talent, of course, is wonderfully uncommon, and over the
past half century, Guild Hall, East Hampton's center for the visual and
performing arts, has done its best to show the work of these resident artists
and others. Beginning this Wednesday, some of their finest paintings and
sculptures will be on view at the Knoedler Gallery, in a special exhibition
arranged as a ''salute'' to Guild Hall from New York's four major museums - the
Guggenheim, the Metropolitan, the Modern and the Whitney - all of which have
loaned pieces from their own collections.

This tribute is only one of many festivities scheduled for this year's
celebration of Guild Hall's 50th anniversary. Four major exhibitions of East
Hampton artists -''Thomas Moran: Search for the Scenic''; ''Childe Hassam:
1882-1935''; ''Willem de Kooning: Work From 1951 to 1981,'' and ''Lee
Krasner-Jackson Pollock: A Working Relationship'' - have been planned for Guild
Hall's galleries, and this summer the John Drew Theater will present three new
one-act plays written and acted by local residents: Anne Jackson and Eli Wallach
will star in Murray Schisgal's ''A Need for Brussel Sprouts,'' Dina Merrill and
James Kirkwood in Mr. Kirkwood's ''Surprise,'' and Cliff Robertson and Miss
Merrill in Mr. Robertson's ''The V.I.P's.''

Over the last half century, Guild Hall has evolved from a local community center
to a regional arts institution, and its evolution reflects some of the
extraordinary changes that have occurred in East Hampton itself -changes that
have transformed a rural village into a full-fledged colony of artists, writers
and theater people.  But to understand Guild Hall's role in this highly
disparate community and its unusual mediating position among the artists, the
local residents, the wealthy summer colony, and the new wave of New York
visitors, it is necessary to first understand something about East Hampton
itself.

Because of its rural beauty, because of its relative isolation - the very things
that made it such an attractive place to begin with - East Hampton remains a
village fiercely resistant to change. The tracing of family genealogies is still
a favorite pastime among its residents, and only second-generation citizens are
truly regarded as natives. A local group called the Ladies Village Improvement
Society helps make sure unsightly signs and buildings do not mar its historical
character, and various organizations keep watch over the zoning ordinances.

New arrivals - be they artists, writers, or young professionals - are tolerated
because they help sustain what remains essentially a resort economy. But the
local residents resent the newcomers for buying up the land, driving up real
estate taxes and raising the cost of living. And some of the wealthy old
families who established summer homes there decades ago resent the newcomers for
turning what was a polite, exclusive resort into a fashionable spot frequented
by what they regard as their social inferiors. As one member of the Maidstone
Club, a well-known East Hampton country club that only recently admitted Jews,
put it, ''I don't say the town has changed as much as the quality of the people
who come into it.''

Like other cultural havens such as Provincetown, Sante Fe and Woodstock, the
South Fork was first ''discovered'' by the painters.  In the postwar years, when
the current generation of artists began moving to the area, it was inexpensive -
Jackson Pollock and his wife Lee Krasner bought their house in Springs for
$5,000 - and it also offered a quiet, isolated place to work. Willem de Kooning,
for instance, who found that distractions were increasing in New York as a
consequence of his growing fame, moved to Springs in the 1950's and later built
a spacious, white studio, specially designed to capture the region's lovely,
sea-distilled light. ''The light is so marvelous,'' he said during a recent
interview. ''It reminded me of Holland - not that I wanted to go back there, but
I thought this is a good place to work the rest of my life.''

Other artists also discovered the East End's light, and unlike Mr.  de Kooning,
many of them - including Fairfield Porter, Jane Freilicher, Jane Wilson, Robert
Dash, Paul Georges and John Mac Whinnie - set about trying to capture its
mercurial qualities directly in their work. ''There's so much water here that
everything is doubled,'' says Mr. Dash, who has lived in Sagaponack since 1966.
''The light bounces over the ocean and dunes and over the air and then bounces
off another body of water. I've also never come across a part of the country
where the topography changes so dramatically: from beach to dune to marsh to
hill country with your scrub pine and oaks and back to marsh and dune and water
- all within four miles.  This is a visual smorgasboard here.''

Clearly what made these rural vistas especially attractive was the fact that
they were within two hours of New York. For artists, this means being close to
their galleries and dealers; for writers, being close to their editors and
publishers. What's more, as growing numbers of artists and writers began to move
to the South Fork, a sense of shared community emerged - a reassuring sense that
should one want to commiserate about work, exchange ideas or simply gossip about
mutual friends, there would always be someone around to lend a sympathetic ear.
In fact, there soon emergedwhat Elaine Benson, the owner of the area's most
successful gallery, calls ''an old boy's network'' - a network that created a
kind of support system for younger talent.

As in any community, regional causes, political issues and special celebrations
bring people of similar sensibilities together, and the cultural community of
the South Fork is no exception. In 1972, some 30 area artists, including Mr. de
Kooning and Larry Rivers, combined their efforts on two canvases, which they
planned to auction in order to raise money for George McGovern's Presidential
campaign. Vietnam protests and anti-nuclear petitions have garnered similar
support, as have such local concerns as the John Steinbeck Library and the
Animal Rescue Fund.

On a daily level, though, it is often Guild Hall which serves, as the chairman
of its board Budd Levinson says, ''to orchestrate the talent in the area.'' Over
the years, in fact, many residents who also happen to be prominent cultural
figures have participated in Guild Hall activities: Cy Feuer, Betty Friedan, the
late Robert Alan Aurthur, Elia Kazan, Sidney Lumet, Dwight MacDonald, Frank
Perry, George Plimpton, Irwin Shaw, Peter Stone and Charles Strouse have
assisted with its film festivals; David Ignatow, Kenneth Koch, Peter
Matthiessen, Willie Morris, Howard Moss and the late Jean Stafford have given
readings there; and Gwen Verdon, Bob Fosse, Phyllis Newman, Betty Comden and
Adolph Green have appeared at the John Drew Theater. And, of course, local
artists from Willem de Kooning to Roy Lichtenstein, Saul Steinberg to Audrey
Flack, Alfonso Ossorio to Howard Kanovitz have exhibited their work in Guild
Hall's two galleries.

By no means, however, were these contemporary artists the first to discover the
East End or the first to be exhibited at Guild Hall.  East Hampton attracted
such painters as Gilbert Burling and Henry Ferguson as early as the 1860's, and
in 1878, the Tile Club, a wellknown group of artists that included Winslow
Homer, J. Alden Weir, Edwin Abbey and the architect Stanford White, began
visiting the area. Dressed in suits of velveteen, heavy ribbed stockings and
berets, they wandered through the quiet town, carrying sun umbrellas and picnic
baskets, and they set their easels up in cow pastures and along the beach. Their
sketching parties, in turn, encouraged other artists to visit, and by 1891, one
writer was already complaining that the area had become a year-round resort for
artists. ''Alas,'' he wrote, ''the spirit of the times is creeping over this
restful place.''

In 1880, Thomas Moran, a landscape painter of the Hudson River spirit who
praised East Hampton's ''English countryside, antique rural charm,'' became the
first artist to build a permanent studio there. His work reflected the
prevailing taste for the incorporation of moral values in art and the
19th-century belief that God could be revealed though nature, and Moran regarded
himself as part of established society. He participated in the social functions
of East Hampton's wealthy summer colony, and he even helped found the exclusive
Maidstone Club. Indeed, the first generation of East Hampton artists were not
only accepted by the gentry; they were part of it.

When Guild Hall opened in 1931, many of these artists took part in the
festivities: Childe Hassam dedicated the Thomas Moran gallery, and the sculptor
Maude Jewett organized the first show, an exhibition titled ''The Tile Club and
Its Followers.'' Built with a $100,000 gift from Mrs. Lorenzo E. Woodhouse,
Guild Hall was ''dedicated to encouragement and cultivation of taste for music,
drama and the arts'' and the promotion of a ''higher type of citizenship.''
During the ''on-season,'' it was to serve the cultural needs of the summer
colony, whose staid mansions still line the oceanfront along Lily Pond Road. And
during the winter, it was to serve as a kind of community center for the local
residents.

No doubt Mrs. Woodhouse intended that Guild Hall function as something of a
replacement for Clinton Academy - a building then used by the townspeople as a
meeting hall, which she had decided to preserve as a historic landmark.
Unfortunately, Guild Hall -filled as it was at the time with elegant Duncan
Phyfe furniture, crystal chandeliers and imported rugs - seemed a rather
imposing, inhospitable place, and many of the local people stayed away. No doubt
there were other, more insidious factors at work as well - factors having to do
with East Hampton's indigenous consciousness of class.

''The Upstreeters were the gentry who lived on Main Street,'' says Carleton
Kelsey, Amagansett's town librarian and a local historian.  ''And the Bonackers
were the people who worked the farms and plowed the fields and who lived up
toward Springs and Three Mile Harbor.  Guild Hall was strictly an Upstreeter
hangout and the Bonackers wouldn't go there. It goes way back to the time these
people were have-nots and they were not allowed to trespass, as it were, on the
aristocracy's property, and since they knew what side their bread was buttered
on, they simply didn't go there.''

By the 1950's, however, the efforts of Guild Hall's director Enez Whipple
succeeded in making Guild Hall more accessible to members of the community.
Classes in everything from French to investments were held there, and fraternal
groups began to hold their meetings there, as did amateur theater clubs. This
would not last, however, for as the artistic community of East Hampton began to
grow, more and more emphasis would be placed on its museum activities, and, as
Mrs.  Whipple points out, ''The minute you bring in exhibitions, you can't run a
square dance or hold classes. So, we gradually had to throw out those other
activities.''

By World War II, the South Fork was playing host to a whole new wave of artists.
Sara and Gerald Murphy had settled there and had encouraged many of their
friends to follow. Guy Pene DuBois joined the faculty of the Amagansett Art
School in 1938, and such expatriates as Ferdinand Leger, Marcel Duchamp, Max
Ernst, Jean Helion and Lucia Wilcox took studios in the area. Most of these
artists would later return to Europe, but with the arrival in 1945 of Jackson
Pollock and his wife Lee Krasner, the South Fork began to nurture a distinctly
American school of artist.

Indeed, it soon began to look as though the entire Cedar Bar - that famous
artists' hangout in the Village -had been transported to the eastern end of Long
Island: By 1957, when Guild Hall began presenting exhibitions year-round, many
of the most influential new artists had come to the East Hampton area to work,
including Robert Motherwell, James Brooks, Adolph Gottlieb, Grace Hartigan,
Franz Kline, Willem de Kooning and Balcomb Greene.

Although Rosanne Larkin, then chairman of Guild Hall's art committee, had the
prescience to recognize the importance of these artists, and included paintings
by Mr. Pollock, Miss Krasner and Mr.  Greene in a 1949 exhibition of regional
art, many of the museum's supporters - and for that matter, most of the
community at large - were more dubious. Unlike Moran and Hassam, these new
artists did not have the money or the inclination to play golf and tennis at the
Maidstone Club, and as far as many members of the old summer colony were
concerned, their lifestyle smelled vaguely of bohemianism and Greenwich Village.
To make matters worse, their work struck the uninitiated as discordant,
unintelligible and, well, ...willfully abstract.

''The community had mixed feelings,'' recalls Alfonso Ossorio, who moved to East
Hampton in 1949. ''Guild Hall was planned for a totally different kind of
painting - lovely, polite paintings. And the society people disliked the new
abstract work so much they didn't buy it. I also think there was a certain
reservation that this new breed of artist was ruining the nice, old, civilized
East Hampton way of life. They were bohemians, and they were wild and they drank
too much and they painted these awful things.''

Unwilling to alienate an audience inclined toward pretty watercolor landscapes,
Guild Hall did not embrace the new artists wholeheartedly, but over the years,
gradually began to include more of their work in group shows. For many of the
artists, this gesture did not come soon or rapidly enough. In 1957, Mr. Ossorio,
John Little and Elizabeth Parker founded the Signa Gallery, partly, says Mr.
Ossorio, as ''a protest to Guild Hall because it wasn't showing really
avant-garde work.'' The gallery operated for four summers in East Hampton,
showing the work of such artists as Jean Dubuffet, Mr.  de Kooning, Mr. Pollock,
Mr. Brooks and Wilfred Zogbaum.

If the artists tended to complain that Guild Hall was slow to recognize their
achievement, however, certain members of the summer colony chastised the museum
for showing avant-garde work at all. To them, it seemed an unnecessary
capitulation to trendiness, and some of them began to withdraw their longtime
financial support. What's more, the John Drew Theater had also become the source
of much concern. By 1960, when Guild Hall's board decided to produce its own
summer theater, members of the community had begun to protest: According to Mrs.
Whipple, there were charges that the theater was attracting homosexuals and
''undesirables,'' and a petition was reportedly circulated along Main Street,
seeking to close the hall.

Conservative elements in the community, says Mrs. Whipple, ''had to have a
whipping boy for whatever seemed to be happening in the community and for a
while Guild Hall was it. Some people felt that the theater was attracting the
kind of people we didn't want to see in the community. People felt that by
running a show for eight performances a week, you had to publicize widely to get
an audience and that by doing so you were encouraging people to discover this
little community which they'd hoped to keep as a quiet little resort.''

Certainly the nature of some of the shows staged at the John Drew were
controversial as well. Productions from the Phoenix Theater and the Yale
Repertory were criticized as being too experimental, and in 1972 when Edward
Albee and Richard Barr produced a summer season that included such provocative
plays as Mr. Albee's ''The American Dream,'' Joe Orton's ''What the Butler Saw''
and Martin Duberman's ''Dudes,'' audience members stalked out and several board
members resigned.

''For all the influx of theater people and artists,'' says Mrs.  Whipple, ''this
is basically a conservative community. They'll go to New York and see anything,
but here they're sitting next to their next door neighbor and they become very
conscious of what their next door neighbor thinks. This wasn't confined to
Maidstone members.  Everyone was shocked. We had trouble getting back on our
feet after that: We lost quite a few members. Today we look at everything that
goes into the theater with the knowledge that we are dependent on the acceptance
of this organization by the community.'' Yet, while its theater bookings have
remained almost willfully sedate - ''Otherwise Engaged,'' ''Deathtrap'' and
''The Magic Show'' have been among its recent offerings - the museum has
nurtured a sense of professionalism, committing itself increasingly to
avant-garde work and the work of younger artists.

This has been necessitated by the growing sophistication of Guild Hall's
audience, and facilitated by the addition of younger, more cosmopolitan members
to its board - both consequences of East Hampton's changing population. It is a
direction that has won the approval of visiting New Yorkers and the respect of
the South Fork's artistic community. ''Guild Hall is looked upon in a kindly
way,'' says Elaine Benson. ''In the last decade, attention has been paid to
major contemporary living artists, many of whom are living here.''

As with any institution in a transitional community, though, the acclaim is not
universal. A residue of class resentment from the days when Guild Hall was run
by the gentry endures -''the local people still don't realize what they have,''
says Eloise Spaeth, a longtime board member, ''their attitude is let the summer
people fund it'' - and some East Hampton residents feel that history has been
repeated.  They feel that Mrs. Woodhouse's appropriation of Clinton Academy has
been repeated with artists and their wealthy patrons taking over what was once
their community center. ''These things start as local institutions and very soon
cease to be,'' says Douglas Dayton, the Mayor of the Village of East Hampton.
''The majority of its supporters are summer residents who are more articulate,
more aggressive and have more time to serve on committees.''

Although its officers point out that it brings visitors - and hence, income -to
the community, that it provides employment and serves as a prestigious cultural
center for the entire East End of Long Island, Guild Hall receives no direct
financial support from the local government. ''I didn't think it was fair to
spend general tax revenues on something on the order of Guild Hall which has a
particular constituency,'' explains Mr. Dayton, who says he has never attended
the John Drew Theater and hasn't visited the museum in years. ''It doesn't
happen to be my cup of tea, but then I suppose I'm a barbarian.''

Certainly, the constituency Mr. Dayton is referring to includes the successive
waves of people who have come to the South Fork, attracted by its glamorous
reputation as a colony of artists. The late Harold Rosenberg once said, that ''a
law in the development of all art hangouts is that the artists tend to get
submerged by the people they attract,'' and already that has begun to happen.
It's clearly impossible to buy a house as Lee Krasner and Jackson Pollock did
for $5,000, and younger artists find it increasingly difficult to move to the
area, although a few of the more successful ones, such as Chuck Close and Audrey
Flack, have recently established residences there.

''The whole scene has changed,'' says the photographer Hans Namuth, who has had
a home there for several decades. ''Pollock is dead and de Kooning is old, and
the comradeship that used to exist in the early 40's and 50's when everyone was
unknown and poor is disappearing. I think success has changed things. It is no
longer the bohemians getting together and spending hours seeking advice from
each other. All that is no more.''

Certainly the days when it was possible to know all the other artists and
writers in the neighborhood are gone. Although the intimate dinner party
continues to thrive, there are a growing number of benefits - such as Elaine
Benson's previews and George Plimpton's upcoming fireworks show -where a minimal
donation admits curiosityseekers to a party cast with famous writers, artists,
actors and celebrities.

Lee Krasner, for one, says she has adjusted to such developments by simply
saying no to a lot of invitations. ''When we first arrived in the area, the
attitude was if you didn't bother them, they didn't bother you,'' she says.
''Now it's a whole different ballgame -lots of big-wheel deals. The fact I had
isolation here and nothing to do all winter made me work - it's being able to
concentrate and being cut off that made this such a wonderful place to paint.
The fact of the matter is I'm awfully glad I moved out when I did. I'm glad I
had my experience here when it wasn't an art colony - when it was just a real
experience in terms of the place.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Jackson Pollack in 1950 photo of the East
Hampton community in 1962

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE FUR TRADE: PAYING TOP DOLLAR FOR PELTS

BYLINE: By SANDRA SALMANS

SECTION: Section 3; Page 6, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1662 words


The prices are ''crazy, crazy,'' one man mumbles. A second man drops out of the
bidding, chomping glumly on his cigar. But Joseph Charles Reich, sitting in the
center of the auction room, raises a manicured, gold-braceleted hand and buys
another bundle of pelts. By the end of the two-day auction, Charlie Reich will
have bought some 60,000 mink pelts, nearly one-third of the total number sold,
and he will have spent $3.5 million.

In the small, clannish and immensely profitable world of fur, Mr.  Reich, at 58,
dominates a coterie of so-called skin dealers. Although industry figures tend to
be guestimates, Scheflin-Reich, which he founded with Murray Scheflin in 1955,
is generally thought to be the country's biggest mink dealer, with estimated
annual revenues of $30 million to $35 million, and a significant factor in the
international industry. It sells mink pelts to such well-known houses as
Revillon and Ben Kahn and to countless smaller manufacturers. (The largest
dealer in all skins is said to be Anglo-American Fur, also in New York.)

The fur auction season, which began in December, ended last week with a series
of mink sales at Hudson's Bay on 30th Street in New York. At the auctions, Mr.
Reich and his colleagues buy the stiff, dirty and smelly skins that they then
sell to manufacturers, who transform them into the coats worn by elegant women -
and, increasingly, by men - around the world. (The rest of the year, the dealers
supervise the ''dressing'' of the raw skins, match the pelts and sell them to
manufacturers.)

''It's very comforting that the whole world wants mink,'' says Mr.  Scheflin,
who is 70.  Indeed, there is no shortage of buyers these days. Last year, retail
sales of fur coats in the United States reached $944 million, according to the
American Fur Industry, and they are projected to pass the $1 billion mark this
year. Furthermore, with American fur craftsmanship world-renowned, United States
pelts and coats have become a big export business. The United States shipped
$552 million abroad last year, compared with $329 million in 1976; while raw
skins accounted for most of those sales, coat exports are growing far more
rapidly.

Business has not always been so good. Since the 1950's, when every American
woman supposedly implored, ''make mine mink,'' fur coat sales in the United
States had plummeted from about $600 million a year to $279 million in 1970.
Sales were depressed by the general wave of protest stemming from the Vietnam
war, a revulsion against conspicuous consumption and an objection to killing
animals to make expensive coats. Furthermore, the industry was producing
shapeless mink coats while customers were looking for flair.

But in the early 1970's, manufacturers turned to Seventh Avenue designers, and
fur turned into a fashion. Concern with social issues subsided, the ''Me
Generation'' flourished, and by 1975 the industry had made a resounding
comeback. By the time Nancy Reagan swept through the Inaugural whirl, not in a
respectable Republican cloth coat but in her Lunaraine mink, no one cheered
louder than the furriers.

Along the way, however, the industry contracted sharply. Dressers, the
specialists who tan the leather and beat, kick, wash and grease the raw skins
into sleek and silky pelts, were among the casualties.  ''There were 86 dressers
and dyers in 1946,'' recalls John Cucchiara, a partner in Manhattan Fur
Dressing, one of the biggest dressers.  ''Now there are six.''

The number of manufacturers, which totaled several thousand in the 1940's, has
fallen to about 600. Until recently, fathers did not encourage their sons to
join the ailing trade. ''This is one of the most personalized businesses in the
world,'' said Fred Goldin of Goldin-Feldman International, whose daughter joined
the company a few months ago. ''When the head of a company dies, the company
disappears.''

At Scheflin-Reich, however, there appears to be no doubt about the future of the
trade. Mr. Reich's two sons are managers, and his grandson works there
part-time. For Mr. Reich, who was born in Warsaw, emigrated to this country from
Palestine in 1938 and learned the business as a teen-ager by going to work for a
dealer when ''I didn't have two cents,'' the skin trade has truly been a
rags-toriches story. Mink has paid for a home with a pool in Connecticut, a
Mercedes, a wardrobe of well-tailored suits and gold jewelry for Mr. Reich and
five fur coats for his wife, an interior designer.

''We always did well,'' he says of his company.  Each year, the company buys
some 700,000 skins at auctions around the world. Much of the buying is done
overseas, in Scandinavia, Leningrad and London, where Hudson's Bay conducts the
world's biggest fur auction; there are also auctions in Minneapolis and
Montreal. But the biggest auctions for mink are in New York, and the quiet,
impeccably-groomed Mr. Reich dominates them.

Before he bids on the furs, Mr. Reich visits the ''cold rooms'' of Hudson's Bay,
to examine and price the pelts. The average male pelt costs $60, the pelt of a
female - prized for its lighter weight and silkiness - is $65. (Between 50 and
60 pelts go into a full-length mink coat, which retails for between $7,500 and
$15,000.)

THE skin dealer has no orders from manufacturers yet, only an approximate notion
of what he will need, and thus he is taking a gamble. By summer, when the
manufacturers have shown their samples to retailers and received orders, the
price of pelts may have fallen, and Scheflin-Reich will be forced to sell at a
loss or hold the furs until the market improves. ''I've taken a beating many,
many times,'' says Mr. Reich, although he adds that the price has not dropped by
as much as 10 to 20 percent in the last eight years. Lately, however, the price
of skins has been rising.

Stiff with dried blood, the pelts hang looped together on cords like so many
fish that didn't get away. The top-of-the-line Blackglama minks, on which Mr.
Reich bid last week, hang leather side out, fur side in. Mr. Reich inspects a
sampling for size, color and silkiness of fur. To him, slight discolorations in
the stiff leather indicate that the furry inside is also flawed, and he lowers
his price. Where the fur is visible, he ''breaks'' the skin, folding it back to
examine the color of the underfur. In the Blackglama, for example, the darker
fur is most desirable.

Acquiring a feel for fur is not easy. ''It took me five years to learn,'' says
Alfonso Telese, a vice president of Revillon, wiggling his fingers. Mr. Telese,
who worked for Scheflin-Reich before joining Revillon, says of Mr. Reich, ''He
buys the top.''

At the auction last week, Mr. Reich paid the top price: $290 per pelt for a
50-pelt bundle of Black Willow females. ''I paid more than I expected,'' he
admits during a lull in the bidding, but he bids steadily. In the auction room
are other skin dealers, brokers and manufacturers buying for their own account.
In the last three rows, mink ranchers watch the bidding with equal intensity,
recording the prices with ball-point pens capped with Blackglama mink.

After the auction has ended for the day, manufacturers start telephoning
Scheflin-Reich. The conversations tend to be to the point, according to Mr.
Reich. The manufacturer asks him what he bought, and he tells the caller the
number of bundles he purchased from different breeders.

''How much?'' the manufacturer asks.  ''Reasonable,'' says Mr. Reich.  ''They're
mine,'' says the manufacturer, and with those words, he commits himself to an
order that may represent an outlay of $1 million or more.

''When a man tells you, 'They're mine,' you don't have to sign any contracts,''
says Mr. Reich. ''That's it. Always.'' To cover costs and make ''a nice
profit,'' Mr. Reich says, he charges manufacturers 10 percent above the price he
pays. But the financial relationship between manufacturer and dealer does not
stop there. ''We do everything - buy, sell, finance,'' says Mr. Reich.  Because
of the seasonal nature of the industry, it is common for dealers to extend
credit to the manufacturers for six months, charging interest from billing date,
at the prime rate or, in some cases, 1 1/2 points higher.

Scheflin-Reich, like virtually all of the other skin dealers, manufacturers and
dressers, as well as the small specialty companies that sell silk linings and
finish fur garments, is located in New York's fur district. Within its borders -
27th Street to 31st, the Avenue of the Americas to Eighth Avenue - the furriers
present an peculiarly inelegant picture of an industry swathed in glamour.
Perspiring shirt-sleeved men, clutching lush fox coats, straggle from
manufacturer to finisher; others tote pelts from dealers to manufacturers, who
''borrow'' them before placing an order.

At the Beaver Room in the Traders Cafe, the furriers' restaurant, the industry's
clannishness thrives amid a mul-tinational atmosphere. Manufacturers of Greek
ancestry do business with Jewish dealers who emigrated from Leipzig and with
Middle West mink ranchers. Often there are buyers from West Germany, Italy or
Japan.  They see each other at shows and auctions, and everyone knows everyone
else. ''You go anyplace in the world,'' says Mr. Reich of his tight circle of
colleagues, ''and if there's a fur man there, you'll know him.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Charlie Reich

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Bangungut

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 280 words


Long before there was a Stephen King or a William Blatty or a string of movies
shot in the dark and celebrating knives, there was an Anglo-Irish writer named
Sheridan LeFanu. LeFanu lived in Dublin in the mid-19th century and wrote novels
like ''Uncle Silas'' -about a girl who didn't know whether her enemies were in
her home or in her head. His nights were haunted by nightmares about a house on
the verge of collapse, and when he died unexpectedly a friend said, ''The house
has fallen at last.''

We thought of LeFanu this month on reading about 18 Laotian refugees who, over
the last 4 years, seem to have died of bad dreams. The syndrome is called
''bangungut,'' a Filipino word for nightmare.

The Laotians belonged to a mountain society called the Hmong, who spoke little
English and whose own tongue became a written language only a few years ago.
Refugees from the Vietnam war, they lived on the fringes of American life and
their religion was, until recently, animist. That is, they attributed conscious
life to natural objects.

What were these nightmares? Did a palm tree's fronds turn into threatening
fingers? Did a forest move and march with the implacabililty of the tide? Did a
rose stretch on its stalk and throttle the sleeper?

Or did a gasoline hose curl and crush like a python? Was one of the dreamers
pinned by a perambulating postbox? Or stabbed by scissors run amok?

Whatever caused the Laotians' deaths is beyond autopsy; it defies dissection.
And we who wake from our nightmares are left to wonder - what kind of dream
stops the heart?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AT HOME ABROAD;
FREEDOM OF THE PRESS

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 889 words


Fifty years ago this month the Supreme Court decided the great case, Near v.
Minnesota, that breathed life into the First Amendment's guarantee of press
freedom in this country. Ten years ago, daring to test that freedom on the
sensitive issue of the Vietnam War, The New York Times began printing the
Pentagon Papers - and won in the Supreme Court when the Government tried to stop
publication.

The anniversaries of those legal landmarks are worth celebration, and
reflection. For time has brought clarifying light to bear on both episodes. We
can see now, I think, that they were not so much victories for the press as for
a political experiment, the one begun in 1776.

At the heart of the American system is the idea that the people are sovereign:
not in some theoretical sense, but actually having the power and the duty to
control their government. Other countries have freedom, but none subjects its
government to such intimate and continuing public accountability. The American
public, to play its constitutional role, must be informed. And that is what the
legal tests of June 1931 and June 1971 were about.

The Near case is known for establishing the American legal presumption against
''prior restraints.'' Under the First Amendment, the Supreme Court held, courts
cannot ordinarily stop publication of something because it may be false or
damaging - not even the nasty Minnesota weekly involved in the case, the
Saturday Press, which specialized in abuse of politicians and anti-Semitic
diatribes.

But there was more to the case, and more to the Saturday Press, than that. So we
find in a fascinating new book on the case, ''Minnesota Rag,'' by Fred W.
Friendly.

For all its abusiveness, the Saturday Press did actually dare to print stories
about gangsters and their links to politicians that more respectable papers did
not. And a lot of the stories were true.  Only the Saturday Press, for example,
wrote about a gangster attack on Sam Shapiro's dry-cleaning store because Sam
would not pay for ''protection.'' The story forced a prosecution, and Sam's
11-year-old son Irving was a principal witness. He went on to become chairman of
the Du Pont Company.

The Supreme Court, when it considered the case, well understood the significance
of the press's role in informing the public about what Chief Justice Hughes's
opinion called ''official malfeasance and corruption.'' At the argument Justice
Brandeis said the editors of the Saturday Press had acted with ''great courage''
in challenging ''criminal combinations.'' He asked:

''How else can a community secure protection from that sort of thing if people
are not allowed to engage in free discussion?'' When 40 years later The New York
Times started to publish the Pentagon Papers, it was asking essentially the same
question. Only this time free discussion was needed to expose not local crime or
corruption but years of deception by national leaders that had got the United
States mired in a terrible war.

Just as the State of Minnesota had claimed that it needed to protect its
citizens from the ''scandalous'' writings of Jay M. Near and his weekly, so the
United States Government said it had to protect the country from the disclosures
of the Pentagon Papers.  Officials witnesses predicted the most appalling damage
to the national security if the history collected in the Papers were allowed
out.

William B. Macomber, Deputy Under Secretary of State, testified - in a court
hearing held in secret because of the alleged sensitivity of the evidence - that
diplomatic disclosures in the Papers might ''undermine our relations'' with
allies. If the U.S. could not have confidential communications with other
governments, he said, ''we have irreparably damaged the chance of free
government to endure.''

Floyd Abrams, a lawyer who helped represent The Times in 1971, took a
retrospective look at the Pentagon Papers case in a piece for today's New York
Time's Magazine. Among others he interviewed Mr.  Macomber, now President of the
Metropolitan Museum. Mr. Macomber said he thought it was right for the
Government to bring the case but thought it was ''probably decided properly''
-against suppression. He said:

''Even though I've been a diplomat all my life and nothing is more important to
me than the security of the United States, the First Amendment is, in another
way, the security of the United States. You can't save something and take the
heart out of it.''

The official attitudes evident in 1931 and 1971 are just the same today and
always will be. Those who are in office think they know best. Nowadays hardly
any judge would try to restrain disclosures of local scandal. But Federal
officials are inventing new ways, under the guise of ''national security,'' to
keep the public from knowing about life-and-death issues of policy.

At the heart of the First Amendment - really of the entire Constitution - is an
open relationship between governors and the governed. It is still an experiment:
a dangerous one. But it is our system.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE PENTAGON PAPERS A DECADE LATER

BYLINE: By Floyd Abrams; Floyd Abrams, a member of the law firm of Cahill Gordon
& Reindel, was co-counsel to The New York Times in the Pentagon Papers case.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 22, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6749 words


Shortly after 7 o'clock on the evening of June 14, 1971, President Nixon spoke
by telephone with his Attorney General.  They agreed upon the text of a telex,
which was immediately dispatched to the offices of The New York Times in New
York.  Respectful in tone, its substance was ominous.

For two days, The Times had been publishing documents included in a detailed,
classified Pentagon study, along with articles based upon the study.  Now, in
his telex, Attorney General John N. Mitchell was charging The Times with having
violated the Espionage Act.  He called upon the newspaper to halt further
publication, which would cause "irreparable injury to the defense interests" of
the nation, and to return the classified documents to the Department of Defense.

Two hours later, in a telex signed by Harding Bancroft, executive vice president
of the paper, The Times declared that it would "respectfully decline" the
Attorney General's demand "for the same reasons that led us to publish the
articles in the first place." The next day, for the first time in American
history, the Government sought -- and won -- a temporary court order barring a
newspaper from publishing a news article.  On June 30, after 15 days of frantic
legal battles amid a firestorm of publicity, the United States Supreme Court
ruled against the Government.  The Times and other newspapers involved resumed
publication of what had long since become known as the Pentagon Papers.

A decade later, the feverish mood of those days is difficult to recall.  Richard
Nixon spoke of them in his memoirs as "tense and bitter," and they were all of
that as the nation suffered through the trauma of the Vietnam War.  The year
before had seen the American invasion of Cambodia and the killings on the Kent
State campus.  Responses to The Times's publication of the Pentagon Papers and
the case that followed reflected the degree to which the nation was divided over
the war.  Opponents of the war, such as Representative Edward I. Koch, of New
York, and Prof.  Hans Morgenthau, of the University of Chicago, strongly favored
publication.  Supporters of the war, ranging from Ronald Reagan to Jimmy Carter,
were harsh in their criticism of The Times.  For all parties involved in the
case, the atmosphere was emotionally charged.  When Whitney North Seymour Jr.,
for example, the United States Attorney who represented the Government in the
case, entered the courtroom in New York, he was greeted by the spectators with
hisses.

The Pentagon Papers case has been examined in the memoirs of many of its
participants, including Messrs. Nixon, Kissinger, Haldeman, Ehrlichman and
Colson.  Transcripts of those court sessions closed to the public because of the
airing of classified materials have since been released.  Harrison Salisbury, in
his recent biography of The Times, has described in detail the legal battles
over the papers.  What this article attempts is something of a different order:
an effort to assess, in the light of the decade past, and with the help of
interviews with more than a score of participants, the effects of publication of
the Pentagon Papers and the court case that followed.

In a variety of ways, the events of 10 years ago constituted a watershed in
American life for the Government, the press, the law and the public.  Some of
the impact has been totally unpredictable -- the unlikely trail of events, for
instance, that led from publication of the Papers to the creation of the Nixon
Administration's "plumbers" to plug news leaks to the ultimate fall of the
Administration itself.  Some elements of any assessment are necessarily
conjectural -- the degree, for example, to which the Papers altered political
attitudes of Congress and public toward the war.  Former Secretary of State
Cyrus R. Vance, for one, believes publication ultimately shortened the conflict.
Still other aspects seem quite clear.  None of the dire consequences of
publication foreseen by the Government came to pass.  The disclosure signaled
the end of an era of press-Government collaboration.  It also led to a Supreme
Court decision that was both a major victory for the press in its battle against
censorship by any branch of government and a reminder that the larger struggle
was still to be decided.

In all such judgments, the stance of the observer has special relevance.  As one
of the lawyers for The Times in the case, and as one who has often represented
journalists in other cases involving First Amendment issues, I can offer some
measure of expertise but little pretense to objectivity.  The Pentagon Papers
case had a special intensity for all involved.  I can hardly forget, for
example, the fiery glare of Assistant Attorney General Robert C. Mardian as he
sought to prevent the entire Times defense team from taking notes at the closed
court sessions.  The effort failed, but Mr. Mardian's efforts impressed
Alexander Bickel, The Times's chief counsel on the case, a Yale University Law
School professor who had immigrated to the United States from Rumania.  Turning
to me, he whispered, "Every time Mardian looks at me, I think he wants to have
me deported."

It all began in 1967 with a decision by Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara
unique in the history of warfare.  In the midst of the United States' seemingly
endless involvement in the Vietnam conflict, Mr. McNamara ordered a historical
"study." The Secretary, by that point dubious about the American role in the
war, wanted answers to fundamental questions about the nature of the struggle.
The study, Mr. McNamara insisted, should be "encyclopedic and objective." It was
expected to require the labor of six full-time professionals over a period of
three months.  In fact, by the time 36 scholars finished the task 18 months
later, a new Secretary of Defense, Clark M. Clifford, was in place.

Eventually, the study was severely attacked.  Critics on the left, such as Prof.
Noam Chomsky, of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, would charge that
the study reflected the "pro-Government bias" of its authors.  On the other
hand, Henry Kissinger, in his memoirs, said that it was "selective" and
"one-sided," reflecting an antiwar point-of-view.  Some historians, noting that
the study had been based entirely upon documents from such sources as the
Department of Defense and the Central Intelligence Agency, complained at the
lack of White House documents.  And since no interviews were permitted of the
participants in the decision-making process, the result was fairly described by
Leslie H. Gelb, director of the Study Task Force and, today, The Times's
national security correspondent, as "not so much a documentary history, as a
history based solely on documents -- checked and rechecked with antlike
diligence."

Whatever its limitations as history, the study, which covered the decades from
World War II to 1968, amply fulfilled the mandate to be encyclopedic.  There
were 3,000 pages of text; 4,000, of documents; a total of 2.5 million words.
The Pentagon Papers weighed 60 pounds.  The text was thoughtful, often
persuasive, inevitably debatable.  The documents were devastating, demonstrating
an extraordinary level of governmental duplicity based upon an unprecedented
source -- the very files of the Government, itself.

On Aug. 7, 1964, both Houses of Congress, at the urging of the Johnson
Administration, had passed a resolution endorsing "all necessary measures to
repel any armed attack against the forces of the United States and to prevent
any further aggression." As the Pentagon Papers documents revealed, the
Administration had long sought the extra powers conferred by that kind of
resolution, and President Johnson had seized upon a particular incident -- the
allegedly "unprovoked" attack on an American ship in Vietnam's Tonkin Gulf -- as
the means to get the measure through Congress.  He had not shared that desire
with the Congress.  Nor had he shared with it the fact that American soldiers
had been engaged in clandestine warfare against the North Vietnamese.

From other documents, the reader could trace the path of increased American
involvement in Vietnam -- and of repeated Government deception about it.  Some
of the material revealed in the Papers had been previously reported; some had
not.  But in many instances the documents themselves proved the truth of what
had only been alleged.  The Truman Administration, for example, had "directly
involved" the United States in Vietnam by giving military aid to France in her
war against the Vietminh.  The Eisenhower Administration's efforts to rescue
South Vietnam from a Communist takeover had played an important role in the
final breakdown of the 1954 Geneva accords.  The Kennedy Administration had
turned minor American involvement in Vietnam into a "broad commitment." The
Johnson Administration had consistently dissembled about American military plans
and activities there.

Such revelations were not, however, intended for public eyes.  When the study
was delivered to Secretary Clifford on Jan. 15, 1969, it carried a top-secret
classification.  It was filed away, and the war continued to drag on -- a
circumstance that one of the study's authors, Daniel Ellsberg, soon came to
consider intolerable.

A former marine, then a consultant in the Departments of Defense and State, Mr.
Ellsberg had started out as a fervent supporter of an American role in the
Vietnam War.  While assigned there from 1965 to 1967, he concluded that there
was no hope of American success, and upon his return he became increasingly
radicalized and increasingly distressed that the newly elected Administration
was not using what he viewed as its opportunity to extricate the United States
from its folly -- and, he would conclude, its criminal conduct -- in Vietnam.

As a consultant at the Rand Corporation, a California defense research
organization, Mr. Ellsberg had access to one of the 15 copies of the study.
Starting in 1969, he tried to interest Congressional committees in subpoenaing
the study.  All such efforts failing, Mr. Ellsberg made a copy of the study
available to Neil Sheehan, then a Times reporter.  It presented The Times with a
soulwrenching set of decisions.

Just a century earlier, in the summer of 1871, The Times had printed another set
of secret internal government documents; in that instance, the paper had exposed
the criminal transgressions of the Tweed Ring in New York City.  This time, the
stakes were different, and much higher.  On the face of it, this sober,
respectable paper had to decide whether or not it was going to print
"top-secret" documents that dealt with a war in which the nation was still
engaged.

The debate within the paper was long, exhaustive and sometimes acrimonious.
Executives, editors, reporters and attorneys argued over the meaning of
patriotism and journalistic ethics and over the risks that publication, or
nonpublication, of the Papers held for the profession and for The Times itself.

A decade before, in April 1961, The Times had toned down an article about the
forthcoming invasion of the Bay of Pigs in the interests of what was thought to
be national security.  A year after the hapless and disastrous invasion,
President Kennedy had told The Times' publisher Orvil Dryfoos, "I wish you had
run everything on Cuba . . .  I'm sorry you didn't tell it at the time." That
earlier decision was constantly cited by those in favor of printing the Pentagon
Papers.  And in the end, they carried the day.

The Pentagon Papers case was assigned by lot to Federal Judge Murray Gurfein, a
new Nixon appointee, who had served during World War II as an Army officer with
the Office of Strategic Services.  It was, in fact, his first case as a judge.
On Tuesday, June 15, in the United States Courthouse in New York's Foley Square,
the judge issued a temporary restraining order barring publication by The Times.
On Saturday, June 19, he decided in favor of The Times.  Government attorneys
immediately proceeded to an upstairs court-room in the same building and shortly
obtained a Court of Appeals order continuing the bar on publication.  The
following Wednesday, that court ordered Judge Gurfein to conduct further
hearings to allow the Government more time to prove its case.  The Times then
filed papers seeking review by the United States Supreme Court.  On June 30, the
Court found for The Times.  The next day, publication resumed.

That rapid survey of the sequence of events following Attorney General
Mitchell's telex to The Times ignores, of course, the frantic pace of the
various proceedings in various courts, including those concerning The Washington
Post and other publications.  It ignores, as well, the single issue central to
the disposition of the Government's case -- the potential danger to national
security said to be posed by continued publication of the Papers.

When the Government went before Judge Gurfein on June 15, it submitted an
affidavit of J. Fred Buzhardt, general counsel of the Department of Defense.
Materials already published by The Times, Mr. Buzhardt said, had "prejudiced the
defense interests of the United States." Publication of additional materials
would "result in irreparable injury to the national defense."

In Secret sessions before Judge Gurfein, it became clear that the threatened
dangers had little to do with military harm inflicted during war.  Such a
possibility was mentioned, but it fared poorly in court because the most recent
of the documents was three years old and because much of the information about
which the Government was upset either had no military significance or was
already in the public domain, having been revealed at Congressional hearings or
published in newspapers.

The chief Government witness with respect to possible military consequences of
publication was Vice Adm.  Francis J. Blouin, Deputy Chief of Naval Operations
for Plans and Policy.  Impressive in demeanor, candid in response to questions,
Admiral Blouin initially testified that it would be a "disaster" to publish
documents held but not yet printed by The Times, "let alone the ones that have
already been published." Under cross-examination, however, the admiral made it
clear that, in virtually all respects, his testimony was based not on fear of
any immediate military peril but on the more general ground that "there is an
awful lot of stuff in [the Pentagon study] that I would just prefer to see sleep
a while longer."

In a recent interview, the now-retired officer said that he continued to believe
that publication had been harmful, both "as a matter of principle" -- in that it
ignored regulations governing classified documents -- and as "just another one
of those things that helped destroy the will of our country." As to the specific
harm that the publication of the Papers might have caused, he commented,
"Looking at them today, I don't think there was any great loss in substance."

As became evident in the course of the trials, the core of the Government's case
was based not upon potential military dangers but upon possible diplomatic harm.
William B. Macomber, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration,
testified that the publication of the Pentagon Papers that had already occurred
had caused considerable back-home political embarrassment to the governments of
some American allies.  The Prime Minister of Australia, for example, had been
attacked by the opposition party because of revelations about the circumstances
under which Australian troops were sent to fight in Vietnam.  Canadian leaders,
as well, were being criticized for failing to let their own people know of their
efforts as United States proxies in negotiations with North Vietnam, efforts
revealed in the Pentagon Papers.

Mr. Macomber's basic message: Governments must be able to deal with each other
on a confidential basis, or they cannot deal at all.  "I just don't see," he
told the court, "how we can conduct diplomacy with this kind of business going
on."

In his memoirs, Henry Kissinger recalled that his "nightmare" at the time the
Pentagon Papers were published was that the Chinese Government, with whom Mr.
Kissinger was then secretly negotiating, "might conclude our Government was too
unsteady, too harassed, and too insecure to be a useful partner." As it turned
out, of course, the agreement with China went through.  In a recent interview,
McGeorge Bundy, national security adviser in the Kennedy and Johnson
Administrations until 1966, commented that China was never "worried about the
disclosures in the Pentagon Papers.  Nixon and Kissinger were."

Today, William Macomber, now the president of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in
New York, continues to believe that the Government should have brought the
Pentagon Papers case, since it raised "very serious and very close issues,"
issues that needed to be resolved in a court of law.  However, he said in an
interview that he now believes the case was "probably decided properly." His
view: "I think that, even though I've been a diplomat all my life and nothing is
more important to me than the security of the United States, the First Amendment
is, in another way, the security of the United States.  You can't save something
and take the heart out of it."

Aside from the dire warnings of the Government, the publication of the Pentagon
Papers inspired a host of expectations, pro and con -- expectations heightened
by the fact of the lawsuit.  Many of them turned out to be no less mistaken than
those predictions of national-security disaster.

A number of antiwar Congressmen had sought to participate in the case with The
Times because they said they viewed the continued publication of the Pentagon
Papers as essential to their understanding of the war and of how to vote on
war-related matters.  There were those who thought that an aroused Congress
would force President Nixon to get us out of Vietnam.  And there were others who
envisioned an immediate public uproar that would carry all before it.  (The
American people, as Tom Wicker later wrote, "did not rise in anger to demand the
end of the war, as Ellsberg in his most optimistic moments might have hoped.")
Some analysts actually suggested that the Papers would redound to the benefit of
the Republican President, since the period covered in them ended before his
incumbency.

The truth about the impact of publication of the Papers, apart from that of the
court case, lies elsewhere.  Although it is necessarily speculative, it is far
from insignificant.

As regards the war itself, there seems little doubt that the revelations in the
Papers strengthened public and Congressional opposition to continued American
participation.  Charles Nesson, a Harvard Law School professor, believes that
publication "lent credibility to and finally crystallized the growing consensus
that the Vietnam War was wrong and legitimized the radical critique of the war."
Many observers give the Papers less importance, pointing out that the war did
not in fact end for another four years, but as former Secretary of State Vance
said in a recent interview, "Publication plainly had an effect on public opinion
and public opinion had an effect on the duration of the war."

It may also have paved the way for the public's reaction to the Watergate
transgressions.  In this view, the disillusionment with Government aroused by
the Pentagon Papers made the public less trusting, less willing to accept
Government denials concerning Watergate.

Publication had direct, if utterly unpredictable, effects on the Nixon White
House.  Apart from reinforcing the President's views of the press as his
implacable enemy, it set into motion a crazyquilt series of events.  The "leak"
of the Pentagon Papers led the President to establish the group that would later
become known as the "plumbers." Assigned the task of gathering information for
the purpose of discrediting

Daniel Ellsberg, they engaged in the criminal break-in at the office of Mr.
Ellsberg's former psychiatrist.  That was one of the elements that finally led
to the dismissal of the Government's criminal case against Mr. Ellsberg for
copying the Pentagon Papers.  The illegal acts of the plumbers would later
figure importantly in the impeachment resolutions that brought on Mr. Nixon's
ultimate resignation.

The effect of publication on the press was substantial.  As Fred W. Friendly,
the former president of CBS News, puts it, publication "stiffened the spines of
all journalists." It may have done more.  According to Benno Schmidt, a
professor at Columbia University Law School, it "signaled the passing of a
period when newspapers could be expected to play by tacit rules in treating
matters that Government leaders deem confidential."

There are many who hold that, for better or worse, publication of the Pentagon
Papers was the beginning of a new period of press militancy, when journalists
would increasingly see their function as that of exposing wrongdoing rather than
of reprinting Governmental statements.  Harrison Salisbury, for example, argues
that the reporting of Watergate would not have occurred but for the willingness
of the press to publish the Pentagon Papers.  And Mr. Bundy cautions that one
effect of the Pentagon Papers case is that it led the press, in one sense, to
"change for the worse.  One of the things that has happened is the growth of the
notion that unless the relationship between the press and Government is
adversarial, it's not honest." Others charge that the pressure to produce
investigatory articles has led to a greater reliance by many publications on
unnamed sources.  (Ironically, both Richard Nixon and Daniel Ellsberg have
expressed their suspicions that leaks were increased by the publication of the
Papers.)

Publication also underlined the absurdity of a classification system that barred
from public view so much information of no security consequence.  After a series
of Congressional hearings and debates over several years, which included
frequent references to the Pentagon Papers case, the Freedom of Information Act
was strengthened to allow, for the first time, judicial scrutiny of
classification documents.

It may well be that the most important effects of the Pentagon Papers relate
neither to the war described by the study nor to the journalistic decision to
publish.  The legal effects of the Pentagon Papers case may dwarf all others.
Prior restraints -- bars, in advance, on what the press may print -- has
historically been viewed as the single most intrusive and dangerous form of
government conduct threatening freedom of expression.  In fact, in a landmark
case decided 40 years before the Pentagon Papers ruling, Chief Justice Charles
Evans Hughes indicated that in virtually no case would a prior restraint be
upheld.

In the Pentagon Papers case, those issues would be considered again.  Six of the
nine members of the Supreme Court concluded that on the factual record before
the Court, the Government had failed to meet its "heavy burden" of justifying a
prior restraint on publication.  Of the six, four members of the Court were so
persuaded of the inadequacy of the Government's position that they would have
ruled for The Times without any need for oral argument.  Two of them, Justices
Black and Douglas, opposed such restraints in all cases on First Amendment
grounds; one, Justice William J. Brennan Jr., opposed the restraint in all cases
except the extremely unlikely circumstance -- thus far unknown in our history --
in which the country was at war and the Government proved that "publication must
inevitably, directly and immediately cause the occurrence of an event kindred to
imperiling the safety of a transport already at sea," and a fourth, Justice
Thurgood Marshall, voted in favor of The Times on the ground that no statute of
Congress allowed the relief sought by the Government.

The three dissenting members of the Court agreed with the general proposition
that prior restraints against the press were rarely to be permitted.  However,
Justice John Marshall Harlan, in an opinion joined by Chief Justice Warren E.
Burger and Justice Harry A. Blackmun, not only objected to the "almost
irresponsibly feverish" pace of the case through the courts, but suggested that
the judgment of the executive branch as to the potential harm to the conduct of
foreign relations caused by publication should, in most circumstances, be deemed
governing.

The victory of The Times in the Pentagon Papers case was thus dependent upon the
votes of the two other Justices, Potter Stewart and Byron R. White.  In their
opinion, they stated that, at least in the absence of explicit Congressional
authorization, they could not agree to the constitutionality of a prior
restraint on publication unless the disclosures in question would "surely result
in direct, immediate and irreparable damage to our nation or its people." Since
nothing that had been pointed to by the Government in the Pentagon Papers met
that test, the two Justices cast their decisive votes in favor of The Times.
The Stewart-White opinion is generally cited as establishing the legal test of
the Pentagon Papers case.  It is plainly an extremely difficult one to meet, not
least because it is virtually impossible to demonstrate that publication of
anything will "surely" lead to "irreparable damage." But because it is far from
an absolute bar on prior restraint (and because Justices Black and Douglas, the
only two members of the Pentagon Papers Court who had favored such a bar, have
since died), the decision of the Supreme Court in its one, more recent
prior-restraint case is all the more important.

In that case, decided five years to the day from the Pentagon Papers ruling, the
Court unanimously struck down a series of prior restraints on publication that
would have limited the right of the press to publish information about
defendants in criminal cases, such as the fact that they had confessed.  Imposed
by the courts in Nebraska for the stated purpose of assuring a defendant a fair
trial, the prior restraints in question were unanimously held unconstitutional.
Nonetheless, the Court's ideological disagreement, which had been reflected in
the many opinions in the Pentagon Papers case, persisted.  Only three members of
the Court (Justices Brennan, Stewart and Marshall) would go so far as to flatly
ban prior restraints in all cases involving claims that publication would
interfere with a defendant's right to a fair trial; the rest of the Court, while
making the issuance of such orders in the future extremely unlikely, did leave
open the possibility of some such Court order.

The practical effect of the Nebraska ruling, built in turn upon that in the
Pentagon Papers case, has been virtually to end the issuance of prior restraints
on publication.  An occasional trial court has issued one in the last five
years, but in virtually all cases an appellate court has reversed that decision.
The result has been a de facto end to the issuance of virtually all prior
restraints -- except in the very national-security area about which the Pentagon
Papers case revolved.

It was in the midst of his most trying and least successful argument of the
entire Pentagon Papers case that The Times's counsel, Alexander Bickel, sorely
pressed by members of the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, had attempted
to offer one example of material that, if published, could "possibly" justify
the entry of a prior restraint.  His example was a situation in which, as he put
it, "the hydrogen bomb turns up." It was precisely what would be involved eight
years later in the only case since the Pentagon Papers in which the United
States has sought a prior restraint on publication.  The Progressive magazine
was about to publish an article, entitled "The H-Bomb Secret," that included
detailed papers for the construction of a hydrogen bomb.  The United States
sought and obtained from the United States District Court in Wisconsin an order
barring publication.  During the appeal of the Progressive case, similar
information to that contained in the article was published elsewhere.  The
Government then dropped its effort to prevent publication.

The Progressive case leads to another conclusion suggested by the facts of the
Pentagon Papers case.  Judicial bans on publishing seem totally ineffective.

In the Pentagon Papers case, during the period in which The Times was enjoined
from publishing the documents, Daniel Ellsberg made available to almost 20 other
newspapers portions of the Pentagon Papers.  The Government brought actions for
injunctive relief against three of them, but no action was taken against the
others.  The number of newspapers that published some portion of the Pentagon
Papers led Judge Roger Robb of the United States Court of Appeals for the
District of Columbia, while hearing a related case, to inquire of counsel for
the Government whether it was "asking us to ride herd on a swarm of bees."

Judge Robb's question illustrated an inescapable dilemma regarding the issuance
of any prior restraint on publication.  Once information is out, it is virtually
impossible to stop its broader dissemination.  All the prior restraints issued
in the Pentagon Papers case failed to prevent Mr. Ellsberg from continuing his
distribution.  The Nebraska injunction was held unconstitutional five years
after the Pentagon Papers case in part because of the Court's conclusion that
events that occur in a small community are passed on by rumors even if
newspapers are barred from publishing.  "Plainly," Chief Justice Burger
observed, "a whole community cannot be restrained from discussing a subject
intimately affecting life within it." The prior restraint issued in the
Progressive case another three years later did not keep the very material that
the Government sought to bar from the magazine from being printed elsewhere.

The fact that the Pentagon Papers case involved claims of possible harm to
national security had led to an initially stern judicial response by Judge
Gurfein.  When the case began on June 15, the judge lectured lawyers for The
Times on the need for "patriotism" on the part of all involved.  In open court
on the morning of June 18, before hearing the Government's case, the judge
caustically admonished The Times that "it seems to me that a free and
independent press ought to be willing to sit down with the Department of Justice
and as a matter of simple patriotism determine whether publication . . . is or
is not dangerous to the national security." But as the case proceeded, Judge
Gurfein's mood changed.  He repeatedly prodded the Government to identify
"specific documents" that would compromise national security.  He repeatedly
gave the Government "one more chance" to explain how publication would be
seriously harmful to the nation.

When Judge Gurfein's decision in favor of The Times was appealed, however, the
Government's case seemed renewed, almost as if the clock had been turned back to
the first moments of the hearing before Judge Gurfein.  The claim of potential
harm to national security appeared to carry great weight with some judges of the
Court of Appeals, the more so, it seemed, because they had not personally seen
and heard the faltering efforts of the Government's witnesses.  The same may be
true about members of the Supreme Court itself.  Justice Harry A. Blackmun
suggested that further publication of portions of the Pentagon Papers might well
result in such events as the death of soldiers and the destruction of alliances
as well as the "prolongation of the war" and "further delay in the freeing of
United States prisoners." It was a harsh charge, particularly telling from so
gentle and respected a jurist -- a charge unlikely to have been made by one who
had actually heard the Government's witnesses.

Other cases involving claims of national security in the last decade have led to
similar reactions.  Through the mid-1970's the Central Intelligence Agency
engaged in litigation with Victor L. Marchetti, a former agent who had signed a
C.I.A.-prepared document promising not to disclose information learned by him
when he was in the agency.  According to a 1972 United States Court of Appeals
ruling in a case involving Mr. Marchetti, the C.I.A. could block publication
only of information that was classified, that had been learned by Mr. Marchetti
while he was in the agency and that was not already in the public domain.

Armed with this authoritative ruling, Judge Albert V. Bryan Jr., of the United
States District Court in Alexandria, Va., two years later tried the case
involving a book written jointly by Mr. Marchetti and John D. Marks entitled
"The C.I.A. and the Cult of Intelligence." As for the question of whether
particular portions of the book had been previously classified, Judge Bryan,
after listening to the four deputy directors of the C.I.A. testify to the
contrary, concluded that the deputies' classification decisions had been made as
they read the manuscript and not on the basis of whether the material had
previously been classified.  Similarly, after hearing Mr. Marchetti and Mr.
Marks, Judge Bryan concluded that, based upon their general "candor with the
Court," he believed their testimony as to when they had learned of certain
matters.

On appeal, as had been true in the Pentagon Papers case, the Government's case
seemed revived.  The United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit in
Richmond, in a 1975 ruling reversing the decision of Judge Bryan, decided that
there was a presumption that everything that could have been classified had been
classified and, as well, that all information that reposed in the agency while
an agent was employed should be presumed to have been learned by him then.

As in the Pentagon Papers case, judges on appeallate courts in the Marchetti
cases were far more sympathetic to obstract claims of national security than the
trial judge who had seen the Government witnesses and found them wanting.

Although the press triumphed in the Pentagon Papers case, the victory was of a
limited and troubling nature.  A majority of the Supreme Court not only left
open the possibility of prior restraints in other cases but of criminal
sanctions being imposed upon the press following publication of the Pentagon
Papers themselves.  While restrictions in advance of publication have
historically -- and correctly -- been viewed as the worst possible intrusions on
press freedoms, the visage of criminal prosecutions after publication was hardly
one to encourage boldness among editors.

Even the fact that the United States had sought, however unsuccessfully, to bar
publication was troubling.  "Law," Alexander Bickel would later write, "can
never make us as secure as we are when we do not need it.  Those freedoms which
are neither challenged nor defined are the most secure." In this sense, he
suggested, the fact that the United States had attempted in the Pentagon Papers
case, for the first time, to censor the press was itself a kind of defeat.  By
doing so, a "spell was broken, and in a sense freedom was thus diminished."

But if the legal victory of The Times in the case was limited, the effects of
defeat would have been staggering.  As Prof. Thomas I. Emerson, of the Yale Law
School, has writte: "The result was certainly favorable to a free press.  Put
the other way, a contrary result would have been a disaster.  It would have made
the press subject to a very considerable extent of advance restriction.  It
would have changed the whole relationship between the press and Government."

Former Vice President Walter F. Mondale, in a speech in Kansas City last
September, made a similar observation: "One shudders to think of what our future
would be like if The New York Times had not exposed a policy of mistakes and
misdeeds, and published the Pentagon Papers."

What this retrospective suggests is that the entire Pentagon Papers case was
based on flawed premises.  The law required the courts to assume that restraints
on publication would be effective when, in fact, they were not and there was
little reason to expect them to be.  The law also required the courts to assume
that they could predict the effects of publication when neither they nor anyone
else could.  The efforts at prediction were, particularly among some appellate
judges, titled in favor of the Government on the basis of the view (as
summarized by Justice Harlan) that the courts should defer to the executive
branch of the Government in determining "the probable impact of disclosure on
the national security." Even judges who voted for The Times believed (although
Judge Gurfein did not) that publication would be harmful to national security.
Justices Douglas and Black commented that the disclosures in the Pentagon Papers
"may have a serious impact"; Justices White and Stewart observed that they were
"confident" that disclosure of materials in the Pentagon Papers "will do
substantial damage to public interests." Yet with the advantage of 10 years of
hindsight, it now seems unlikely that there was any damage at all.

What occurred during the last two weeks of June 1971 was thus a continuing
series of restraints upon publications entered by courts, despite the
extraordinary frailty of the Government's case.  Assuming that under some
circumstances in which claims of national security were asserted, some
prepublication limits would be proper, Judge Gurfein first restrained The Times
from publishing so that he could consider the matter; so, in turn, did the Court
of Appeals; so also did the Supreme Court itself in the Washington Post case,
which the newspaper had won in the lower courts.  The effect was summarized by
Supreme Court Justice Brennan:

"The error which has pervaded these cases from the outset was the granting of
any injunctive relief whatsoever, interim or otherwise.  The entire thrust of
the Government's claim throughout these cases has been that publication of the
material sought to be enjoined 'could,' or 'might," or 'may' prejudice the
national interest in various ways.  But the First Amendment tolerates absolutely
no prior judicial restraints of the press predicated upon surmise or conjecture
that untoward consequences may result."

There is a problem with Justice Brennan's argument.  If prior restraints are to
be permitted at all, how can a court not take enough time to study the matter
thoroughly?  And if the process of judicial consideration itself leads to
interference with the immediacy of speech, is that not a price worth paying so
as to avoid the "irresponsibly feverish" pace objected to by Justice Harlan?

One answer is Justice Brennan's: Unless and until the Government demonstrates
that publication "must inevitably, directly and immediately" bring about
enormous national harm, no prior restraints on publication should be permitted
for a moment.

Another answer worth considering is one which would not garner a single vote on
the Supreme Court today.  If prior restraints on publication are both useless
and dangerous, why not totally remove them from the arsenal of government
attorneys?  Criminal prosecutions could, if appropriate, be commenced after
publication; prior restraints before publication, so rarely even attempted in
our history, could be avoided.

These views were most often expressed in the Supreme Court by Justice Black.
Rarely quoted by the Supreme Court of the 1980's, Justice Black is generally
viewed by the Court (as he was by Mr. Bickel) as too "absolutist," too
unyielding, too unresponsive to other societal needs.  But the Pentagon Papers
case may, a decade later, be best recalled in Justice Black's opinion, the last
he would write on the Court:

"The press was to serve the governed, not the governors.  The Government's power
to censor the press was abolished so that the press would remain forever free to
censure the Government.  The press was protected so that it could bare the
secrets of government and inform the people.  Only a free and unrestrained press
can effectively expose deception in government.  And paramount among the
responsibilities of a free press is the duty to prevent any part of the
Government from deceiving the people and sending them off to distant lands to
die of foreign fevers and foreign shot and shell."

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Lyndon Johnston and Nguyen Cao Ky in 1966 photo
of Bernard Baker photo of Eugenio Martinez photo of G. Gordon Liddy photo of E.
Howard Hunt photo of segment of Freedom of Information Act photo of Justice
Blackmun photo of people with The Progressive magazine photo of Daniel Ellsberg
at news conference, Boston,

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN CAMBODIA THE SOUND OF BELLS

BYLINE: By Joel R. Charny

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 872 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


In Cambodia, after a decade of war, spent cartridges litter the ground like
bottle caps after a picnic. Khmer peasants gather the bits of metal, melt them
down, and fashion them into the tiny cowbells that encircle the necks of their
oxen and buffalo. In the countryside, the pleasant jingle-jangle of these bells
gives a rhythm to the tranquility. Bells made from bullets - the transformation
is no less elegant in its symbolism than Isaiah's biblical admonition to beat
swords into plowshares.

Cambodia is now a country that is stable enough to allow such transformations to
take place. Schools that served as munitions workshops or torture chambers under
the Khmer Rouge are schools once again. Ruined pagodas used as pigsties are
being rebuilt with money donated by peasants and city dwellers alike. Such small
victories are but a part of the great task of reconstruction that the Khmer
people face.

No one who visits Cambodia, which is called Kampuchea by most of the world, can
fail to be impressed by its rebirth. Yet to Americans the name ''Cambodia''
continues to evoke the terrible images of starving children, masses of ragged
refugees, and sinister Vietnamese officials. The truth is far less grim.

While numerous problems remain to be overcome, there is no longer mass
starvation, thousands of refugees have returned to their native land from the
border camps, and the Vietnamese have placed themselves in a low profile,
advisory role in a Government in which day-to-day decisions are made by Khmers.

The long-term intentions of the Vietnamese are undeniably ambiguous and
worrisome. Yet the best way to keep them in Cambodia indefinitely is to continue
to support the Khmer Rouge as a viable political and military alternative. This
was precisely the Indochina policy pursued by the Carter Administration and
there is little likelihood that the Reagan Administration, obsessed with the
Soviet threat, will modify it.

Indeed, at the June 19-20 ministers meeting of foreign ministers of Asean - the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations - Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig
Jr. is likely to affirm United States support for the efforts by Asean and China
to form an anti-Vietnam coalition to support the Khmer Rouge-led guerrilla war
against the Heng Samrin Government. By actively joining this effort, which has
been under way, the Administration would help to confer political legitimacy
upon a political movement that exists only in the imagination of diplomats. For
the grand illusion of this approach to the Cambodian question is that Pol Pot,
Ieng Sary, and other leaders associated with the murder of more than one million
of their own people would voluntarily step aside in favor of a ''third force''
combining lesser Khmer Rouge leaders, bourgeois bureaucrats, and
right-wing-leaning military men from the Lon Nol era. In this illusion, Son
Sann, a former prime minister under Prince Norodom Sihanouk, would be the
nominal leader of this unlikely government coalition.

Few Khmers believe in such a pipedream. As Prince Sihanouk learned recently
within days of his quickly retracted offer to ally with the Khmer Rouge, the one
thing that is unacceptable to Cambodians today, whether peasants or wealthy
exiles, is the reurn of the Khmer Rouge under any guise. ''We would fight to the
last man before we allow the Khmer Rouge to return'' is a sentiment often
expressed in Cambodia.  Having once been the victims, the Cambodians, too, have
a right to say ''never again.''

A political solution to the conflict in Cambodia must begin with disarming the
Khmer Rouge and bringing their leaders to trial by an international tribunal
modeled after that at Nuremberg. That Western and Asian leaders lack the courage
to implement such a plan makes its justice no less compelling.

With Pol Pot and his fellow mass murderers removed from the scene, the
Vietnamese would be faced with the choice of gradually reducing their influence
in Cambodia or confronting a national resistance movement that would enjoy the
support of the populace. Given the current economic and political problems that
the Vietnamese leaders face in their own country, it is doubtful they would risk
defending the Heng Samrin Government against a full-scale popular revolt.
Negotiation of a political solution would be their only recourse.

Thus, the specter of further civil war and bloodshed still haunts Cambodia. The
Khmer people are acutely aware that the peace and stability now prevailing in
their country are precarious at heart.  Having survived as a people, in defiance
of the machinations of great and small powers alike, the Khmers will continue
their attempts, at once stubborn and noble, to wrest tranquility from chaos and
transform bullets into bells.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Joel R. Charny, Southeast Asia projects officer for Oxfam America, a
nonpolitical aid agency that funds development projects, returned from Cambodia
in January.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Westchester Housing;
BLOCK WATCHERS CUT CRIME

BYLINE: By BETSY BROWN

SECTION: Section 11; Westchester; Page 8, Column 3; Weschester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1813 words


HOMEOWNERS may be victimized, if they are not careful, by burglars this summer,
when lush foliage conceals doors and windows and families are vacationing.

But people are being careful. Neighborhood watch and block-watcher programs have
been organized in a score of Westchester neighborhoods, with volunteers keeping
an eye on comings and goings and calling police if they see anything suspicious.

Police chiefs say they can't prove it statistically, but they believe that the
programs are discouraging burglars, and occasionally they result in an arrest.

Two young men, for example, were charged with burglary recently as a result of a
block-watcher program in Yonkers, which has the most active neighborhood effort
in the county.

At a meeting of the Ludlow Park Association, neighbors talked about burglaries
that had occurred in their area on three successive Friday nights. They decided
to be particularly watchful on the next Friday.

When a woman heard her elderly neighbor call out, she telephoned the police and
then ran next door, where she found two youths kicking the back door. Police
arrived within moments, arrested one, and caught the other fleeing on foot.

Another burglary was solved recently in Chappaqua, after a woman reported to the
police that four men were driving slowly through her neighborhood. The police
stopped the car and questioned the occupants but had no reason to hold them. An
hour later, another woman came home to find her house burglarized.

Police traced the earlier car to Yonkers, searched it and found a tiny coffee
spoon that had fallen between the seats - all that was left of the woman's table
silver except for a candelabra that they found later in some bushes.

''We can't have wall-to-wall policemen,'' said Stephen Acunto, director of the
crime prevention unit of the Westchester Department of Public Safety, who has
discussed the program with representatives of 100 neighborhood groups. ''But we
can do this at no expense to the taxpayers.''

The neighborhood-watch programs were initiated by the county in 1979. The county
provides literature, speakers and suggestions on how to organize. The object is
to teach people what to look for and when to alert the police, not to train them
as auxiliary policemen, Mr.  Acunto said.

The programs range from structured systems in Yonkers and White Plains, where
each block watcher has a code number to be used when calling the police to speed
up the report to less formal arrangements such as the two in Ossining, where
neighborhood groups are formed into ''modules'' and are supposed to keep an eye
only on immediate neighbors.

Yonkers has 12 Blockwatcher Associations with 1,000 members; White Plains is
trying the system in the Fisher Hill and Battle Hill areas, and Mount Vernon is
discussing a program with three neighborhood associations. Police Chief Frank
Comito of New Castle has visited 20 neighborhood associations to discuss
watchfulness and a half dozen have put up signs saying ''This neighborhood is
working together to prevent crime.''

The Bedford police decided to emphasize neighborhood watchfulness after a
civilian patrol system started by several residents last December began to lose
members. Sgt. David Martin said that the roster of volunteers hit a high of
about 30 but has dropped to 20, because the weekly four-hour car patrol was
''frustrating and boring'' to some of the volunteers. ''It was a lot to ask,''
he said.

Even watchfulness has its limits, according to William L. Wagner, a neighborhood
watchman and chairman of the board of directors of the Tuc-Loc Civic Association
of Yonkers, which gets its name from two of its major streets, Tuckahoe Road and
Lockwood Avenue.

''You don't stand in the window all day staring out,'' he said.  ''But when
you're walking the dog, or going to the store, or are out mowing the lawn, you
just stay aware of what's going on.''

The antiburglary literature tells people to watch out for ''suspicious'' persons
and to watch for ''strange cars'' and to write down the description and license
number. They define suspicious persons as those who walk or drive slowly through
a neighborhood, particularly in pairs, or a couple who separate with one
watching the front of the house while another goes to the rear door, or persons
who go to several doors and then ask for someone with a name that is unknown in
the neighborhood.

Mr. Wagner, a retired insurance company investigator, told how he had warded off
a potential burglar when he noticed a man walking through the garden of a
neighbor who lived alone and was away on vacation. He went to the house and
asked whom the man was looking for, and the man mumbled something and left.

''If people are out at work all day, and you see someone coming to the door,
that's suspicious,'' he said. ''On the weekends, they may have guests you don't
know, or strange cars, but you don't worry as much because you know they're
home.'' He said that a blockwatcher should become familiar with the neighbors'
routines and said that ''even retired people have routines. They usually go to
the store at a certain hour, and you know when the house is apt to be empty -
and so do burglars.''

When the police talk of potential burglars, they often mention teen-agers as
likely suspects, and some said that burglaries increase in the summer when
teen-agers are out of school.

Mr. Wagner said that ''too many people like to blame everything on teenagers.
Burglars can be any age.'' So can watchers, he said, but in his neighborhood,
most watchers are retired persons, ''who tend to go for walks and notice what is
going on.''

Robert Menge, who is helping to organize a program in the Fisher Hill
neighborhood in White Plains, said teen-agers can be a valuable part of the
block-watch programs, because ''they are the best eyes and ears of the
neighborhood, and a high school kid could tell the year, make and model number
of a car at a glance.''

Yonkers Police Lieut. James Bubbico said, ''We usually like to think burglars
are outsiders, but sometimes they live right in the neighborhood.''

He suggested that watchful neighbors ''step outside and look around before they
go to bed, and don't assume that when you see a car parked in an unusual place,
and there are people in it, that they are lovers.''

While neighborhood watchers are organizing themselves, makers of burglar alarms
are constantly updating their systems because burglars get more sophisticated
all the time. Even the amateur burglar doesn't stay amateur very long, according
to Glenn DeFaber, of J. F.  B. Alarms of Harrison. ''It doesn't take long to get
to be a professional,'' he said. ''They talk to their friends, and before long
they're experts.''

''Burglars used to break a pane of glass, unlock the latch, open the window and
climb in,'' he said. ''So people wired the windows, and then burglars began
taking out the whole pane.

''Then we began putting pads under the carpet that sounded when someone stepped
on them,'' he said. ''We put them in the master bedroom, because that's where
burglars go for jewelry. But if the rug wears thin, the pad becomes visible.
Burglars began tearing up the rugs or walking on the furniture. Some houses have
so much furniture you can walk around on it like walkling on stones in a pond.

''Now we have a sensor that detects body temperatures,'' he said.  ''It's copied
from the ones used in Vietnam to detect the enemy. It looks like an electric
outlet, and it reaches out to sense a human being.''

The sensor sets off a bell or a siren that is supposed to scare off the burglar
and alert the neighbors. Recently this feature has had to be made more
sophisticated so that it will reset itself after it goes off.

''The burglars knew that the older ones would go off and be inactive until they
were reset, so after it went off they left and then came back and robbed in
peace.'' he said. ''The problem is that neighbors don't call unless the bell
rings for hours.''
Dobbs Ferry Cedar Street 4-room, 1-bath condominium $75,500 2d floor, 928 square
feet; $286 a month Hastings-on-Hudson Jefferson Avenue 8-room, 1 1/2-bath frame
raised ranch $97,500 Built 1966; 50x100 lot, patio; taxes $3,223 Katonah
Westview Drive 8-room, 2 1/2-bath raised ranch $117,900 1967; shops and trains,
1/2 acre; taxes $2,787 Larchmont Sheldrake 6-room, 2-bath frame ranch $142,500
Built 1962; sunporch, 75x100 lot; taxes $3,423 Scarsdale Carstensen Drive
8-room, 2 1/2-bath English Tudor $235,000 Built 1979; cul de sac, 1/3 acre;
taxes $5,850 White Plains Washington Avenue 7-room, 2 1/2-bath frame Colonial
$57,500 Built 1904; modern kitchen; taxes $1,439 Yorktown Heights William Court
9-room, 2 1/2-bath frame Colonial $119,980 Built 1969; den, 1 acre; taxes $4,368


Sales in Other Areas Darien, Conn.  Hoyt Street 3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath stucco
Colonial $116,000 Built 1935; 1/3 acre; taxes $1,298 Ringwood, N.J.  Cupsaw
Avenue 3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath saltbox $120,000 2 fireplaces, three decks; taxes
$2,740

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of crime watch sign in Chappaqua

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The Lively Arts;
ANOTHER FOR WILSON'S TALLY

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 15, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1046 words


''CAN Lanford Wilson Score on Broadway?'' was a headline in The New York Times
last year when Mr. Wilson's ''Talley's Folly'' was uprooted from its nonprofit
Off Broadway birthplace and thrust into the commercial mainstream. Artistically,
the answer was resoundingly affirmative. The play won the Critics Circle Award
and the Pulitzer Prize - but not the Tony for which it was nominated.

''Will Lanford Wilson win the Tony?'' would seem to be the inevitable follow-up
question. His ''Fifth of July,'' which takes place 33 years and one day after
''Talley's Folly,'' is another work in a projected cycle of five plays about the
mythical Talley family of Lebanon, Mo., the playwright's hometown. It has been
nominated for the Tony - the only major theatrical accolade Mr. Wilson has not
received. The Tony ceremonies are being broadcast tonight at 9 o'clock on
CBS-TV.

Win or lose, Mr. Wilson, who bought a home in Sag Harbor 11 years ago and has
been renovating it since, will be concentrating on the third Talley play, ''A
Tale Told.'' It will open Thursday night at the Circle Repertory, where the
first two originated.

''That's four days after I don't get the Tony. Too many people like 'Amadeus,'
'' he said gloomily, referring to the English import considered to be ''Fifth of
July's'' chief competitor.

Because ''A Tale Told'' was not ready ''on time,'' Mr. Wilson had to postpone a
play he was supposed to write for this summer's 50th anniversary season at the
John Drew Theater in East Hampton.

In contrast to ''Talley's Folly,'' which was a delicate duet, ''A Tale Told''
is, according to the playwright, ''a ripsnorting melodrama - as much as I can
write a ripsnorting melodrama.''

''It's also dark and spooky,'' he said.Both plays take place on the Fourth of
July in 1944.  Mr. Wilson's style has been acknowledged for its grace,
compassion and lyricism. ''One of my primary concerns is the sound of American
speech, and sometimes people don't quite hear it immediately,'' he said. ''I was
distressed by a recent remark overheard during the intermission of 'Fifth of
July.' A woman said, 'I like a play that has marvelous language,' implying that
this one didn't, and I'm shocked at myself for not stomping on her.''

For all his acclaim since he came into prominence as a promising and prolific
Off Broadway playwright in 1963, Mr. Wilson maintained, ''I still couldn't write
a play aimed for Broadway in the first place, with all those demands and
pressures. I wouldn't know how. I hate that whole scene. I want to stay where I
am. As soon as I think I have to write a great play, or I've got recognition, I
can't work at all.''

He remains steadfast in his loyalty to the Circle Rep, the Off Broadway
institution that he founded with three colleagues in 1969 to create a theatrical
environment where process and participation take precedence over product.

Mr. Wilson's only commercial ''hit'' was ''The Hot l Baltimore,'' which ran Off
Broadway for three years. A short-lived television spinoff followed.

''Damned little of the play got into that series,'' he said. ''I kept writing
them little notes that said, 'The play is about urban decay, not about
prostitutes.' I had nothing to do with the writing of it. They didn't want me,
and I didn't want them. It was a very nice relationship.''

The reality of Broadway success remains illusive for the 44-yearold playwright.
His first Broadway play -''The Gingham Dog'' in 1969 - ran less than a week.
''Talley's Folley,'' according to the showbusiness trade paper Variety, was a
financial failure.

After seven months on Broadway, ''Fifth of July'' has not recouped its
investment. ''It's still $400,000 in the hole,'' he said.  Business improved
after Christopher Reeve, whose star power, it was assumed, would be a box-office
boon, was replaced by Richard Thomas as Kenneth Talley Jr., a paraplegic Vietnam
veteran and former teacher who is living with a male lover. Mr. Thomas's
performance, to many critics' minds, transformed the play and fulfilled its
possibilities.

''I always wanted to write about a gay relationship as I see it without everyone
feeling enormous guilt,'' Mr. Wilson said. ''And four years ago, when I was
teaching the playwriting course at Southampton College, I discovered I had no
talent for teaching, so I said, 'If you can't teach, write about someone who is
a natural teacher and how something happens to completely destroy his style so
that he's terrified of going back to the classroom.'

''One of the students in the course was a paraplegic veteran. He was
un-self-conscious about it, but no one ever looked at him.  Imagine going
through life or trying to teach with people looking at the floor, not at you -
not being able to catch anyone's eye.

''Others I talked to said, 'People like that don't want to be looked at; it
would be an encroachment.' It was a startling observation for me, and I started
talking to him about his injury and his feelings, and out of all those different
influences, the character worked out.''

On awards, Mr. Wilson said: ''Every once in a while, I stop in the middle of
weeding the garden and say, 'I won the Pulitzer Prize, and what do you know
about that!' It gives me a nice little jolt, and when that's over, I go back to
weeding the garden. Awards mean that a play might run a little longer, and we
might return some of the money so people don't feel burned and will invest in
another Circle Rep play. It would be important for the future of other serious
American plays on Broadway.''

After the Tony nominations were announced, ''Fifth of July's'' audiences
increased from 62.7 percent to 91.4 of the New Apollo's capacity.

With two more Talley plays to go, Mr. Wilson said: ''Let's call it a trilogy for
a while. I came all the way from Missouri to Long Island, and I've been writing
about Missouri again. I want to get out of that locale and out of 1944 and back
to here and now.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Lanford Wilson reviewing stage plans at Circle
Repertory

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Around the World

BYLINE: Thailand Is Undeterred, By Warning on Refugees, Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 85 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 7


Thailand will proceed with the repatriation of 180,000 Cambodian refugees
despite a warning from the Vietnamese-backed Government of Cambodia, Prasong
Soonsri, secretary general of Thailand's National Security Council, said today
in an interview published by The Bangkok Post.

Deputy Foreign Minister Vo Dong Giang of Vietnam said Friday that any attempt by
Thailand to repatriate the refugees without agreement from Phnom Penh would be
dangerous.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

REPORTERS MARK D-DAY PLUS 37 YEARS

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS E. KNEELAND, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 977 words

DATELINE: ATHENS, Ohio, June 7


On the late side of midnight, Jack Thompson swirled the Scotch and water in his
glass, staring hard into it. He was sober and thoughtful.

''War, I'm sorry to say, is a very exhilarating experience,'' he said above the
bar noises at the Ohio University Inn. ''Everything else is a little bit duller.
The war experience binds together those who have experienced it in a way that's
not possible in any other kind of experience.''

Mr. Thompson knows about wars. He covered them for The Chicago Tribune, from
World War II until he packed in his typewriter after several stints in Vietnam.

And he knows about the comradeship that war breeds. That is why he was here this
weekend, for a reunion marking yesterday's 37th anniversary of D-Day, June 6,
1944, the day the Allies invaded Normandy.

Half of Them Have Died

Walter Cronkite didn't make it. Neither did William Randolph Hearst Jr. or a lot
of others. Defense Department officials told John R.  Wilhelm, dean of the Ohio
University College of Communication, that of the 400 people on its list of World
War II correspondents in the European theater, half were dead. Of the 100 or so
survivors reached by Dean Wilhelm, only a score arrived for his ''last hurrah''
reunion.

But those who came, unfazed that the 37th year might seem an odd anniversary to
celebrate, seemed to prove the truth of Mr. Thompson's notion about bonds forged
in war as they effortlessly eased back into the friendship and tales of another
time.

And John Wilhelm, himself a World War II correspondent for The Chicago Sun,
readily explained why he had called his old colleagues together in this
particular year.

Ryan Papers Go to University

''It's the year I'm retiring,'' he said. ''It's my last chance to do it. Kathryn
Ryan had been toying with what to do with the Cornelius Ryan Collection, so she
decided to do it before I retired.  We're the only university that ever gave him
a doctorate. Besides, he introduced me to my wife.''

Mrs. Ryan's presentation of the World War II papers of her late husband, who
wrote ''The Longest Day,'' ''The Last Battle,'' and ''A Bridge Too Far,'' was a
highlight of the weekend, as was the planting of an apple tree from Normandy in
a tiny park set aside by the school as memorial to World War II correspondents.

But mostly the assembled correspondents, a little whiter of hair, a little
slower of step, just talked. And mostly they talked about war.  ''I was out in
the water on D-Day,'' Mr. Wilhelm said. ''We were supposed to go to Omaha Beach.
We didn't go until D plus one, because of the fire coming down from those
cliffs. Omaha was called Easy Red. It wasn't easy and it was plenty red.

''I lost my typewriter and everything else. We had a lieutenant who got nervous
and dropped us in 18 feet of water. A lot of people drowned.''

Gen. Taylor's Order to Move

Mr. Thompson recalled his own introduction to Omaha Beach: ''German shell fire
was landing everywhere. I was petrified with fear and holding my typewriter in
front of my face. I was there when Col. George Taylor said: 'Gentlemen, we are
being killed on this beach. Let us move inland and be killed.' In about two
hours we were inland. I don't know whether it was his speech, but those are the
kind of things history is made of and I was there to hear it and write it.''

And then he remembered the Elbe River, where the American and Soviet armies
first met near the end of their struggle against the Germans, and driving all
night through a no man's land to get there first to file a report.

Smiling now through his neat beard, he told how Ann Stringer of The United Press
had suddenly appeared on the scene in a Piper Cub flown by an artillery observer
and had quickly flown out and filed before he could.

''I was beaten, but I was beaten by a damned good reporter,'' he said, adding
with a competitiveness that has not faded totally with the years: ''I did not
think very kindly of Annie Stringer at that moment. I could have slit her
throat.''

And Mrs. Stringer, whose husband, Bill, a Reuters correspondent, was killed just
before she arrived to cover the war, remembers, too.  ''That was one reason why
I thought I had to get that story,'' she said. Then, smiling as she conjured up
the picture of Mr. Thompson on the ground as she took off in the Piper Cub, she
added, ''I couldn't worry about him.''

He Recalls Making Broadcast

And Wright Bryan, a former editor of The Atlanta Journal and The Cleveland Plain
Dealer, beamed as he told again how he got the first network radio broadcasts
from the D-Day landing to the United States.

Mr. Bryan, then a correspondent for The Atlanta Journal and a stringer for the
National Broadcasting Company, recollected with a sly grin:

''I was only over France about 11 minutes in a plane, but I saw some bullets
flying so I could do an eyewitness story. I did it for NBC. All those poor
buggers down there on the beach didn't have a microphone.''

Shared memories have softened the sharpest edges of old rivalries, but some of
the lingering frustrations come through the laughter.  Nodding pleasantly at
Iris Carpenter Akers across the table from him, Ken Dixon, who covered the war
for The Associated Press, said: ''She had the room right across the hall from me
and I hated her.  She was not only competent, she was also beautiful, and all
the captains and majors and everybody would beat a path to her door to give her
all the stuff I wanted.''

Mrs. Akers, who wrote for The Boston Globe, interjected, ''They'd blue-pencil
mine first.'' Mr. Dixon continued: ''And she hated me because I'd figure out
ways to get stuff by the censors.'' ''The sad thing is that there are so few of
us left,'' Mrs. Akers whispered to someone beside her.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Howard Cowan,John Groth, James Cassidy and Iris
Carpenter Akers

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Around the Nation;
U.S. Aide Is Pessimistic After Talks With Veterans

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 198 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, June 7


A lawyer for the Veterans Administration said today that he was pessimistic
after meeting with Vietnam War veterans who are insisting on a meeting with
President Reagan before they end their 17-day hunger strike and sit-in at a Los
Angeles hospital.

The protesters are seeking assurances of better medical care for veterans.
''Nothing really new came up,'' Robert Coy, the agency's acting general counsel,
told reporters at the Wadsworth Veterans Hospital.  ''As far as I am concerned,
we have given the response we think is appropriate.''

Mr. Coy said the agency would meet two of the protesters' demands.  The Reagan
Administration will ask two West Coast psychiatrists to review the care provided
by the Brentwood and Wadsworth facilities.  He said the agency also agreed to
hire an outside expert on environmental health to review Federal studies of the
effect of the defoliant Agent Orange on American soldiers who served in Vietnam.

A rally was held today outside the hospital in support of the 18 protesting
veterans inside and outside of the building.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

New York Political Notes;
3 NEW G.O.P. CHIEFS CITY UNLIKELY TO ALTER STATUS QUO

BYLINE: By Frank Lynn

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 796 words


In an unusual turnover of party leadership, three of the five New York City
Republican leaders have been elected in the last month - Alfred S. Pantaleone in
Brooklyn Thursday evening, State Senator Roy M. Goodman in Manhattan 10 days ago
and George M. Hart in Staten Island three week ago. That leaves only State
Senator John D.  Calandra of the Bronx and City Councilman Jack R. Muratori of
Queens as "the old-timers" among the Republican county chairmen.

But since the three new leaders generally reflect the stances of their
predecessors, there are not likely to be any major ideological changes in the
city Republican leadership.

Mr. Pantaleone and Mr. Hart are considered conservatives, while Mr. Goodman is
closer to the center of the political spectrum.

However, the new leaders, except for Mr. Hart, are considerably more cautious
and less colorful than were their predecessors, notably George L. Clark Jr. of
Brooklyn, who will now concentrate on state affairs as state Republican
chairman, and the late Vincent F. Albano Jr. in Manhattan.  As county chairen,
Mr. Albano and Mr. Clark did not hesitate to speak out publicly and colorfully.

In the race for the at-large seat on the City Council that goes to a
non-Democrat in Brooklyn, Vito P. Battista, who has made a career of loudly
battling City Hall, is making his latest political comeback as the Republican
candidate.  His principal competition will be another vocal politician, Michael
Long, the Conservative Party leader in Brooklyn and one of the leaders of the
state party.  The seat must go to someone who is not a Democrat because no party
may hold both at-large seats in a single borough.  The Democrat holding the
other at-large seat is Robert Steingut.

The Conservatives captured the seat that is now vacant four years ago when
Vincent A. Riccio, a Republican, who ran on their line and defeated the
Republican candidate, Donald Pemberton.  Mr. Riccio lost his seat last month
when he was convicted of payroll padding while having served previously as a
State Assemblyman.

Assemblyman John A. Esposito, who is challenging Mayor Koch for the Republican
mayoral primary, is not likely to get the endorsement of the Right to Life
Party.

Mr. Esposito said that he believed in the antiabortion goals of the party but
would not sign "a loyalty oath" that the party requires of its designees.  The
candidate must put in writing his agreement with such party goals as a
constitutional convention to ban abortion.  Mr. Esposito lost the party's
designation for the Assembly last year when he also refused to sign the "loyalty
oath."

Rabbi Balfour Brickner of the Stephen Wise Free Synagogue in Manhattan is
assuming an influential role in the LIberal Party as the newly designated
chairman of the party's national issues committee.  The rabbi has been active in
national Jewish affairs and is a veteran of the civil rights movement and the
actions against the Vietnam War.  Another clergyman, the Rev. Dr. Donald S.
Harrington, is state chairman of the party but he is nearing retirement age.

Richard M. Nixon has accepted an invitation to be a guest at the Republican
State Committee's $200-a-person fund-raising party June 15 in Manhattan.  Mr.
Clark, the G.O.P. state chairman, said he had invited the former President
despite a stir that resulted from a Nixon appearance at an Ohio Republican
fund-raising event in February.

Mr. Clark said that he had received only one protest, from Senator Warren B.
Rudman of New Hampshire, who had said he was reconsidering whether he would
attend because mr. Nixon had been invited.  The state chairman said he hoped to
have at least 1,000 paying guests at the cocktail party, where there will be no
formal speeches.

Suffolk County will seek a primary date all its own from the State Legislature.
The reason is that the county's bipartisan reappointment commission has been so
delayed in drawing new boundaries for the County Legislature that there will not
be time for circulating designating petitions to qualify for the Sept. 10
primary ballot.

In that case, party leaders will designate candidates and very likely deprive
two or three Republican incumbents who are at odds with their leaders of the
opportunity to seek renomination through the primary process.

Suffolk officials say publicly that they will ask the State Legislature to
approve a primary date later than Sept. 10 for that county only. Privately, they
doubt the Legislature will set such a precedent.  The reappointment delays are
attributed to late census figures and last-minute disputes over district
boundaries.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

2 AMBASSADORS TEST THEIR MARRIAGE

BYLINE: By LYNN ROSELLINI, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 1173 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 7


He gets the Hindu cloth painting. She gets the Persian miniatures. He gets the
two Lhasa Apso dogs. She gets the textiles from Iran.

They will divide the Persian rugs and Mozart and Haydn records between them, but
he gets most of the Burpee seed packets she ordered for the garden. And that
leaves the touchy question of the Christmas decorations. ''After all,'' Jane
Abell Coon observed, ''we'll each want a Christmas tree in our residence.''

It has been like this ever since Jane and Carleton Coon decided to split up, in
a manner of speaking. ''Will the dogs be happier in Katmandu?'' they ask each
other. ''Can one grow tomatoes in Dacca?  Can a good marriage withstand having
two Ambassadors in the family?''

New Living Arrangements

It is not the Coons' marriage that is breaking up these days, just their living
arrangements. In a few weeks Jane Coon is expected to take up her new post as
Ambassador in Dacca, Bangladesh. At about the same time Carleton S. Coon Jr. is
to assume his assignment as Ambassador in Katmandu, Nepal.

If this sounds like an odd way to run a marriage, listen: He: ''One argument is,
absence makes the heart grow fonder. It may solidify the relationship. You take
each other for granted when you're together all the time. I think it's going to
be all right.''

She: ''It's not going to be ideal, but I know I'd be awful hard to live with if
I was unemployed.''

Even Separate Interviews

Mrs. Coon, who is 52 years old and has short salt-and-pepper hair and the kind
of warm, sympathetic smile that makes you want to tell her your life story,
talks in her State Department office, where she is Deputy Assistant Secretary
for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs. Her 54-year-old husband was
interviewed by telephone while visiting relatives in New Hampshire in the wake
of the death of his father, the noted anthropologist. Together but apart, the
Coons told the story of the ultimate two-career family.

They are not the first American married couple to serve simultaneously as
Ambassadors. Carol C. Laise, a career officer, and her husband, Ellsworth
Bunker, did it in the late 1960's; she was assigned to Nepal and he, a political
appointee and an Ambassador at Large, was later sent to South Vietnam, which was
then at war. But the Coons are the first married career Foreign Service officers
to rise together to ambassadorial rank. For a time, it seemed, the State
Department did what it could to prevent such an occurrence.

Carleton Coon Jr., fresh out of Harvard, joined the Foreign Service in 1949 and
served in West Germany, Syria, India, Iran, Nepal and Morocco. Jane S. Abell, a
Wooster College graduate, appeared to have an equally promising career when she
joined the service in 1951, serving in Pakistan and India.

A Sharp Change in Direction

When she and Mr. Coon were married in 1968 - they had become friendly while both
were assigned to Washington - her career came to a halt. According to State
Department regulations then in effect, male Foreign Service officers could
marry, but female officers could not. ''When I asked her to marry me, I knew
that was the price she would have to pay,'' Mr. Coon said. ''We felt at the time
it was a pretty stiff price.''

So while Carleton Coon continued his climb up the diplomatic ladder, Jane Coon
set about rearing his six children, aged 4 to 16, whose mother had died of
cancer in 1967. How did she feel about the sudden, forced shift of focus? ''I
found it at least as challenging and rewarding as my Foreign Service career,''
she replied. ''I gained a whole new dimension in terms of interpersonal
relations.'' She broke off with a laugh. ''That's a dreadful term,'' she
continued.  ''But I guess during my career years I had been stretched
intellectually. During my child-raising years I grew emotionally.''

The experience was an eye-opener in other respects. As a Foreign Service wife,
traveling with her husband to posts in Nepal and Morocco, Mrs. Coon noticed that
people treated her differently than when she was a political officer. At
diplomatic receptions she was shunted off to the ''women's end of the room.''
Instead of being addressed on current issues, she was asked about food and
shopping.

And a New Batch of Friends

''One of the things I learned during that time,'' she said, ''was to appreciate
my sex more. When I came up competitively in the 1950's and 60's there was a
strong tendency to disclaim your own sex and work in a man's world. I began to
make good women friends.''

In 1976, after the State Department abandoned its policy on marriage, Mrs. Coon
rejoined the Foreign Service and moved quickly through the ranks. The post she
is leaving, Deputy Assistant Secretary, outranks that of her husband though his
longevity has earned him a higher Foreign Service officer rating (F.S.O. 1,
$50,000) than hers (F.S.O. 2 at the same salary).

Mr. Coon has served in recent months as liaison to Robert G.  Neumann, newly
appointed Ambassador to Saudi Arabia, who helped direct the Reagan State
Department transition team. When it came time to assign the embassies, the Coons
got their wish to go to adjoining countries. While neither Nepal nor Bangladesh
is considered in the first rank among diplomatic posts, Bangladesh, an
impoverished nation beset by political instability whose President, Ziaur
Rahman, was assassinated late last month, is viewed as the more important
assignment of the two.

Limitations on Shop Talk

Communication between the mountaintop (Katmandu) and the river delta (Dacca)
perhaps 500 difficult miles away will not be all that easy.

''When I was in the Foreign Service and Jane wasn't,'' Mr. Coon said, ''I
confided in her a great deal and got a lot of useful advice. Then when she was
first put on the firing line as country officer for Pakistan, I performed
somewhat the same function for her.''

Now such shop talk will be next to impossible. ''I doubt whether the State
Department lines were set up for us regaling each other in extenso with private
stories,'' he said. ''It takes about three days to get a call in to Katmandu.''
Said his wife: ''There are a couple of direct flights a week between Dacca and
Katmandu. I think it takes about two hours. We hope to get together once a
month.''

Not perfect, they say, but enough to maintain what both agree is a good
marriage. ''We're both tremendously engaged in what we're doing,'' Mrs. Coon
said. ''It gives us an opportunity to do what we want without placing great
strains on the marriage.''

Asked to define ''great strains,'' she said, ''There would be a greater strain
if one of us quit what he was doing to go along with the other as a dependent.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Carleton S. Coon Jr. and Jane Coon

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 9, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW STUDY ACCUSES CUBA ON GUERRILLAS

BYLINE: By JUAN de ONIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 688 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 8


The United States is facing a sustained political and military effort by Cuba to
establish Communist regimes in the Caribbean and Central America, the Assistant
Secretary of State-designate for Inter-American Affairs told the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee today.

Thomas O. Enders, whose confirmation is being considered by the committee,
offered as part of his testimony a preview of a major State Department study
that denounces Cuba as the instigator of revolutionary movements in El Salvador,
Guatemala, Colombia and Costa Rica.

The new study builds on the white paper on Communist support for guerrillas in
El Salvador that was issued in February and that has been criticized as being
both inaccurate and unsubstantiated.

Commenting on a Wall Street Journal article critical of the white paper, Dean
Fischer, the State Department spokesman, said in a prepared statement statement
today, ''We stand by the conclusions.''

Shipment of Weapons Noted

Mr. Enders, who has been directing the State Department's Latin American bureau
from behind the scenes while awaiting confirmation, said Cuban military support
for Nicaragua included recent shipments of howitzers and armored personnel
carriers. He said training of Nicaraguans in several Communist countries in the
use of heavy tanks and Soviet-built MIG combat aircraft could mean that these
weapons ''may be on their way'' to Nicaragua.

The special report on Cuban support for guerrillas in the Caribbean and Central
America is expected to serve as the basis for increased United States pressure
on the Havana regime. Mr. Enders said the Administration was considering
tightening economic regulations that allow some exports from the United States
to Cuba and that anti-Communist radio broadcasts beamed at Cuba were ''under
very active considerations''.

On the white paper on El Salvador, Mr. Fischer said, ''The chronicled events
related, namely the unification of the guerrilla groups by the Cubans, the
gathering of arms and military supplies from the Vietnamese, the Ethiopians, and
the Eastern Europeans, and the transshipment of these arms to Cuba and Nicaragua
are fully confirmed.''

The white paper was said to be based on 19 captured guerrilla documents and
other intelligence information. The Wall Street Journal article, based mainly on
an interview with Jon D. Glassman, a State Department political officer who was
largely responsible for preparing the white paper, pointed to inaccuracies,
guesswork and ''mistakes'' in analyzing the captured documents.

In a statement read by Mr. Fischer, however, Mr. Glassman discounted the
uncertainty on details in relation to the ''substantive accuracy'' of the
paper's conclusions.

The main question of authorship of the documents concerns an account of a trip
by a guerrilla leader to Moscow, Hanoi, Addis Ababa, several Eastern European
capitals and Havana to obtain arms for the guerrillas. The white paper
identifies the guerrilla leader as Shafik Handal, secretary general of the
Salvadoran Communist Party, and the document is the basis for much of the
argument that the Communists organized a major arms delivery system for the
Salvadoran guerrillas.

A State Department official said there was no way of definitely identifying the
author of the report on the trip, which he said could be Mr. Handal or some
other guerrilla official.

But the official said there was no doubt that Mr. Handal had made such a trip
because intelligence reports had been received placing him in the Communist
capitals on the dates when the report said he was conducting meetings with high
party and government officials.

The white paper was issued as the new Administration was announcing increased
military aid to El Salvador's military-backed civilian Government. The
conclusions were used to argue the case for increased military aid.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 9, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Protesting Veterans Vow To Carry On if Evicted

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 223 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, June 8


Apparently resigned to eviction, Vietnam veterans fasting in tents at the
Wadsworth Veterans Administration Medical Center said today that they would not
fight, but would regroup at nearby St. John's Church and carry their protest to
Washington, demanding a meeting with President Reagan.

However, the 12 hunger strikers and their two dozen supporters said after their
negotiations with Veterans Administration officials broke down yesterday that
they would not voluntarily dismantle their encampment.

Another half-dozen veterans who have been occupying part of the hospital's lobby
since May 20 said that they would passively resist eviction.

Ron Coy, acting counsel for the Veterans Administration, said that if the
protesters did not leave peacefully, steps would be taken to have them evicted.

The Veterans Administration has agreed to have two non-V.A.  doctors to
investigate care at the Wadsworth and nearby Brentwood facilities and the
treatment of James Hopkins, a veteran whose death, apparently due to drinking
and an overdose of sleeping pills, triggered the protest. The agency also
promised to have an outside expert review studies of the effects of Agent Orange
and other toxic herbicides used in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 9, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

4;
CARING FOR THE HOMELESS MEN NOBODY WANTS IN HIS NEIGHBORHOOD

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 729 words


To the Editor:

A May 22 letter to The Times from the presidents of the Boards of Visitors of
the Manhattan Psychiatric Center and the Children's Psychiatric Center
questioned the wisdom of the city's proposal to build dormitories on Wards
Island to house 400 additional homeless men.

his administration is pledged to making adequate provision for the homeless, and
we feel that the Wards Island buildings are a critical element in the network of
services we envision for homeless people.  The dimensions of this problem are
serious and call for sensitive and immediate administrative action.

A recent study conducted by the Community Service Society claimed there were
36,000 homeless people wandering the streets of New York City. While we question
the accuracy of this figure, the number of homeless seeking shelter has been
growing, and we need additional shelter capacity to serve them. In addition to
the Wards Island plan, we're building two new dormitories with a capacity for
650 men at Camp La Guardia in upstate New York.

In developing these plans, we have been taking into account, as much as
possible, neighborhood needs and wishes. We have spoken to every community board
in the city and have yet to find any neighborhood in any borough willing to
accept a new 200- to-300-bed facility for men in its area. On the other hand,
Wards Island has many features that make it ideal for housing homeless men. It
is not a residential neighborhood, has plenty of vacant space and is accessible
by public transportation to the city.

The authors of the letter expressed concern that the residents of these new
dormitories would disrupt activities in the adult Manhattan Psychiatric facility
nearby. Yet many of the homeless men we are speaking of formerly resided in this
or similar state-run facilities and were discharged as being ready to return to
society.  How can the board now object to the mere proximity of men it formerly
housed as being detrimental to its residents? This attitude is hard to justify.

The fact that there is a children's facility on the island is an important
consideration and one that we are fully aware of. To increase their sense of
security, we can easily reinforce the security measures we already have in
place. Furthermore, it should be noted that no incidents of any kind have been
brought to our attention involving the children of the Manhattan Children's
Psychiatric Center and the inhabitants of the Keener Building. If we work
together on this matter, we can see to it this doesn't become a problem in the
future.

We were particularly surprised and dismayed by the letter insofar as we
contacted Goldine Triantafyllou, a co-signer, six months ago and offered to meet
with her and her colleagues to discuss the housing of men on Wards Island. At
that time, we received no response. Less public outrage and more concerted
private efforts to work with us on their part would in all probability lead to a
resolution of their concerns.

Finally, while Wards Island has many advantages as a location for housing the
homeless, there is no perfect, problem-free setting for these men. They are in
some respects outcasts of our society, and their problems are multiple. Many
have histories of mental illness or criminal incarceration; few have held steady
employment; some are younger, disaffiliated Vietnam veterans or former drug
users. It will take considerable effort and in some cases professional
intervention to help these men enter the mainstream of city life.

Still, we cannot abandon them. Their most immediate needs are places to sleep,
food to eat and a place to wash up. The projected dormitories will help meet
those needs and give the men a home base from which they can begin to put their
lives in order. Who among us would deny them that?  ROBERT TROBE Deputy
Administrator Family and Adult Services Human Resources Administration New York,
June 4, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 9, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Garwood's Conviction Is Upheld By Camp Lejuene Commandant

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 152 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., June 8


The commanding general at Camp Lejeune today upheld the court-martial and
sentence of Pfc. Robert R. Garwood of the Marines, who was convicted in February
of collaborating with the enemy while a prisoner of war in Vietnam.

Maj. Gen. David Barker issued a short statement saying that he had reviewed and
approved the findings and sentence.  Private Garwood, 34 years old, was
convicted on five counts of collaborating with the enemy in two of the 14 years
he was a prisoner in Vietnam. He was also convicted of assaulting another
prisoner.

The private was sentenced to be discharged dishonorably from the corps and
ordered him to forfeit all pay from the date of his conviction. He was also
reduced to private.

The case now goes to a Navy Court of Military Review, and after that it is
expected to be reviewed by the Court of Military Appeals.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 10, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. OFFICIALS CONCEDE FLAWS IN SALVADOR WHITE PAPER BUT DEFEND ITS CONCLUSION

BYLINE: By JUAN de ONIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1692 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 9


United States officials closely involved in preparing a special State Department
report on Communist arms shipments to guerrillas in El Salvador said today that
the Administration had ''overreached'' the documentary evidence in blaming the
Soviet Union.

The officials, however, strongly defended the report's main conclusion that Cuba
and Nicaragua cooperated in the delivery of large amounts of arms to the
guerrillas last November and December.

They said the evidence gathered by electronic and human sources was considered
conclusive by United States intelligence analysts and was independent of
captured guerrilla documents that provide a fragmentary picture of the origin of
the arms.

''By the time we got the documents we didn't need them to know what was going on
because the evidence on our intelligence screen was abundant,'' one official
said.

'Textbook Case of Aggression'

In the special report, ''Communist Interference in El Salvador,'' made public
Feb. 23 after a diplomatic drive to inform United States allies of the decision
to increase military aid to the Salvadoran military, major significance was
attributed to the documents.

Along with the report, 19 of the captured documents, translated from the typed
or handwritten originals in Spanish, were distributed as purported documentary
evidence of the report's contention that ''the insurgency in El Salvador has
been progressively transformed into a textbook case of indirect armed aggression
by Communist power through Cuba.''

The centerpiece of the documents, and the basis for involving the Soviet Union
in the charges of Communist interference, was an account of a trip made by a
high Salvadoran guerrilla to Moscow, Hanoi, Addis Ababa, Eastern European
capitals, and Havana last year seeking arms.

The guerrilla has been identified by United States intelligence analysts as
Shafik Handal, secretary general of the Salvadoran Communist Party. The party is
one of the five main political groups in the Unified Revolutionary Directorate,
which has political direction of the Salvadoran insurgency.

White Paper Is Criticized

The interpretation of this and other documents in the so-called white paper on
El Salvador prepared by the State Department, and the reconstruction of a
process by which Mr. Handal's trip led to arms deliveries later in the year, has
come under criticism in articles published in the The Wall Street Journal, The
Washington Post, Progressive magazine and other publications.

Some criticism has been on points of translation, involving shades of meaning in
Spanish that do not appear to alter the central question of whether an arms
supply system from abroad was organized.

''It was a hasty job, under a lot of pressure, and it was sloppy in some ways,''
said a State Department official.  Other criticism has shown that identificaton
of some of the authors of the documents may be mistaken. The names of people and
places were largely given in code.

In one case, the State Department identified the author of a document listing
arms promised by Vietnam to Mr. Handal - who is identified as secretary general
of the Communist party - as Ana Guadalupe Martinez of the Ejercito
Revolucionario del Pueblo, a faction opposed to the Communists. The document is
signed only Ana Maria. The signature could be of Ana Maria Gonzalez of the
Communist Party's armed wing.

Soviet Role at Issue

A more central questions is whether the white paper's interpretation of Mr.
Handal's report on his travels accurately portrays the Soviet Union's role.

The document on Mr. Handal's trip, which, like many of the other captured
papers, is only an extensive fragment, says that at the end of his journey to
Asia and Africa he returned to Moscow last July and met with Soviet party
officials, such as Karen N. Brutents, head of the Central Committee's Latin
American section.

The result of these talks, the document reports, was an agreement ''in
principle'' by Mr. Brutents, a middle-level party official, to transport the
arms, subject to approval by higher party organs.

On Aug. 5, Mr. Handal, by this time apparently in Havana, expressed concern that
''lack of decision by the Soviets'' could undermine the arms supply program. But
the document also shows that Mr. Handal was invited back to Moscow to discuss
the matter with the Soviet Central Committee in September or October.

There is no subsequent document, however, that shows Mr. Handal returned to
Moscow or that makes any further direct reference to Soviet involvement. On the
other hand, captured documents describing events through the middle of November
show that the Salvadoran guerrillas were having trouble handling all the arms
that were moving through clandestine land and sea routes from Nicaragua.

Night Flights Are Noted

State Department officials said the intelligence reports on arms movements from
Cuba to Nicaragua, and subsequently to El Salvador, coincide in general with the
documentary evidence.

''During a period from the middle of October to the middle of November there
were regular night flights from Cuba into Managua's airport, which was closed to
other traffic,'' said an official who asked not to be identified. ''That was one
way the arms were shipped.''

The documents present a confusing picture of the tonnage of arms involved in the
Cuban-Nicaraguan pipeline and are even more unclear on the volume of arms
reaching the rebels.

State Department officials point out, however, that a substantial increase in
guerrilla armaments was recognized under the Carter Administration, which ended
a ban on United States military sales to El Salvador, in effect since 1977, when
a major guerrilla uprising began in January.

The documents were also gathered during the Carter Administration.The first lot,
captured in November, was sent to the Defense Intelligence Agency by Col. Eldon
Cummings, then head of the United States military mission in El Salvador.

Official Sent to Investigate

Officials recalled that the account of Mr. Handal's trip raised interest in
reports of arms shipments, but was not given circulation outside the
intelligence community.

Subsequently, the State Department decided that more documents might be in the
hands of Salvadoran security forces and sent Jon D.  Glassman, a political
officer then at the United States Embassy in Mexico, to investigate last
January.

Mr. Glassman has told how he found the second batch of documents in boxes at the
headquarters of the National Guard, one of five Salvadoran security forces.
These forces do not coordinate their operations through any central intelligence
office.

At the time the Reagan Administration took office, in January, the guerrilla
offensive in El Salvador had failed to achieve any major objectives, such as
overrunning an army garrison or seizing any population center.

Reagan Takes Strong Line

But President Reagan and Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.  brought a new
anti-Communist ideological position to the Government.  This was reflected in
the President's first news conference, at which he said the Russians ''reserve
unto themselves the right to commit any crime, to lie, to cheat'' in pursuit of
their goals.

Mr. Haig accused the Soviet Union of ''unprecedented risk-taking'' in Africa and
Latin America, using the ''Cuban proxy.'' State Department officials recall that
the Salvadoran documents began to be seen in a new light, as evidence of a
global Communist conspiracy with the Soviet Union as the center.

Mr. Haig, eager to increase United States military assistance to El Salvador and
''draw the line'' against Soviet advances in the third world, pushed the
department's bureau for Latin America, with support from the intelligence
community, to develop the white paper.  Mr. Glassman was brought to Washington
for the purpose as the expert on the documents.

The result was an ambitious report in which the strongest case for an
international Communist conspiracy to ''take over'' a Central American country
was presented on the basis of limited evidence.

Basic Conclusion Not Questioned

Some officials involved described this as ''overreach.'' Others saw it as ''too
ideological.'' But even Robert E. White, the former United States Ambassador to
El Salvador, who was removed by Mr. Haig and who has criticized increased
military assistance to the Salvadorans, has not questioned the basic conclusion.

While still Ambassador, Mr. White said during the January guerrilla offensive
that at least 100 insurgants had entered El Salvador by sea from Nicaragua to
join the uprising. ''We can't stand idly by and watch the guerrilla movement
receive outside aid,'' said Mr. White, who recommended that limited military aid
be restored to the Salvadoran armed forces.

James Cheek, former Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American
Affairs, who was in charge of Central American affairs, said the white paper was
not as important as the physical evidence of arms entering El Salvador.

Mr. Cheek was quoted by The Associated Press in a Washington dispatch yewsterday
as saying: ''I say throw the white paper away, ignore it. The fact remains all
those weapons are there. You tell me how they got them?''

Mr. Cheek said today that this comment was not intended to cast doubt on the
content and conclusion of the white paper, but to emphasize the evidence of
weapons deliveries from external sources.

He said that about 180 weapons captured in transit to El Salvador through
Honduras by land, following procedures and routes described in the documents,
were United States-made rifles. These have been identified by United States
military officials by serial numbers as having been issued to troops during the
Vietnam War and were presumably captured. These weapons are designated as M-16
when fully automatic and as AR-15 when semiautomatic. The captured documents on
arms promised by Vietnam listed hundreds of AR-15 rifles and millions of rounds
of ammunition.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Salvadoran soldier guarding captured weapons

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 10, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

VETERANS OF VIETNAM WAR EVICTED, ENDING AN 18-DAY PROTEST ON COAST

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 494 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, June 9


An 18-day protest by veterans of the Vietnam War at a Veterans Administration
hospital here ended this morning when security officers evicted the
demonstrators from the hospital lobby and from a camp they had set up outside.

Seven persons were arrested when they refused to leave the lobby, but they were
later released.  More than 40 veterans had joined the protest, which was
precipitated by the apparent suicide last month of James Hopkins, a former
marine who had complained of mistreatment by the Veterans Administration.

The protesters, including a dozen who said that they would refuse to eat until
their grievances were resolved, had vowed to remain at the Wadsworth Veterans
Administration Medical Center until President Reagan came to see them and until
the veterans agency agreed to increase its attention on the delayed effects of
combat stress on Vietnam veterans and closer study of the effects of Agent
Orange, a herbicide used in Vietnam.

Protest Is Termed a Success

Many demonstrators also sought changes in V.A. operations to reduce what they
regarded as excess bureaucratic delays.  Contending that it was probably the
first time since the war ended that Vietnam veterans had been united, Mike
McCarthy, one of the demonstrators, said, ''We've done what we set out to do.''
He called the protest a success because it had brought many veterans' complaints
to the public's attention.

''We have aroused the American consciousness,'' said Richard Ogden, who also
participated in the demonstration. ''We won this battle, but we can't hope to
win the war in just one battle.''

In the 24 hours before the decision by the veterans agency to evict the
demonstrators, the group had become increasingly divided over tactics and
objectives. One faction, for example, accused another of using the attention
being paid to their cause to advocate their positions on other issues, such as
the role of the United States in El Salvador, where American military advisers
are working.

V.A. to Investigate Complaints

And there was a split over whether to end the protest after V.A.  officials in
Washington agreed conditionally to investigate Mr.  Hopkins's experience with
the agency and to address the protesters' complaints about inadequate attention
being paid to the effects of Agent Orange and post-Vietnam stress problems.

Except for what the protest leaders called ''symbolic'' resistence to the order
to leave the hospital lobby, the eviction from the hospital grounds took place
peaceably.

Later, many of the veterans adjourned to St. John's Episcopal Church here, where
an organization called the Center for Veterans Rights is based, and said they
would make plans to express their grievances in Washington this summer.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Ron Kovic

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 10, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1227 words


New China accord pushed in Sen- ate by Reagan aide A2
For the Chinese, a great new place to visit - China A2
Mexican President ends visit; progress in talks is reported A3
Legislator's son is arrested in South Africa A3
Crocker confirmed in Africa post by Senate A4
Officials admit flaws in Salvador report; but defend conclusions A6
Around the World A7
Italian police seize the member- ship lists of all Masonic lodges A9
Brezhnev says U.S. is taking no real steps to renew arms talks A10
Greece gives U.S. Monday dead- line on bases accord A11
Soviet calls U.S. an accomplice in Israeli raid on Iraqi reactor A12
Habib, U.S. envoy, returns to Bei- rut, his mission clouded A13
France upset by Israeli attack on French-built reactor in Iraq A14

Government/Politics
South Carolina and U.S. reach in- tegration accord A28
Schools close another chapter in desegregation efforts A28
Carey offers choice of 3 compro- mises on Medicaid takeover B3
New investigative office is set up by Transit Authority B3
State study says imprudent prac- tices imperil L.I. water supply B4
Goodman sees opportunity in Manhattan G.O.P. post B4

General
Around the Nation A16
Vietnam veterans evicted, ending protest in Los Angeles A16
Board faults T.W.A. crew in jet's 5-mile dive over Michigan A18
The mail is moving by bicycle these days in Phoenix A20
Extortion by youth gangs plague Chinese communities B7

Living Section
Food Goat cheese: Piquancy, with an artisan's touch C1

Mess may be ''dining'' but there's still K.P.  C1

In pursuit of a wild dish: branch lettuce C3

60-Minute Gourmet C3

Best Buys C9

Wine Talk C17
Living At Cole Porter party, the mix is right C1

Metropolitan Diary C2

Kitchen Equipment C2

Personal Health C10

Discoveries C14

Industry/Labor
New commuter aircraft to be built in Youngstown, Ohio A20

Religion
Conservative re-elected president of Southern Baptists A16

Arts/Entertainment
S.J. Perelman's ''Last Laugh'' is about to be published C20
Tanner's film ''Messidor'' opens C21
Chuck Close's Photo-Realist paintings at the Whitney C26
Kevin Wade's ''Key Exchange'' staged at the WPA C26
Producers presenting proposal in Hollywood writers' strike C28
Julia Hirsch's ''Family Photo- graphs'' is reviewed C29
Cynthia Gregory and Fernando Bujones in ''Don Quixote'' C29
Henry James's ''The Ambassa- dors'' on public television C31
Bantam aims at Hispanic market with Valenzuela book C31

Obituaries
Allen Ludden, host of TV game show ''Password'' B6
Nathaniel J. Palzer, active in fighting vote fraud B6
Chester Gorman, archeologist B6

Sports
Holmes out to stop Spinks but has retirement on his mind B8
Yankees top Royals, 8-5, for ninth straight victory B9
No disappointment for Nets on first round of draft B9
How Coach Brown of the Nets maneuvers his draft choices B9
Knicks get Newlin from Nets B9
Reds beat Mets, 8-4 B9
Arbour considers stepping down as coach for Islanders B9
Rose, with 2 hits, draws within one of Musial's mark B10
Expos end 5-game losing streak by routing Braves, 12-1 B10
Red Smith on a guy named Brucker B10
Buck Williams, No. 1 Net choice, calls himself a team player B11

Features/Notes
About New York B3
Notes on People B4
Going Out Guide C22

News Analysis
Drew Middleton looks at Iraqi op- tions for retaliation A12

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A30

America can't be colorblind yet Deregulation betrayed Why worsen a good co-op
law?  Topics: refuge & also-rans Letters A30
James Reston: Jerusalem and the bomb A31
Russell Baker: and sausage on the side A31
Alan Cranston: condemn Israel?  Didn't we plan to hit Cuba?  A31
Gerald J. Bender: Secretary of State Helms A31

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 11, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. AND DISTANT CONFLICTS: EUROPE FEARS MILITARY SHIFT

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 949 words


Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger's directive that the Rapid Deployment
Force be established as an individual command in 18 months rather than in three
to five years reflects the Pentagon's desire to endow American strategy with a
mobility and flexibility needed to honor new military commitments. But the
emphasis on these new commitments and the major expansion of American military
power planned by the Reagan Administration may well increase the difference in
power between the United States and its NATO allies and lead to doubts about the
solidity of the American resolve in the defense of Western Europe.

A major acceleration in the formation of the force, which in itself represents a
change in American strategic thinking, will mean little unless there is a
comparable acceleration in the procurement of equipment to move large forces
great distances in a short time. Some Pentagon planners also think that the new
strategic approach, which embraces southern Africa, Southwest Asia and Latin
America, also calls for a re-evaluation of some present weapons programs.

Weapons Too Heavy for Planes

The planners argue that many Army weapons designed and built for service in
Europe are too heavy to be transported by air in large numbers and that the
emphasis in the Administration's procurement program should shift to lighter
weapons more easily delivered by air.

Speed will be essential, they stress, if American forces are to deter new
Angolas in Africa or new Afghanistans in Southwest Asia.  The emphasis on rapid
movement to areas long outside American military planning reflects the
fundamental changes in strategic thinking that have taken place in the last
year. Not only are planners thinking in terms of two and a half wars - for
instance, a major one in Europe and the Western Pacific, another in the Middle
East and a minor conflict in Latin America. They are also thinking in terms of a
long war.

Many elements in the new strategy are bound to affect relations between the
United States and its North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies.

On the basis of talks in NATO capitals and discussions with military leaders, it
is clear that Western Europe has been encouraged by what is considered to be a
more vigorous American defense policy.  But political and military leaders are
wary of aspects of that policy that might divert American forces from West
Germany. Similar fears were evident during the Korean and Vietnam Wars.

The Carter Administration's decision to pre-position weapons and equipment in
West Germany for six divisions assured Western Europe that the major American
military effort would be there. Now some American soldiers and military analysts
are questioning so great an investment in one area.

This has caused some European politicians to doubt the validity of the American
defense efforts for Europe.  The emphasis in American speeches and military
planning on the importance of defending Southwest Asia has had a mixed impact on
European allies.

The Europeans cannot quarrel openly with this new emphasis since they are even
more dependent than the United States on Middle East oil. But they are haunted
by fear that the United States might draw on the Seventh Army in West Germany in
event of a Mideast war.

Western alliance planners understand that the movement of the 200,000
American-based troops in the Rapid Deployment Force would be too slow to deal
with a Soviet move into the Middle East or a rebellion against pro-American
rulers in Saudi Arabia and other Gulf nations.

If, as American commanders contend, the object of any intervention would be to
save the oil fields, then the United States would have no choice in an emergency
but to airlift troops from Europe, probably including the augmented airborne
battalion in Vicenza in northern Italy.

The Russians, officers emphasize, are ''next door'' to the oilfields and speed
of reaction would be essential.  The American preparations to deal with a long
war are likely to add to the military differences between the United States and
its allies. Although successive alliance commanders have urged the allies to
prepare for a war of at least 30 days, few of the European forces are in that
position today.

A New Sense of Urgency

American commanders here and in Europe believe that there is a new sense of
urgency among European military leaders. They add, however, that this is not
reflected in parliaments or public opinion.

''Our opposite numbers in the allied armies and air forces understand the
significance of the Soviet buildup in conventional forces and the threat to the
Persian Gulf,'' an American staff officer said. ''But no amount of missionary
work by our people or theirs appears to impress many politicians and leaders of
public opinion.''

Some, he said, do not, or will not, believe their own or American intelligence
reports about Soviet military strength. Others have grown so accustomed to
living with an ever-present threat that even verified visual evidence the threat
is growing has little or no impact, he added.

American calls for greater military efforts go largely unheeded for another
reason. The major Atlantic alliance powers are having economic difficulties and
the price of weapons has tripled since the 1960's. Even those governments
willing to strengthen their forces find the task beyond their means.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 11, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Veterans Vow to Continue Fasting Until Fourth of July

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 176 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, June 10


One of 12 Vietnam War veterans evicted from a Government hospital for staging a
sit-in and hunger strike said today that the protesters would continue fasting
and would get to Washington by some means by the Fourth of July, when they hope
to meet with President Reagan.

''The hunger strike is still going on,'' said Clarence Stickler, 34 years old,
of Oxnard, who has been without solid food for 18 days. ''We have just made a
tactical retreat. We are going to regroup and attack again.''

Mr. Stickler said the protesters would, for now, stay at St. John's Episcopal
Church near downtown Los Angeles.  The veterans and a score of supporters were
evicted by Federal police yesterday from their tent city on the grounds of the
Wadsworth Veterans Administration Hospital in western Los Angeles.

They demanded independent reviews of V.A. hospital care and of the effects of
the defoliant Agent Orange, a study of the psychological problems of veterans
and a meeting with Mr. Reagan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 11, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Books of the Times;
Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 894 words


By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt
NAM. The Vietnam War in the Words of the Men and Women Who Fought There. By Mark
Baker. 324 pages. Morrow. $12.95.  EVERYTHING WE HAD. An Oral History of the
Vietnam War by Thirty-Three American Soldiers Who Fought It. By Al Santoli. 265
pages. Illustrated. Random House. $12.95.

EVIDENCE abounds that to us Americans the experience of Vietnam is still not a
part of acceptable reality. One could point to the rapidity with which the war
has died as a subject of discussion, or to the hostility that its veterans have
reported encountering while trying to return to civilian life, or - to be overly
subjective, perhaps - to the resistance one feels at the prospect of reading two
more books about the war.

In any case, to make the war seem more real (or perhaps to expiate his guilt for
forgetting it) this reader felt compelled to overcome his resistance and read
''Nam'' and ''Everything We Had,'' two oral histories of Vietnam. The first is
by Mark Baker, a noncombatant who nevertheless feels a wound inflicted by the
war on his entire generation. The second is by Al Santoli, a much-decorated
veteran infantryman who is now a poet, actor and theatrical director.

Hands Dipped in Blood

After all, what could be more real at this late date than to hear about the war
from the men and women who actually fought it? Who can tell us better about the
heat and fear of arriving suddenly incountry at Cam Ranh Bay than the ''grunts''
who lived and fought through it? Who can convey more vividly what it was like to
be isolated and tortured as a prisoner of war, than the actual victims?  Who can
hit us more stunningly with the perversity of the violence induced by the war,
than a soldier who came to take a distinct kind of pleasure at literally dipping
his hands in his comrade's blood?

What is more, when one reads ''Nam'' and ''Everything We Had'' back to back,
their voices merge into a sort of Greek chorus that recounts the experience of
the war from the beginning of mindless enlistment all the way to the end of
coming home and trying to rejoin civilization. Actually, Mark Baker's ''Nam'' by
itself constitutes a choral history, because its voices remain anonymous and are
dovetailed so as to lend different shadings to every phase of the Vietnam
experience. By contrast, the witnesses in ''Everything We Had'' are identified
by name and further individualized with brief biographies and photographs.

Yet reading the two books together still enhances the choral effect, if only
because their respective experiences blend so consistently. For example, in both
books veterans who happen to have been Black Muslims repeatedly testify that
once they found themselves in combat, the issue of race evaporated completely.
For a more remarkable example of coincidence, each book's former prisoner of war
describes almost precisely the same mental exercises employed to pass the time
in solitary isolation, including the recollection of one's life in minute detail
and the design and construction of one's dream house from foundation to rafters.

Nevertheless, for all the detail and horror of ''Nam'' and ''Everything We
Had,'' there is something tedious about the experience of reading them. Or to
put a finer point on it, this reader found himself extremely restless while
reading. I have two obvious explanations for this. The first is that despite all
the thoroughness of the interviews undertaken by the authors, and for all the
representativeness of the testimony, there is finally very little that is new in
either book. Alas, we have read it all before, from the stories of live
Vietnamese children who were turned into boobytraps by the Vietcong, to the
reports of wanton rape and murder by American soldiers driven mad by the
elusiveness of the enemy.

Testimony Too Painful

The second explanation is that the testimony of these books is simply too
painful to accept as reality. Oh, sure, we can tune in for a paragraph or a page
or even a chapter. But we can also tune out, and the greatest horror of any war
is not being able to tune out, the relentlessness of being there, even if you
can dull your senses with drugs, as so many testify to having been able to do in
Vietnam.  We who were not there can turn this testimony back into print on the
page, and discover that our minds have wandered to more palatable subjects.

Perhaps the best measure of the distance between a reader and the voices in
these books is the testimony in ''Nam'' of veterans who, for reasons of survivor
guilt or other mysterious quirks of human psychology, found it unbearable to
have to give up Vietnam when they were finally discharged. That, to someone who
did not live through the war from day to day, is not only unrealistic to
imagine; it is simply unbearable. In the same way, perhaps, these books are
unbearable.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 12, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

At the Movies;
Meet 'Zorro' Hamilton, swashbuckler.

BYLINE: By Chris Chase

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1596 words


THE other day, George Hamilton skyed in from the coast, as S.J.  Perelman used
to say. Mr. Hamilton was on his way to London to make a movie with George Segal
(if another strike doesn't happen, and the directors don't go out) and he
stopped briefly in New York. Just long enough to talk about ''Zorro, the Gay
Blade,'' which will open here in mid-July.

In ''Zorro,'' Mr. Hamilton looks like what your grandma used to call a lounge
lizard. Small black moustache, slick polished hair and a slightly crazed glint
in the bedroom eyes. In life, his 42 years sit lightly on Mr. Hamilton, who has
come into his own as an entrepreneur-farceur after more than two decades of
acting dopey playboys.

Doing the Zorro remake, in the role played in years past by both Douglas
Fairbanks and Tyrone Power, was Mr. Hamilton's own idea.  ''After 'Love at First
Bite,' '' he says, ''I wanted to do a swashbuckling picture that made light of,
yet had a reverence for, all those pictures I grew up seeing - 'The Corsican
Brothers,' 'The Scarlet Pimpernel,' 'Mutiny on the Bounty.' ''

Lure the kids, but don't offend the generation that loved the old movies; that
was the plan. In ''Zorro, the Gay Blade,'' Mr. Hamilton stars as Don Diego Vega,
heir to the Zorro legend, and also as his long-lost twin brother, Ramon (a.k.a.
Bunny Wigglesworth), a terrible fop. This allows Mr. Hamilton to do his Spanish
accent, and his English accent, both excellent, right up there, in fact, with
his Transylvanian accent.

''I love that kind of stuff,'' he says. ''I've always wanted to be the sort of
actor that Peter Sellers was.'' Mr. Hamilton started in the movie business at
17, but says it took ''Love at First Bite'' to wash out all the pictures that
preceded it. ''I'm a born-again actor. But I think if I hadn't started producing
and marketing, getting involved in almost every area, I would never have lasted.
My career was over many times. I was kicked out of three of four studios. Being
under contract in the days when I came up wasn't a godsend. If they had you,
they thought, well, we've always got him, but who else can we get?''

As for television, Mr. Hamilton, who starred in one series, ''The Survivors'' by
Harold Robbins (he calls it ''a huge expensive failure''), decided very quickly
that it wasn't for him. ''It's a graveyard for movie stars. If you're lucky, you
stay with a series for a bit, and then it's over for you, and you're up for
guest shots. TV is a monster, it's going to eat you up.''

Mr. Hamilton says he developed his comedy timing by working on stage. ''I did a
lot of plays. Mainly Neil Simon. You don't learn comedy in films. There is no
rhythm set. You have no feedback.''

Since he's clearly intelligent, not to mention resourceful, does Mr. Hamilton
mind that his public image has been that of a handsome ninny who chased
starlets?

No he doesn't. ''I think one of the great things in life is being
underestimated,'' he says. ''I've always liked to fight out of a corner. When
things are going well, I just drift along and stare out of the window and watch
paint dry. I don't focus. But when the odds are against me, the adrenalin
starts. What I've learned is not to put up with much bull. I've heard a lot of
it, dealt in it, traded it, given out a lot of it in my time. It's a commodity
we'll never run short of. But what I really like to do now is cut through all
that, and say what I mean.''

At present, Mr. Hamilton considers himself a resident of Colorado.  ''I live up
in Aspen; there's something almost magical about Aspen.  They have a think tank.
The greatest minds come there. In summer, the best musicians in the world play
there. And in winter, the Europeans who used to go to St. Moritz and Val-d'Isere
ski there. Because it's cheaper, and it's more exciting to them. Aspen is
overrun by Italians wearing cowboy hats and boots now. It's funny, it's a
game.''

The series of independent films that has been running at the Art Theater since
March is ending with ''The Dark End of the Street,'' which is playing through
next Tuesday. It's a picture that one critic called ''a powerful and completely
uncondescending view of workingclass people.'' It was shot in and around North
Cambridge, Mass., and a remarkable 21-year-old actress named Laura Harrington
plays Donna, the female lead.

Donna is a street kid. She lives with her mother, brother and sisters, works in
a doughnut shop, takes hair-styling courses, has a boyfriend with a record.
Laura Harrington was not a street kid. Her father was a university professor.
''A kind of outrageous humanist,'' she says. ''He started the protest for open
housing, in Ann Arbor, Mich. When I was small, I'd go down and march in front of
the state capitol with a sign saying 'We Shall Overcome.' I would stand five
feet behind my father, and pretend I was black.''

Professor Harrington switched from school to school, getting, involved in
protests against the war in Vietnam, and the bombings in Cambodia and the
destruction of the environment, and always being pressured by the authorities to
move along to some other place.

''He had a gift,'' Miss Harrington says, ''but in some ways it's a horror story.
He was angry that the world didn't function as it should. When we'd go to New
York on vacations, we wouldn't go to New York to see plays or museums, we'd go
to New York to see Harlem. I ached for absolutely everybody. It's a hard burden
for a little kid.  And my father was an atheist. That was probably the hardest
thing.  You end up taking responsibility for the whole world because you think
there's nobody else to save it. It makes you very serious.''

Eventually, Miss Harrington's parents separated. ''He took off with the money,
the car. He was used to playing God, and when we started to grow up, it was
difficult for us to keep thinking of him that way, and he interpreted this as an
absence of love, and he left. What his leaving meant was that I started working
as an assistant manager of a clothing store during my senior year in high school
to help support my mother.''

Realizing that she couldn't get to college without aid, Miss Harrington began
auditioning as an actor at various schools, and she won a full scholarship to
Boston University, where she studied with David Wheeler, known for his work with
the Theater Company of Boston. It was Mr. Wheeler who recommended Miss
Harrington to Jan Egleson when the director was casting ''The Dark End of the
Street.''

After she got the part, Miss Harrington went to Cambridge and lived for a month
with the other kids in the movie - mostly high school students who had grown up
together in or near the same housing project.

''I just hung out and got to know everybody, love everybody,'' she says. ''My
own youth had been secluded. When I was 16, I felt suicidal. I could see that
everything was hideous. I had very little humor. And because we moved so much, I
was alone. People never called me up and said, 'Let's go out and do something.'
But in Cambridge, at the age of 21, I was getting to be 16 for the first time.''

In February, ''The Dark End of the Street'' played Cambridge, and the reviews
were ecstatic, especially for Miss Harrington. ''When I read The Boston Globe
review, I wept,'' she says. ''You do something, and it's just nice to know that
somebody noticed it, that you can care and get away with it, you know? Some
people give up so much, and I haven't had to do that.''

She did have to give up the boyfriend she'd been going with before she made the
picture. ''That dissolved, because after a while you realize this person is only
going to like you when you're not working, when you're his,'' she says. ''Now I
have a boyfriend who's an artist, and he loves all the elements of my life. The
more I'm away, the better in a way, because he has to paint.''

Miss Harrington believes in commitment. ''I think you can't batter yourself into
constant new relationships, it gets boring. One relationship, if it's a good
one, is not boring. Sometimes it's hard, but it's not boring.''

Since she isn't yet a household name with hundreds of offers to choose among,
Miss Harrington sometimes pays her rent by working in a restaurant, as a cook
and a waitress, work she does not consider demeaning in the slightest. ''I don't
feel like I'm poor,'' she says, ''I'm working in a restaurant, and I'm
struggling, but I know the richness of my life.''

Michael Winner has been set to direct a remake of Rudyard Kipling's ''Gunga
Din'' on locations in Spain and India. George Stevens produced and directed the
original in 1939... Next Tuesday, ''A Month of Bunuel!'' begins at the Public
Theater. The restrospective consists of three Bunuel movies -''The Discreet
Charm of the Bourgeoisie'' (1972), ''The Phantom of Liberty'' (1974) and ''Diary
of a Chambermaid'' (1964) with Jeanne Moreau.''...Also at the Public, as part of
its free-admission Public Service screening program, ''The Patriot Program,'' a
93-minute documentary about Northern Ireland made by Arthur MacCaig, will be
seen for three weekends starting June 20. Free-ticket distribution starts each
Saturday and Sunday at 1 P.M.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of George Hamilton in 'Zorro, the Gay Blade' photo
of Laura Harrington

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 13, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

New York;
EIGHT ISN'T ENOUGH

BYLINE: By Sydney H. Schanberg

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 888 words


One of the best recent examples of politics as usual was the City Council's
redrawing of its district lines to conform to the results of the 1980 census.

The census found that the city had lost more than 800,000 people since 1970, so
the Council adjusted to this 10.4 percent drop by increasing the number of its
members from 43 to 45.

The census also found that while whites were fleeing the city, which accounted
for the loss, blacks and Hispanics had increased by a few hundred thousand, so
that they now represent nearly half the population (more than half if illegal
aliens were counted) -up from only one-third in 1970. The City Council's
response was again perfectly logical: keep the number of minority-represented
seats unchanged, at eight. Eight out of forty-five, to complete the arithmetic,
is less than 18 percent.

This took a good deal of creativity in the drawing of the district lines on the
city map, but everyone knows by now that reapportionment is best left to the
experts.

For the unschooled, the Council provided a detailed, crystalline memorandum
clarifying what should have been obvious. It seems that the population, in
addition to shrinking, had shifted in such unusual ways ''that a pervasive
integration, on a scale never experienced before in this city, had taken place
over the decade since the prior census.''

And because blacks and Hispanics had become ''so diffused'' and integrated
throughout the city, the memo went on, it was extremely difficult to find the
necessary coherent masses of these groups that would insure election of minority
Councilmen.

Thus, the White Paper concluded, only by increasing the number of districts and
drawing lines ingeniously could the eight minority seats be preserved.

It is too soon to know if this principle will endure, but it could well turn out
to be something akin to the Vietnam maxim that the village had to be destroyed
to save it.

To cut through the baloney, the only maxim guiding the Council's hand was that
of guaranteeing the re-election of its present members this November without
reducing any borough's number of seats regardless of that borough's population
loss. So the big population losers - Manhattan, the Bronx and Brooklyn - were
kept at par, while Queens, which suffered only a marginal loss, and Staten
Island, the lone borough that grew, were each given an extra seat. (Those two
new seats will together cost the city treasury about $200,000 annually for
salary, staff and expenses - something the taxpayer might want to think about
when his councilman explains to him the fiscal constraints that make it
impossible to put a foot patrolman on his block.)

Once the protection of incumbents was set as the Council's overriding goal, any
increase in minority representation became unlikely. The Council, always
practical, knew it could not accomplish both.

Curiously - or perhaps understandably - there was little protest from the
present minority members of the Council, all of whom ended up supporting the
redistricting bill. First, they shared the personal ambitions of their white
colleagues in wanting to be re-elected and, second, they decided this was not an
issue on which they wished to rock the leadership's boat.

Most black and Hispanic spokesmen outside the Council also shrugged and endorsed
the plan. ''Realism made us conclude that this was the best we could get at this
time,'' said Horace W. Morris, executive director of the New York Urban League.
''And if we had pushed, we might have gotten something worse.''

One of the facts of life that has bred this sense of resignation is the pattern
of low voter turnout by blacks and Hispanics, which has usually meant that to
get a minority candidate elected, a district must be at least 65 or 70 percent
minority members. In short, to get ''sure'' minority seats, you have to draw
lines so as to pack more blacks or Hispanics into a district than you would
whites to produce a white seat.

This hurdle notwithstanding, it is obvious that the Council - if it had wished -
could have done better at minority representation and could have done it without
enlarging its membership.

In recent years the Council, while regularly raising its own salaries, has been
telling us - not without some justification - that it is no longer a rubber
stamp for the Mayor and Board of Estimate and that it has improved its
performance and effectiveness in city government. However, the stunning
indifference shown by the general public to the redistricting debacle might
suggest that voters still think of the Council as an irrelevant chamber of wind
that spends most of its time renaming streets.

Whatever the Council's image, its reapportionment plan will soon face the
scrutiny of the Justice Department's civil rights division.  Will the
department, despite the paucity of vocal minority opposition, reject the
specious plan, as it should, for violating the Voting Rights Act? Or will it
instead congratulate the Council for having succeeded - where everyone else has
failed - in creating a pattern of ''pervasive integration'' in New York City
life?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 14, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HAIG FLIES TO CHINA; SEES A MUTUAL GOAL TO RESIST RUSSIANS

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1122 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Sunday, June 14


Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.  arrived here today for three days of
talks with the Chinese leaders.  He intends to stress to the Chinese that there
is ''a strategic imperative'' for the United States and China to establish
closer political, security and economic ties because of a growing Soviet
military threat to both nations,

Reporters traveling with the Secretary of State were told that as part of the
Administration's decision to enhance relations with China, President Reagan
would meet privately in Mexico in October with Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang when
they attend a North-South summit meeting of industrialized and developing
countries.

A Chance 'to Clear the Air'

That meeting, in turn, could serve as a prelude to a Chinese-American summit be
announced during Mr. Haig's visit.

Mr. Haig is carrying a message from Mr. Reagan to Chinese leaders, but American
officials have refused to discuss details.

In February, it will have been 10 years since President Nixon's historic journey
to Peking, and many of the Americans in Mr. Haig's delegation, including
himself, were deeply involved in those first years of official contact.

Mr. Haig clearly sees the China trip as the most important mission so far of his
five months in office. He said Friday that he wanted ''to clear the air'' with
the Chinese on Reagan Administration policies.

Crucial Party Meeting Planned

Mr. Haig's aides say a review of relations is crucial because the Chinese
leadership is still undergoing stresses and differences on many issues,
including relations with Washington. During the past few days, China has said
that the development of strategic relations between Washington and Peking could
not progress if the United States continued selling arms to Taiwan. (Page 17.)

The Peking leadership is expected to discuss its problems in a Communist Party
meeting that may take place just after Mr. Haig leaves Peking Wednesday. During
that meeting, Hu Yaobang, a protege of Deng Xiaoping, the paramount leader, is
expected to replace Hua Guofeng, the party chairman selected by Mao before his
death.

Mr. Haig is scheduled to meet with Mr. Deng, Prime Minister Zhao, Foreign
Minister Huang Hua, Defense Minister Geng Biao and Deputy Prime Minister Bo
Yibo, who is in charge of economic planning. There is no plan for him to meet
with Mr. Hu.

Reporters were told that the need for strategic collaboration with China had
grown since the early 1970's because of increased Soviet military
''expansionism'' in Asia and the rest of the world. They were told that the
Soviet Union, in addition to using the former American base at Cam Ranh Bay,
Vietnam, for ships and planes, had built an elaborate intelligence- gathering
station there that is second in size only to a Soviet station in Cuba.

Unofficial Ties With Taiwan

In briefings in Washington and Hong Kong, reporters were told that Mr. Haig
intended to make these points in his talks:

- The Administration will manage relations with Taiwan strictly in an unofficial
way so as to avoid jeopardizing the normalization agreement with Peking in which
the United States severed formal ties with Taiwan. In pre-election statements,
Mr. Reagan angered China by talking often of establishing a more ''official''
relationship with Taiwan, but this is not now the Administration's intention.

- On the question of arms sales to Taiwan, the Administration will continue to
supply ''defensive'' equipment at the rate of about $700 to $800 million a year,
but there is no urgency about providing advanced aircraft sought by Taiwan.
Peking has strongly objected to the possible deal.

- The United States shares China's concern about Vietnamese and Soviet
''expansionism'' in Southeast Asia and is interested in coordinating policies
with China and the non-Communist countries of the region on ways of restraining
the Vietnamese and Russians.

- To improve China's ability to withstand external pressure, the United States
will sell it so-called ''dual purpose'' technology, meaning it will be permitted
to buy equipment with possible military uses, such as some computers, certain
types of radar and transport planes. This follows up proposals advanced by the
Carter Administration.

- The United States wants to have a thorough exchange with China on security
questions and to learn whether it actually wants to buy military hardware, as
distinct from technology to produce the hardware itself.

No Talks on Specific Arms Deals

Mr. Haig plans to hold a discussion on ''the broad framework'' of possible
sales, reporters were told yesterday, but is not ready to talk about specific
items. From all indications, Mr. Haig would like to be able to provide the
Chinese with such ''defensive'' equipment as antitank weapons if they ask, but
his aides said such a move awaited further discussions with the Chinese and
policy decisions in Washington.

Mr. Haig intends to brief Peking officials on the Reagan Administration's
strategic outlook. A similar review was given by Zbigniew Brzezinski, President
Carter's national security adviser, when he visited Peking in May 1978.

The purpose of the briefings, to be conducted by Mr. Haig and Richard R. Burt,
the Director of Politico-Military Affairs at the State Department, is to show
the Chinese the common ground between the two Governments and to demonstrate
that the Reagan Administration believes it is taking a more active
confrontational approach toward the Russians than its predecessor.

The trip, reporters were told, ''is a manifestation of President Reagan's own
appreciation of the importance of our relationship with the People's Republic of
China, a friendly, nonaligned country with which strategic relations are a
strategic imperative.''

Interests Are Said to Converge

Reporters were told that the relationship was being based on several principles,
including ''convergence of strategic views between the People's Republic of
China and ourselves, common concerns about Soviet expansionism and the
activities of Soviet proxies globally and in the region, common concerns about
stability and progress in the Asian Pacific region itself, and finally, the
historic friendship of the American and Chinese people.''

The reference to China as a ''nonaligned country'' stems from the
Administration's desire to persuade Congress and the American public that,
despite Peking's continuing description of itself as a

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. (page
16)

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 14, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Hanoi Proposes Renewed Talks With Peking Over Border Tension

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 12, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 81 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 13


Vietnam called on China today to resume negotiations on the tense situation
along the border between the two countries.

The Hanoi radio said the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry had proposed that the talks
resume in July or in August and be held in Hanoi or Peking.

The radio said the proposal was made in a protest note, handed to the Chinese
Ambassador in Hanoi, that called for an immediate end to armed conflicts in
border areas.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 14, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

THE QADDAFI CONNECTION

SECTION: Section 6; Page 52, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 7694 words


Seymour M. Hersh, a former New York Times reporter, is now at work on a book
about Henry Kissinger to be published by Summit Books. By Seymour M. Hershive
years ago, two former operatives of the United States Central Intelligence
Agency - Edwin P. Wilson and Frank E. Terpil - made a business deal with Col.
Muammarel-Qaddafi, the ruler of Libya. In essence, the former C.I.A. men, who
had become partners in an exportimport business, agreed to sell Colonel Qaddafi
their accumulated years of American intelligence-agency contacts, experience and
expertise. Theirs was a product that could not be purchased on the open market.
The colonel, who boasts of supporting terrorism in the Middle East, Europe and
Africa and who has been attempting to set up his own new federation of Arab and
Moslem states, was willing - and able, because of his vast oil wealth - to pay
dearly.

As a result, the two Americans, according to Federal investigators, have made
millions of dollars aiding Qaddafi in his drive to export terrorism and build
his own Middle Eastern power. Under cover of their export-import business,
Wilson and Terpil are said to have helped Libya set up a manufacturing plant for
the production of assassination weapons; to have themselves helped Qaddafi plan
political assassinations; to have recruited dozens of former Green Berets to
teach Libyan soldiers and Arab terrorists how to handle volatile explosives -
how, for example, to turn ashtrays into weapons of terror; to have illegally
shipped arms explosives to Libya with the aid of forged and fraudulent State
Department export certificates, and to have involved other former C.I.A.
employees in their projects.

Information about the Qaddafi connection has been known by the Government since
the fall of 1976. It was then that Kevin P. Mulcahy, at the time a partner of
Wilson and Terpil, approached the C.I.A. and the Federal Bureau of Investigation
with grave doubts about the legality and ethics of his company's business
dealings with Libya.  Mulcahy, a former C.I.A. employee who had spent six months
inside the Wilson-Terpil operation, would spend hundreds of hours, over the next
few years, providing the Government with firsthand knowledge.

Kevin Mulcahy has now decided to tell his story publicly for the first time.
He's tired of waiting for this segment of his life to end. He wants to be listed
again in the telephone directory, to hold a driver's license in his own name, to
vote, to own property, to stop living as if he - and not Wilson and Terpil - had
been indicted for wrongdoing. He feels he is forced now, in effect, to give his
testimony in the pages of The New York Times. The essentials of his account have
been verified where possible through secret documents and in interviews with key
members of the State Department, the Justice Department, the F.B.I., the United
States Attorney's office in Washington, as well as with Stansfield Turner, the
former head of Central Intelligence, and other high C.I.A. officials.

The Wilson-Terpil case is a story of Americans who meet secretly in bars and
board rooms to arrange the illegal sale of electronic-spying equipment and
terrorist weapons, and of Americans who train assassins abroad. It is a story of
an old-boy network of former C.I.A.  operatives and military men, and a story of
present and past C.I.A.  leaders who seem unable to face fully the implications
of the case.It tells of a basic inability of the Government's investigative and
law-enforcement agencies to perform effectively. And it suggests that a moral
climate exists inside and on the edges of the intelligence community which
results in the subversion of national goals to personal gain.

Ed Wilson was running what amounted to an updated version of the
military-industrial complex in which former C.I.A. and military employees have
put their Government experience, contacts and knowledge to use for large
personal monetary gain, regardless of the damage they will do to their own
country. Such men have worked in league with a number of American manufacturers
who have specialized in working for the C.I.A. and other intelligence agencies
in supplying military goods and highly classified technical equipment.
Questions that should normally be asked - Are the sales officially authorized?
Are they legal? Do they jeopardize national security? - are not. Senior
Government officials, in recent interviews, acknowledge that American expertise
is being transferred abroad in unprecedented fashion. The phenomenon, known in
the bureaucracy as ''technology transfer,'' is one apparent result of the
declining morale inside the intelligence community and the increasing profits
available. These officials say that nations such as Chile, South Korea, Brazil,
Argentina, Taiwan, South Africa, Iraq and Pakistan have been able to purchase
the very latest American equipment and technology in communications, military
arms, computer science and nuclear development - with or without authorization
from the United States Government.

The matter was intensively reviewed, at high levels, inside the Carter
Administration, with little progress. As yet, the Reagan Administration has not
addressed the issue. In early May, the Administration did order the Libyan
Government to shut down its offices in Washington, as part of the campaign
against international terrorism. But it has not faced the broader problem -the
export of American weaponry and expertise to terrorists.

Before the Federal prosecutors brought their indictments in April 1980 in the
Wilson-Terpil case, the file was presented to Philip B.  Heymann, then Assistant
Attorney General for the Criminal Division.  Heymann, who is returning this
summer to teach at Harvard Law School, recalls: ''I was shocked by what I saw in
the Wilson matter. The notion that there is no control over an American
intelligence official taking his know-how and selling it to the highest bidder
seems to be insane. If terrorism is to be taken as a major national problem,''
Heymann says, ''we'll have to start at home and draft statutes that would bar
the sale of fancy American equipment and fancy American expertise for terrorist
purposes. It won't be an easy matter, because it's hard to put a lid on the
dissemination of information. But this question is exactly what Congress ought
to be holding hearings on.''

Federal authorities, in accepting Kevin Mulcahy's story as accurate, knowledge
that its implications are deeply disturbing: Qaddafi obviously has utilized the
materials and expertise of Wilson and Terpil in his support of such terrorist
groups as the Palestine Liberation Organization, the Red Brigades of Italy, the
Red Army of Japan, the Baader-Meinhof gang in Germany and the Irish Republican
Army. He is suspected of having ordered the murder of at least 10 political
enemies in Europe and the Middle East; two months ago, the F.B.I. arrested
Eugene A. Tafoya of New Mexico, a former Green Beret, and accused him of an
attempted assassination of a Libyan student at Colorado State University. The
Libyan was one of a growing number outside the country who oppose Qaddafi's
rule. When arrested, Tafoya, who traveled to Libya three times last year, had Ed
Wilson's business card in his possession with telephone and telex listings in
Tripoli, London and Washington for one of Wilson's Swiss-based companies.
Tafoya's links to Wilson are still being investigated.

Colonel Qaddafi is relentlessly anti-Israel, supports the most extreme factions
in Syria and opposes the moderating influences of Jordan's King Hussein and
Egypt's Anwar el-Sadat as part of his campaign of political expansion in North
Africa. Qaddafi's ambitions were strengthened early this year when he
successfully invaded Chad, seizing an area believed to be rich in uranium ore.
The war also meant more profit for Wilson, who has established his own trading
company in Tripoli, known as Meprico, to supply Qaddafi's army.  Libya, relying
on its estimated $25 billion in annual oil revenues, is a major purchaser of
Soviet arms, and more than 5,000 Warsaw Pact military advisers are believed to
be on duty with Qaddafi's 60,000-man army.  A former high-speed-communications
and computer-technology expert in the C.I.A., Kevin Mulcahy was no innocent when
he came forward about the way the export-import business had worked. He had gone
into business with Wilson and Terpil at a high guaranteed income. Within three
months, Mulcahy realized that his partners were routinely selling restricted
military and communications gear. He himself offered to sell such sophisticated
equipment as second-generation computer systems and coded communications
machinery. Mulcahy did not hesitate in his talks with the authorities to
acknowledge his own role in questionable activities, which included the sale of
embargoed ammunition to South Africa. In all of these dealings, he says, he
believed or wanted to believe that Wilson and Terpil were somehow part of a
covert C.I.A. operation.

Today, Mulcahy is an angry and frustrated man. He believes his life is in
danger, a belief shared by Federal officials, and he is deeply disturbed by what
he regards as a monumental lack of resolve, competence and communication within
the Federal Government in handling the case. It took nearly four years to indict
Wilson and Terpil in Washington, on charges that include illegal export of
explosives, failing to register as a foreign agent, and conspiracy and
solicitation to commit murder. Despite fugitive warrants, the Government has
been unable to apprehend them at a time when their travels in and about Europe,
the Middle East, Africa and the United States have been observed by many people.
Last winter, more than six months after his indictment, Wilson was seen by a
business friend in Blackie's House of Beef, a Washington restaurant, with a
group of his former employees; it is not known how he entered the country.
Mulcahy, meanwhile, has been forced to lead a life of furtiveness.  ''I've had
five years of indecision, contradiction and waiting for the day that this
chapter of my life ends,'' he says. ''The Government keeps telling me, 'We're on
top of it; we're on top of it.' '' Yet Wilson and Terpil remain at large, and
many of their operations, which clearly seem to be working against the interests
of their own country and, indeed, world peace, are believed to be continuing at
this moment.

Kevin Mulcahy, now 38, grew up vintage Americana in suburban Washington: altar
boy, Eagle Scout, varsity basketball, class vice president. He was a son of
Donald V. Mulcahy, a 28-year-career senior official of the C.I.A., four of whose
six children were also employed by the agency. Kevin, the oldest child, began
working full-time for the C.I.A. in 1963, after serving as an airborne radio
operator in the Navy. He became a communications and computer expert and worked
on highly classified programs that he will not talk about today. In 1968, he
resigned from the agency to take a position in the electronics industry. There
followed a Page 55 succession of increasingly responsible jobs in the computer
industry, a serious drinking problem that drove him into Alcoholics Anonymous,
and a painful divorce.

By the fall of 1974, Mulcahy had come to grips with his alcoholism and, having
left the computer industry, began working in Virginia as a counselor in a drug-
and alcohol-treatment center. By 1975, he was trying to set up a series of
halfway houses and was scrambling for Federal grants. Mulcahy rented a house by
chance from a Barbara Wilson - Edwin P. Wilson's wife. Mulcahy became friendly
with her and eventually was invited to dinner at the Wilsons' newly purchased,
luxurious 1,500-acre farm in Upperville, Va. Ed Wilson, now 52, was well known
inside the C.I.A. as a skilled and trustworthy operative.  Wilson, who began his
export-import business in the early 1970's while working as a consultant for a
top-secret Navy intelligence unit, had played a role in the Bay of Pigs and
other undercover operations in his long C.I.A. career as a contract agent.
Mulcahy was impressed.

Over dinner, Wilson made it clear that he knew pretty much all there was to know
about Kevin Mulcahy, about his former employment with the C.I.A. and his current
work with teen-agers. A few months later, Wilson made an offer Mulcahy would not
refuse: If Mulcahy would join his arms-sales business in Washington and remain
for one year, he could then have as a bonus a nine-bedroom farmhouse Wilson also
owned and use it as a halfway house for troubled youths.  Mulcahy's guaranteed
$50,000 annual income would be supplemented by commissions and expenses. ''I had
no suspicions at all about the job,'' Mulcahy recalls, and he began working
hard. ''I was putting in 18 hours a day at first, dealing with 10,000 10,000
suppliers and inquiries about food, parachutes - any kind of equipment, from
machine guns to aircraft. There was no reason for suspicion in those weeks.''
Most of the business was aboveboard and involved the sale of highly technical
equipment. Mulcahy was responsible for arranging export licenses, international
letters of credit and shipping, and also for determining which manufacturers'
equipment would meet the specifications of the order.

Mulcahy obviously passed muster. In the early spring of 1976, Wilson walked him
to another office a few blocks away, in downtown Washington, and introduced him
to Frank Terpil, now 41. Terpil had served about seven years as a communications
technician for the C.I.A. but was forced to resign in 1971 after a series of
embarrassing private escapades, including an attempt to smuggle contraband
liquor into India. Unlike Wilson, who mingled easily and effortlessly with
senior C.I.A. officials, corporate executives and important members of Congress,
the Brooklyn-born Terpil was a street operator who had been arrested twice for
illegal trafficking in arms. Mulcahy knew nothing about Terpil except that he
had worked overseas for the C.I.A.

The three men agreed to set up a new company, to be known as Inter-Technology
Inc., for the specific purpose of selling high-speed communications gear and
computers to foreign countries. The equipment was legally purchased from
American companies. Each man was to be a one-third partner of Inter-Technology,
which, it turns out, was one of scores of Wilson-Terpil companies scattered in
corporate records throughout the United States and Europe.

If Mulcahy had any doubts about his new job, he suppressed them by believing -
or wanting to believe - that Ed Wilson was still linked to the C.I.A. ''Ed would
parade his contacts in the C.I.A. with the people he was doing business with to
impress them that he was still C.I.A.,'' Mulcahy says. ''He would suggest he was
still under deep cover.'' Often on Friday nights, Wilson made it a point to go
drinking at bars in suburban Virginia known to be after-hours hangouts for
C.I.A. officials on duty at the agency's headquarters in McLean. Mulcahy, the
new partner, began going along. ''I thought he was agency,'' Mulcahy says of
Wilson. ''I had no question in my mind.''

A few days after the new partnership was formed, Mulcahy discovered sales orders
showing that Wilson and Terpil were in the process of selling machine guns and
silencers to an arms dealer in Zambia. He was bothered by the sale of the
silencers for he knew they had only one purpose - killing without drawing
attention to the killer. He telephoned the F.B.I. and later showed copies of the
sales orders to agents in the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms
(B.A.T.F.), one of whose functions it is to monitor illegal arms deals and
report on impending sales. He also asked about his new partners. The authorities
said that the sale to Zambia was legal and that they had no derogatory
infor-mation about Wilson and Terpil in their files. ''I said to myself,
'Christ, this has got to be an agency operation,' '' Mulcahy recalls. ''These
guys are buying and selling silencers, and the F.B.I. and B.A.T.F. give them the
O.K. So I'm feeling pretty good: I'd gone to the Federal authorities, shown them
documents and they said Wilson and Terpil were clean.''

Wilson's contacts seemed inexhaustible. Ed Wilson was friendly, as Mulcahy and
Federal investigators were later to learn, with many senior legislators,
including Senators Strom Thurmond of South Carolina and the late John L.
McClellan of Arkansas and Representative Silvio O. Conte of Massachusetts. He
could telephone a contact in the Internal Revenue Service and within 15 minutes
have intimate financial details on a potential customer. He was able, with a
telephone call to Washington's police headquarters, to obtain registration
information on a local automobile license plate. But sometime in late May of
1976, Wilson went a step further: He telephoned Theodore G. Shackley, a
prominent C.I.A. official who was then serving as the assistant to the deputy
director for clandestine operations - one of the most powerful posts in the
agency. Shackley was renowned for his toughness and efficiency as a station
chief in Laos and in South Vietnam during the height of the Vietnam War, when
the C.I.A. was deeply involved in its still controversial Phoenix assassination
program. He later served in Chile, when the C.I.A. was assigned the task of
interfering with the Government of Salvador Allende Gossens.

Wilson arranged a meeting at Shackley's home a few nights later after work,
bringing along Mulcahy and an American, Harry Rastatter, one of Terpil's
business associates who had just returned from a business trip to Egypt, Turkey
and Iran. Rastatter had obtained some information from Savak, the Iranian
internal police, and was willing to pass it along to the C.I.A. Shackley was
introduced by Wilson to Mulcahy and recalled knowing his father, who earned the
National Intelligence Medal, the agency's highest reward, before retirement.
There was talk about military and intelligence needs in Iran, Turkey and Libya.
Wilson told Shackley that he and Terpil were planning to travel to Tripoli and
meet with Qaddafi. ''By now I'm convinced that the whole thing is an agency
front,'' Mulcahy recalls. ''I thought Ed was in bed with the C.I.A.'' Some
Federal officials say they are still investigasting Shackley's personal and
financial involvement with Wilson. Shackely has acknowledged to Federal
authorities that the meeting described by Mulcahy as well as other meetings with
Wilson did take place, but Shackley insisted that at no time did Wilson receive
any authority or sanction from the C.I.A. for his work in Libya. He said his
contacts with Wilson were solely for the purpose of obtaining any stray bits of
intelligence Wilson might have picked up. Wilson and Shackley had worked
together in 1960 on the Bay of Pigs operation. Shackley, in an interview,
confirmed Mulcahy's account of the meet-ing and said that he, like Mulcahy, was
unaware then of Wilson's plans for supporting Qaddafi's terrorist program.
Shackley said his purpose in talking to Wilson and Rastatter was to collect
information from non-C.I.A.sources. ''I talked to them solely not to be a
captive of the system,'' he said. ''Wilson was a guy who knew about a lot of
things. He was a good contact.''

After the Shackley meeting, Mulcahy was brought into the Libyan operation.
Muammar el-Qaddafi had placed a purchase order with Wilson and Terpil for
hundreds of thousands of timers capable of detonating explosives at some
specifically delayed time. Wilson and Terpil did not tell Mulcahy, however, the
real purpose of the devices; instead he was led to believe that Qaddafi needed
them to clear mines from harbors and battlefields by safely blowing them up.
The mines, so Mulcahy was told, had been left from the 1973 Arab-Israeli war.
The timers were to be demonstrated to Qaddafi's senior military and intelligence
aides that June in Libya, and Wilson and Terpil had to find an immediate
manufactu,er. They decided to exploit a long-time C.I.A. contractor, the
American Electronic Laboratories of Colmar, Pa., and Falls Church, Va., which
had routinely been providing the agency with some of its most highly classified
electronics and communications gear.

American Electronic was a logical starting place. In May 1976, Wilson had
visited the company's plant in Falls Church in an effort to persuade its
officers to retain his firm to represent its products around the world. Wilson
brought Mulcahy and Terpil to the meeting, as well as an active C.I.A.
employee, Patry E. Loomis, an agent assigned to the Far East who was operating
under cover for an aircraft company. One of Loomis's functions was to serve as a
liaison officer between C.I.A.  headquarters and its overseas stations; he was
responsible for establishing personal relationships with senior military and
Government officials in the Far East. Loomis added credibility to Wilson's
pitch. ''Terpil was there to impress them with his contacts in the Middle
East,'' Mulcahy recalls. ''Wilson was there for Europe and Loomis for the Far
East. I was there because it was told to them that I was ex-C.I.A. and would
remain on-site and accessi-ble while the others traveled.''

Loomis, who had been illegally moonlighting for Wilson for some time, was one of
dozens of former Government employees who had been recruited by Wilson and
Terpil. Government investigators have learned that Wilson's technique, as
utilized in his approach to American Electronic, was to seek out intelligence
and military officials with close relationships with both vital suppliers and
foreign governments. These men would be retained to sell goods, ranging from
canned foods to weapons, to those foreign countries.  Income for his salesmen,
as well as for Wilson, was extremely high, in part because the sales were often
contingent on under-the-table kickbacks to Wilson's company and to foreign
officials.

No agreement was reached between Wilson and senior officials of American
Electronic at their meeting, but Wilson and his associates were able to leave
the impression that their work was not only highly profitable but also had been
officially sanctioned by the Government. In June, when the 10 prototype timers
were needed, another series of meetings was set up in a Virginia bar involving
three of Wilson's employees, along with William Weisenburger, then an
active-duty C.I.A. official, and two employees of American Electronic, one of
whom was another C.I.A. official, then working under cover.  Weisen-burger and
the American Electronic men agreed to work privately over the weekend to produce
10 prototype timing devices at the inflated cost of $1,500 each (10 times the
actual cost). Federal authorities later concluded that these men knew that there
had been no official C.I.A. authorization for the job, and that senior officials
of American Electronic had not known of the moonlighting. It was a project that
in the months ahead struck Mulcahy as wildly ironic: He knew that many of
company's senior officials were Jewish and, he now says, ''You can bet they
wouldn't do anything for Libya.''

Mulcahy was beginning to get a taste of life as an international salesman, and
it was good. In June, he flew to England to set up an exhibition at a security
show at Brighton. The rooms were first class. So was the food, and there seemed
to be a constant series of parties, and party girls. One of Mulcahy's first
customers at the security show was a Syrian company, Abdallah Engineering, which
was interested in purchasing high-speed communications equipment - gear so
sensitive, Mulcahy thought, that the State Department would never permit its
export. ''Frank told me, 'Don't worry about it. We don't need licenses. Just get
the order,' '' Mulcahy recalls. ''By now it was obvious that Wilson and Terpil
had a wide latitude for the agency.''

The equipment included encoding de-vices and radio monitors capable of tracking,
intercepting and interpreting encoded signals. There was a meeting with
representatives of the Irish Republican Army, who wanted American-made M-16
rifles. Mulcahy learned that such weapons could be found in plentiful supply;
North Vietnam had sold its surplus weapons - seized in huge quantities after its
army overran South Vietnam in 1975 - to Samuel Cummings of Interarmco, the
European-based arms dealer. It was in England also, Mulcahy says, that Terpil
asked him if he wanted to earn $5,000 on his return flight to Washington by
detouring to Cairo to deliver a ''cold gun,'' one with no identifying serial
number. Mulcahy refused to deliver the weapon, but did learn months later that
Qaddafi had provided Terpil and Wilson with a $1 million contract to assassinate
Umar Abdullah Muhayshi, a Libyan defector who had plotted to overthrow Qaddafi's
regime. The assassination assignment had been subcontracted by Wilson to three
anti-Castro Cubans in Miami with whom he had once worked in the C.I.A. ''Frank
was playing both ends against the middle,'' Mulcahy recalls. ''He was setting up
an elaborate security system for the guy in Egypt to protect him while at the
same time trying to bump him off.'' Mulcahy and Terpil got along well and the
two men exchanged many confidences during their trips together. ''Frank tends to
talk a lot; he likes to name-drop,'' Mulcahy says. ''What charges Frank's
batteries is the thrill of the chase, the excitement, being on the periphery of
power. He thrives on it.'' In time, Mulcahy said, he came to realize that there
was more truth in Terpil's seemingly wild stories than he had thought.

Wilson is more discreet and far more dangerous, Mulcahy said. ''Ed is devious
and cunning and he's living a lie -that he is the most important human being
alive. He'll use anything to manipulate people or events to get them to come out
in his favor. He's absolutely brilliant in the way he sets a deal up, puts
people together and parcels out information. Ed compartmentalizes his own
operation the same way the agency does. It allows him to play both ends against
the middle and come out the winner. If Ed comes back and goes on trial, he's
going to use every bit of information he's stored up for years to get the C.I.A.
in court and put the agency on trial instead of Ed Wilson.'' In fact, Wilson's
attorney in Washington, Seymour Glanzer, has repeatedly told Federal prosecutors
that the whole story of his client's involvement in Libya has not been aired.
Glanzer, in a telephone interview, refused to comment. But the prosecutors have
inferred from conversations with him that his defense will be: Wilson is still
at work for the C.I.A. There is no known evidence that this is the case,
however.

Mulcahy immediately sensed Wilson's essential toughness, but there was nothing
unusual about such men inside the C.I.A. and it was a characteristic that could
be admired. Mid-1976 was a period of travail for the C.I.A., which was under
attack in the press for its illegal domestic spying activities and under
investigation by the Senate Intelligence Committee for its foreign assassination
efforts.  Mulcahy learned, shortly after joining Wilson and Terpil, that
President Ford had placed severe new restrictions on clandestine C.I.A.
activities. Wilson and Terpil suddenly became more legitimate in his eyes: ''I
thought it was logical that the agency would set it up this way and have their
people on the street freelancing.''

During that summer, Mulcahy edged closer to the line of illegality and, in at
least one case, crossed it. He recalls that Wilson and Terpil were selling
munitions, communications equipment and highly restricted night-vision devices
without preliminary clearance from the Office of Munitions Control in the State
Department and the export control division in the Commerce Department. In one
case, Wilson and Terpil purchased a United States Army vehicle equipped with
night-surveillance equipment for shipment to Libya, in direct violation of all
regulations. To avoid any possible problem, the vehicle was first sent to Canada
and transshipped from there to Tripoli. The risks of such flagrant activity were
high, but so were the rewards. The vehicle cost about $60,000 to purchase in the
United States and was sold to the Libyan Government by Wilson and Terpil for
$990,000, Federal prosecutors later learned. Similarly, Terpil and Wilson
provided Qaddafi with hundreds of closely controlled and sophisticated infrared
night-vision devices for M-16 rifles, which were primarily designed for use by
snipers in warfare. Not all such sales went to Libya. Mulcahy says he was
directly involved in the illegal sale of 2,000 rounds of ammunition to the South
African Government, and he used falsified documents to label the ammunition as
''plumbing fixtures.'' This and other sales, he says, were arranged through Sven
K.H. Hoffelner, an Austrian arms dealer who also owns a successful group of
restaurants in London. Hoffelner had established a close working relationship
with Terpil by the time Mulcahy joined the operation.  In July 1976, after his
return from England, Mulcahy learned that only six of the 10 timing devices sent
to Libya had worked. The demonstration of the devices was made in Libya by John
Henry Harper, who had spent more than 20 years as a bomb and ordnance technician
for the C.I.A. and who had joined American Electronic after he retired. Two of
the timers had failed, Mulcahy was told, because Harper had miswired them.
Libya's reaction to the demonstration was puzzling to Mulcahy: Although nearly
half the devices had failed to work, the Libyans were still willing to order
100,000 for immediate delivery. A few weeks later, Terpil returned from a visit
to Libya with an increase in the order to 300,000 timers. ''I didn't get
suspicious,'' Mulcahy recalls, ''until Frank came in with the order for 300,000.
I knew damn good and well that there was no way there was a need for 300,000
timers - there weren't 300,000 mines in the harbors and deserts from the Six-Day
War as well as World War II.''

At this point, Mulcahy understood that Wilson's story about mineclearing in
Libyan was false, but he thought it was shielding a C.I.A. operation, and not
serving as a cover for a terrorist-support program. The cover story was
beginning to erode. Whatever concerned Mulcahy was quietly suppressed over the
next few weeks, however: ''I was impressed by the money and the possibility of
making a fortune.''

By this time, it was clear that the senior officers of American Electronic could
not be persuaded to build 300,000 timers without verifying the order with the
C.I.A. There was yet another scramble: This time to find a manufacturer who
could begin delivering the timers within 45 days. Another Friday night meeting
in a Virginia bar was arranged with Mulcahy and representatives of another
long-time C.I.A. supplier, Scientific Communications Inc. of Dallas. Terpil had
found the company, whose president, Joe L. Halpain, later agreed to manufacture
500 prototype timers within 30 days. At the Friday night meeting was William
Weisenburger, then a branch chief in the C.I.A.'s Technical Services Division -
the group responsible for producing the special weapons and safety devices that
have been popularized by the James Bond movies. Thomas G. Clines, then a senior
official in the C.I.A.'s Office of Training, also was in the bar that night,
sitting with Ed Wilson. Mulcahy spent the night table-hopping as the
manufacturing plans were worked out. Clines was well known inside the agency for
his closeness to Ted Shackley. Like the others, Clines had played a role in the
Bay of Pigs. After Shackley's retirement from the C.I.A. in 1979, he and Clines
would set up a consulting firm.

Everybody smelled the big money that night in the bar. Mulcahy later learned
that the final contract with Qaddafi called for a total payment of $35 million
for 500,000 timers whose cost to supply, he knew, would be somewhere around $2.5
million. Even in the international-arms business, profits like that are not easy
to come by.

Wilson's major concern was time; he had promised the Libyans that he would set
up a manufacturing laboratory near Tripoli for the production of assassination
weapons in August. Qaddafi, in turn, promised to pay him $1 million in cash
immediately upon arrival of the first batch of timers, explosives and other
equipment that would be needed. Manufacturing the weapons themselves in Libya
would be no problem; men such as John Harper, who was paid more than $2,000 a
week by Wilson and Terpil, agreed to go to Libya and begin training Libyans in
the art of disguising explosives in ashtrays, flowerpots, lamps and other
household goods that could be triggered by delayed timing devices. Scientific
Communications came through on its promise to deliver the prototype timers
within 30 days. The Texas company had handled legitimate and sensitive contracts
for the C.I.A., but this one was different and the firm's president, Joe
Halpain, knew it. He personally delivered the timers, hidden in
plastic-prescription bottles for export to Libya, to a motel near C.I.A.
head-quarters, where they were picked up by Wilson and Mulcahy. Far more
difficult were the issues of where to purchase the volatile chemical explosives
needed for the production of the assassination weapons and how to slip them into
Libya. The necessary explosives included TNT and a variety of lethal
plastiques-among them RDX, formally known as cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine-which
were designated as Class A explosives by the Department of Transportation and
could not be shipped on passenger and cargo aircraft. Wilson and Terpil again
reached into the ranks of C.I.A. contractors and found a California firm, J.S.
Brower and Associates of Pomona, which agreed to supply the chemicals, all of
which were considered defense articles that could not be exported without
Federal licensing.  One problem remained: how to get the timers and explosives
into Libya. In early August, 1976, Mulcahy attended a meeting at the offices of
Inter-Technology in Washington with a cargo sales manager of Lufthansa German
Airlines, which has passenger service from Germany to Tripoli. The sales
manager, Walter Doerr, categorically refused to ship the explosives, legally or
otherwise, on a passenger craft. And he refused to charter a special cargo plane
because of the high risk of explosion. Later that day, Terpil arranged a meeting
with Jerome S. Brower, the 61-year-old president of Brower and Associates, who
was a highly respected figure in his industry (and later was asked to advise
Congress's Office of Technology Assessment on a proposed method of marking and
tracing explosives used in international terrorism). Brower was shown a list of
all the chemicals that Inter-Technology wanted to purchase for the Libyan
operation. Mulcahy recalled that Brower immediately exclaimed: ''Hey, you don't
need all this stuff for mine clearance.''

Wilson explained that the company was setting up a laboratory in Tripoli and
doing some demonstrations work. ''He didn't say precisely what we were doing,''
Mulcahy recalls, ''but it was obvious. Wilson went further than I'd ever heard
in explaining the scope of the entire project. There was an enormous potential
for follow-up business which removed any inhibitions Brower had.'' Mulcahy
marveled at Wilson's ability to handle Brower: ''Brower had never done any
business with either of these guys before and here he is agreeing to sell and
ship explosives to Libya.'' Brower immediately raised his price and demanded
partial payment in advance. Wilson and Terpil agreed to pay nearly $38,000 on
account, Mulcahy says, and the California businessman ''called his plant, talked
to his wife, Peggy, and his plant manager and told them how to pack the
chemicals.''

RDX, the most lethal and unstable material, was to be placed inside 55-gallon
drums in webbing and the drums then were to be filled with a gel substance. The
explosives were to be shipped East, to Dulles Airport, marked as ''industrial
solvent,'' on the first available passenger flights, Mulcahy recalls. Once at
Dulles, they were consolidated into one shipping container, along with the
timers and the industrial tools and workbenches needed to set up the explosives
laboratory in Libya. Then they were forwarded to Europe for transshipment by
Lufthansa passenger planes to Tripoli without knowledge of the airline. All of
the men involved in the meeting in Washington understood the implications of
what they were doing, Mulcahy says: ''The nitro could have blown if the plane
hit an air pocket.''

Brower was indicted in April 1980, along with Wilson and Terpil, for his role in
illegally conspiring to ship the explosives with knowledge that they would be
used to ''kill, injure and intimidate individuals.'' After pleading guilty and
agreeing to cooperate with Federal investigators, he was fined $5,000 last
December and sentenced to a five-year prison term, with all but four months
suspended.

The meeting with Brower had resolved the final stumbling block and Wilson flew
to Libya, where he was to conclude the arrangements for establishing the weapons
laboratory and to be on hand to insure the careful handling of the shipment of
''industrial solvent'' from the United States. He also would receive the
promised million-dollar payoff from Qaddafi.  Kevin Mulcahy, meanwhile, flew to
Europe for a meeting in London with Terpil and a group of British arms dealers.
There was the inevitable party early one balmy Sunday afternoon, thrown by Sven
Hoffelner, the trade link to South Africa. Hoffelner had rented a barge and as
it was being poled along a canal near Oxford in the bright sun, Mulcahy began
taking casual snapshots of the revelry.  Terpil saw his camera, Mulcahy
recalled, and ''went berserk. He got all red in the face; he was really, really
nervous and told me to put the camera away before 'you end up dead.' ''

Later that evening, Terpil explained that one of the guests on the barge was
Carlos Ramirez, known to police throughout the world as ''the Jackal'' - the
international terrorist believed to be responsible for planning the 1972
Olympics massacre in Munich, a deadly raid on the Fiumicino Airport in Rome and
numerous aircraft hijackings. There was no photograph of Ramirez in existence,
Terpil told Mulcahy; the ''Wanted'' posters on display at airports throughout
the world contained only a composite drawing. Terpil also told Mulcahy that
Ramirez was living in barracks No. 3 at the former Wheelus United States Air
Force base in Libya. Terpil seemed awed by Ramirez, who was accompanied at the
party by Sayad Qaddafi, chief of Libyan intelligence, identified by Terpil as
Qaddafi's cousin and the second most powerful man in Libya.  Mulcahy was now in
far too deep and he knew it.  It was late August and John Harper and other
Wilson-Terpil employees were at work in Tripoli setting up the munitions
laboratory for terrorist bombs and a training program for their effective use.
Wilson and Terpil made it clear to Mulcahy that they did not want him to go
Libya. Mulcahy kept his now grave doubts to himself and continued on his
business trip, moving on to Copenhagen and another series of meetings. Terpil
returned to Libya, and he and Wilson suddenly dispatched an urgent cable to
Copenhagen: Mulcahy was to break off his trip and return to Washington to open
negotiations there with the General Dynamics Corpora-tion for the purchase of
one of its Redeye ground-to-air missiles. General Dynamics had advertised in
trade journals that it had l8 Redeyes for sale to legally acceptable buyers. The
missile, which could not be exported to Libya under the law, is
shoulder-launched and has a heat-seeking component that enables it to track and
destroy aircraft in flight. It had been used extensively and successfully by the
Israelis during the 1973 war. ''My problem was not to worry about the
paperwork,'' Mulcahy says. ''Terpil and Wilson had a pilot in Pennsylvania who
would fly anywhere. Once he got over the water'' - and away from American legal
jurisdiction - ''he would change the paper.'' If the Red Eye had been purchased,
the pilot would simply change the intended recipient listed on the export
license, from an approved ally, such as those in NATO, for example, to Libya.

Altering the State Department's export license, known officially as the end-user
certificate, was considered so much a normal part of the arms business by Wilson
and Terpil that Mulcahy had been authorized to quote prices 8 percent to 12
percent higher if the sale also required supply of the certificate. Mulcahy was
unnerved by his sudden assignment and discussed it with an associate in
Copenhagen - a foreign military attache stationed in Denmark who had a
reputation for legitimate operations. ''My friend told me that the only reason
Libya would want one Redeye was for use in a terrorist attack,'' Mulcahy says.
''We speculated that Qaddafi probably wanted to be the first to shoot down a
747. To hit a fully loaded passenger plane in flight would be bigger than the
destruction of planes at Dawson Air Field in Jordan,'' when P.L.O. terrorists in
1970 blew up three international airliners and held scores of passengers
hostage.

Mulcahy had a leisurely dinner and began walking the streets of Copenhagen. He
couldn't sleep. He recalled a trip he and Terpil had taken to a firm called
Defense Apparel in Hartford, Conn., where Terpil discussed the possible purchase
of up to 100,000 suits that would protect humans exposed to radioactivity. Could
the Redeye carry a nuclear warhead? He knew now he would never place the Redeye
order.

''I watched the sunrise come in Copenhagen,'' Mulcahy recalls, ''and knew what I
had to do - get back to Washington fast. I had to find out what paperwork
existed'' in the Inter-Technology offices he shared with Wilson and Terpil. ''I
felt that Frank and Ed were giving Qaddafi any goddamn thing he asked for.''
NEXT WEEK Part Two will tell how, guns and explosives, the hardware of
terrorism, and the experts to use them were exported to Libya by the oldboy
network for more than four years, despite Kevin Mulcahy's disclosure to the
Federal Government.

THE MAN WITH THE CONTACTS

Edwin P. Wilson is invariably depicted by former associates as a charming,
charismatic, effective, rough-and-ready, 6-foot-4 swashbuckler who excelled in
his military and intelligence career.  But the real reasons for his success as
an international weapons dealer are the contacts he has built up during more
than 20 years of work with United States Government intelligence services.

Wilson went to work for the C.I.A.'s Office of Security in 1951 and, after
serving in the Marines, became a full-time C.I.A. contract employee in 1955. In
the late 60's, he helped organize a Washington firm called Consultants
International Inc. for the C.I.A. and the Navy. The firm's ostensible purpose
was to conduct export-import operations, but that function was a cover for
classified intelligence operations.

Over the next few years, his intelligence activities were combined and mingled
with his private operations. He hired a number of associates, many of them with
military or intelligence backgrounds, and, according to Federal officials, was
routinely receiving huge kickbacks from American manufacturers and foreign
governments on his procurement contracts.

The men working for him were convinced that he was still active in C.I.A.
intelligence operations. ''I thought he was reporting directly to the
President,'' one former associate recalls. ''Ed still must be sanctioned by the
U.S. Government. The people I met were impressive.All of a sudden I'm on a
first-name basis with big names in Congress and the Senate. It was always like
the Government was supporting us.'' Robert Keith Gray, an influential
public-relations man known for his close ties to the Eisenhower, Nixon and
Reagan Administrations, was among those listed as a member of the board of
Consultants International for five years, beginning in 1970. However, Gray, who
served as co-chairman of Reagan's Inaugural Committee, expressed surprise in an
interview upon being told of his official listing. ''I never knew I was on the
board,'' Gray said. ''I never was invited to a board meeting.'' He acknowledged
that he has had a social and business relationship with Wilson, whom he
described as ''charming and very much a red-blooded American.''

In 1971, Wilson dropped his C.I.A. connection and was a part of Task Force 157,
a secret Navy intelligence unit that employed 50 to 75 agents to monitor and
collect information on Soviet shipping. It reported not only on routine cargo
items but also watched for the covert shipment of military goods and nuclear
weapons. The unit also was charged with the responsibility of picking up
intelligence operatives from Taiwan and secretly ferrying them inside mainland
China, where they would implant sensitive seismic monitors and radio equipment.
Those operations were stopped after President Richard M.  Nixon's visit to
Peking in 1972, and C.I.A. officials were astonished to learn later that some of
the sensitive equipment, designed solely for use inside China, was appearing for
sale in the international arms market.

Wilson's first C.I.A. assignment, in the 50's, was to infiltrate the Seafarers
International Union, in which he was eventually appointed to a number of
official positions. He also was involved in Congressional lobbying on behalf of
the union and apparently began then forming his close relationship with a number
of influential members of Congress. Wilson became a C.I.A. specialist on
maritime issues and was involved in the procurement of equipment for clandestine
Navy operations. During the Bay of Pigs, he was assigned as a paymaster and
handled procurement as well. He later served in Southeast Asia and Latin
America.

A full accounting of Wilson's connections and business activities may never be
known. He has boasted of having a controlling interest in more than 100
corporations in the United States and Europe. - S.M.H.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 14, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
The photographs on the cover of today's New York Times Magazine are incorrectly
identified. On the left is Edwin P. Wilson; at right, Frank E. Terpil.

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Carlos Ramirez,'the jackel', terrorist photo of
Libyans during Chad invasion photo of Estate of Edwin Wilson in Virginia photo
of Edwin Wilson photo of Muammar el-Qaddafiin 1976 photo of Frank Terpil, Kevin
Mulcahy, Sven Hoffelner photo of Kevin Mulcahy in disguise in 1977 photo of
Mulcahy in Washington

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 14, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOW MOST OF THE SPECIES LIVES

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1224 words


VILLAGES By Richard Critchfield.  Illustrated. 388 pp. New York: Anchor
Press/Doubleday. $17.95.

By NICK EBERSTADT

RICHARD CRITCHFIELD, a farflung correspondent for The Economist, is one of a
handful of Western reporters who have spent time with the ordinary people in the
third world countries he writes about.  Fourteen years ago in Jakarta he
happened to catch a ride from an impoverished pedicab operator named Husen. On
an impulse, he asked if he might visit Husen's home village, Pilangsari. The
stay lasted six months. Working the fields, gossiping with neighbors, getting
drunk with local big shots and contributing to the ever precarious family
budget, Mr. Critchfield came to know a side of Indonesian life that was so
common as to be obscured from his peers. Since that first trip, he has spent
most of his time in about 20 of the two million Asian, African and Latin
American villages in which the bulk of mankind presently resides. ''Villages''
is his account of these wanderings.

It is a remarkable book. Mr. Critchfield has cleared harvests in Bangladesh,
herded sheep in Iran and struggled against the sea with fishermen in Mauritius.
He has laid the dead to rest in upper Egypt and huddled with Tibetan refugees in
Nepal's Himalayas. He has joined the Carnaval mob in northeast Brazil,
befriended Moroccan criminals, chatted with slaves in the Sudan and interviewed
Moro pirates in the Philippines. He has witnessed full-scale political terror in
rural South Vietnam and watched harvest disputes in India's Punjab lead to
apparently irreversible breakdowns in the local caste system.

But ''Villages'' is not so much an account of Mr. Critchfield's own adventures
as of the lives and adventures of the people he meets. Mr. Critchfield writes
about his acquaintances - farmers, magicians, mid-
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Nick Eberstadt is a visiting fellow at the Harvard Center for Population
Studies. He has worked in or wandered through most of the countries of Asia.
wives, preachers, tramp laborers, prostitutes - with an empathy and attention to
detail that make intelligible points of view and styles of life that we would
ordinarily find utterly alien. By writing about people he knows, Mr. Critchfield
in effect reduces the great problems of our age - poverty, inequality, despotism
- to human scale, and in so doing grants them the humanity that is almost always
lacking in books about these issues. ''Villages'' is probably the best available
account of the ways in which the unrepresented majority of our species lives, of
the problems this majority now faces and of its prospects for the future.

Readers accustomed to the notion of the unspeakable misery of the world's poor
may find Mr. Critchfield's depiction of rural poverty instructive. The explosive
growth of third world cities is testimony to the drudgery, the boredom, the fear
and the stifling burden of obligations and expectations that peasants must
endure in the countryside. Poor people are especially accident prone, as it
were, and tragedy is a constant companion in ''Villages.'' Yet suffering is
manifest not in Malthusian apocalypses but in the mundane rubble of broken
dreams. Husen's parents force him to abandon the wife he dearly loves because
their first two children die and her ability to produce a surviving son is
therefore suspect. Tonio, a small farmer in the Philippines, can't keep his
family from falling further into debt each season. Karl, a self-employed
fisherman in Mauritius, is losing his youth, but is unable to secure less
exhausting work.

But with the exception of a few drunks and drifters, Mr.  Critchfield's
villagers do not see themselves as pathetic characters or hopeless cases. When
calamity strikes, they do not throw up their hands and die; instead they
struggle, sometimes against great odds, to improve their situation. Basant Singh
arrived in the Indian village of Ghungrali penniless and homeless, a victim of
the 1947 partition of India and Pakistan; through a cunning marriage, luck,
meanness and incessant hard work, he had already make himself into one of the
richest landowners in the region by the time Mr.  Critchfield first met him.
More typical perhaps is Carolina, the deserted girlfriend of a Brazilian
dockworker, who makes ends meet for herself and her two children through
ingenuity and sheer doggedness. As one reads such stories, one realizes that
there is some-
thing deeply heroic in many of these battles. This is a heroism, however, that
will largely go unsung. The day-to-day saga of maintaining oneself is inherently
unromantic; the objectives are simply too modest.

Despite the sorrow that he has seen, Mr. Critchfield is not a pessimist. He
believes that villagers are ''certainly no less'' stable and happy than we are,
''which is what matters to them and (eventually) to us.'' He argues that
standards of living in the villages are often higher than we suppose, and that
rapid material progress in important parts of the third world is going
statistically unrecorded. When he was in Java in 1979, for example, he talked
with scores of peasants about their plight. When asked, ''Are you richer or
poorer than you were ten years ago?'' every single one of a couple of hundred
villagers replied that he was better off; some even laughed at such a foolish
question. While this exercise was hardly a scientifically conducted survey, it
stood in marked contrast to the reports of the development experts based in
Jakarta, who held that living standards in the countryside were stagnating or
even declining.

Mr. Critchfield is sanguine about the Green Revolution, which he contends
benefited the great mass of people in the countries he lived in, and not just
the elite. He believes that with the proper application of affordable technology
(now available) and enlightened, courageous leadership (heretofore lacking),
India might not only feed itself, but emerge as one of the great breadbaskets of
the world. He identifies Communism and the oppression of women as the two great
banes of the poor world. The latter, he suggests, is preventing Islamic, Latin
American and African societies from providing their peoples with the universally
craved fruit of modern life. About the former he writes, ''No Marxist-Leninist
movement has won peasant support without the populist slogan of 'Land to the
Tillers,' but this land is always seized back again once state power is in the
revolutionary leadership's hands.''

''Villages'' is a rambling, idiosyncratic tour de force. While much of what Mr.
Critchfield says will be hotly and, one suspects, bitterly contested, there is
no question that he has laid down the terms and posed the questions for any
debate that is to ensue. This is a book that deserves to be read.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 14, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PICTURES OF CHANGE

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1195 words


NICARAGUA June 1978-July 1979.  By Susan Meiselas.  Edited with Claire
Rosenberg.  Illustrated. New York: Pantheon Books.  Cloth, $22.95. Paper,
$11.95.
VISIONS OF CHINA Photographs by Marc Riboud, 1957-80.  Introduction by Orville
Schell.  Illustrated. New York: Pantheon Books.  Cloth, $30. Paper, $14.95.

By ANDY GRUNDBERG

PHOTOGRAPHY is like language. It can be employed in the service of the sublime,
the ridiculous or the desultory; it can reveal truth or distort it. But, despite
Edward Steichen's hortation that the goal of photography is to explain man to
his fellow man, the fact is that photographs suggest much but explain very
little.

''Nicaragua'' and ''Visions of China,'' photographic books that purport to
document societies in a state of upheaval, are cases in point. ''Visions of
China'' traces the People's Republic over 23 years; ''Nicaragua'' encompasses a
much smaller time - 13 months - but focuses on a much more visual event, armed
combat. Both books, it should be said, contain a num-
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Andy Grundberg reviews photography for The New York Times.
ber of striking and admirable pictures. But what these pictures tell us about
the transitions they attempt to decipher is naggingly incomplete - even compared
to what can be learned in a 60-second television news report. Worse, what they
do manage to tell us about radical change tends toward the sentimental and
heroicized.

If one needed visual confirmation of what Yeats meant by ''a terrible beauty''
being born of insurrection, ''Nicaragua'' supplies it in spades. Not since
Vietnam and the original incarnation of Life magazine has there been war
photography this graphic and wrenching.  Bodies are everywhere, blown to stumps,
swollen in the sun, burning under a blanket of tires. The sights are not
pleasant during any revolution, and the Sandinista-led popular uprising against
Nicaragua's Somoza regime in 1978-79 was no exception. Susan Meiselas's color
photographs, however, are often intensely beautiful. ''Nicaragua'' becomes
haunting precisely because of the precarious balance between the beauty of its
pictures and the horror of what they depict.

Miss Meiselas's photographs also create the appearance of objectivity. She
photographs mostly from an uninflected middle distance, eschewing close-up
details and long views. Yet clearly the photographer is on the side of the
insurrectionists; she even rides with them into Managua after Somoza's defeat.
The dead, some of them children, are always victims of Somoza's National Guard,
although presumably the rebels did a share of the killing. (Like Marc Riboud,
Miss Meiselas is a member of Magnum, a photo agency that traditionally has taken
a critical view of entrenched
power and a sympathetic one of the downtrodden and oppressed.) What is odd,
then, is that by themselves the photographs are completely ambiguous. The book
separates the pictures from their captions, which are lumped in the back. This
has an unsettling consequence: Looking at the photographs alone, it is
impossible to tell who is fighting whom, or why. What are we to make of a
photograph midway through the book that shows uniformed soldiers firing
automatic rifles from behind a wall of sandbags? Has Miss Meiselas switched her
allegiance without telling us? The caption later explains that these
well-equipped ''soldiers'' are indeed rebels; from another caption we learn that
they have appropriated their materiel from a captured garrison. Such pictures
suggest that without language, the meaning of a photograph is inherently
ambiguous.

The ideology of ''Visions of China'' is more obvious but less well defined. Marc
Riboud took photographs in the People's Republic for four months in 1957, and
again in 1965, 1971, 1979 and 1980, so we might expect him to be a heavy-handed
apologist for the powers that favored him with admission. This is not quite the
case. Ironically, though, Mr. Riboud's pictures dote on evidences of the
increasing materialization of China -television sets, tractors, sunglasses - as
if these were markers of progress. Since more Chinese now wear Western clothes
than before, Mr. Riboud seems to say, conditions have improved. The way in which
these ''improvements'' are shown is often as blunt as a Mao poster. A 1965
picture of a peasant couple carrying a sow to market is paired with a 1979 photo
of a stylish couple carrying a television set down a Peking boulevard.

Mr. Riboud's is not the first report from China (Eve
Arnold, Inge Morath and other photographers have recently weighed in with China
books), but because Mr. Riboud visited China over a wide span of years his book
has a unique historical opportunity. Despite the title, it is no mere monograph
testifying to Mr. Riboud's ''vision.'' Rather, as Orville Schell's introduction
suggests, it seeks to engage history while still paying homage to Mr. Riboud's
poetic sense of black-and-white composition. The expectable result is
compromise. Instead of being arranged in the order in which they were taken, the
photographs are placed in sequences that often are visually superficial and
glib. (Old men in traditional costumes on one page, young children reading
comics on the next.) Likewise (and like ''Nicaragua''), the explanations of what
the pictures show are saved until the end. On the other hand, the quality of the
photographs varies so widely -some equal Henri Cartier-Bresson's, others could
have come from a tourist bureau - that obviously art had to make some
concessions to political history.

Ultimately, ''Visions of China'' explains little more about modern China than
any other China book available. Nor does ''Nicaragua'' explain the overthrow of
Somoza. Partly this is the fault of the photographers themselves, both of whom
seem to rely unquestioningly on the familiar habits of photojournalism, and
partly it is a result of the structure of their books. But the deeper problem
lies with the kind of work photographs are asked to do in books of this sort,
and with photojournalism as a photographic genre. How is it that we expect an
outsider - the ambulatory photojournalist, a glorified tourist - to deliver
essential insights into a foreign culture? Too often style is all that the
photographer brings to the subject - that, and preconceptions. Isn't it, after
all, too much to ask for explanations when the photographer is only paying a
visit?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Shanghai, 1979 photo of street fighter in
Managua

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 14, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Long Islanders;
WAR EXPERIENCES MOTIVATE EDUCATOR

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE VAN GELDER

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 2, Column 5; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 704 words


IN Nuremberg, Germany, in the autumn of 1945, a young American sergeant stood
guard over a devastated city. At night, he presided over a moonlit panorama of
rubble. By day, he witnessed a procession of the homeless, hauling their
belongings in little carts and rummaging through refuse cans in search of food.

''There was something, there, that motivated me toward the idea of creating a
better world somehow,'' he said.  Struck by the futility of war, he concluded,
''No matter who wins or loses, it's that mankind loses.'' It was an idea that
had grown on him as World War II progressed. ''I thought when it was all over I
would do something to help mankind establish alternate solutions.''

The sergeant's name was William M. Kupec. When the war ended, the New York
City-born son of Czechoslovak immigrant parents decided his path lay in foreign
service. He was awarded a B.S. degree in 1948 from the School of Foreign Service
at Georgetown University, but his ideas about his future changed. ''I think I
saw I could reach more people through education,'' he said.

And so he began a career in the Syosset school system, coming to the Split Rock
School in 1948 as a social studies and science teacher. Since then he has held a
variety of posts - elementary school, junior high school and senior high school
principal do not exhaust the list; for the last decade, he has been principal of
the A.P. Willits Elementary School.

Through the years, he said, he has tried to transmit to the children his ideas
about helping others, about the world as a community. Last year, Mr. Kupec
broadened his scope, founding Syosset International Ltd., a nonprofit community
organization ''for the creation of peace through international understanding and
cultural awareness.''

''Right now,'' he said, ''we have 190 members, mostly from Syosset,'' including
members of a youth corps.  Next Friday at St. Edward's Roman Catholic Church in
Syosset, the organization will hold its first annual dinner. Senator Bill
Bradley, Democrat of New Jersey, will be there to deliver the keynote speech,
Mr. Kupec said.

The organization's Raoul Wallenberg International Brotherhood Award -named for
the Swedish diplomat who saved multitudes of Hungarian Jews in World War II -
will be bestowed. ''We thought that the fact that he had given of himself for
people of another culture,'' Mr. Kupec said, ''warranted that we establish an
award in his honor.''

The choice for a recipient of the award was John Wetterer, who used to live in
Massapequa.  ''He's about 32,'' Mr. Kupec said, ''a young fellow who was in the
Vietnam War, and after he finished his tour of duty he organized an orphanage
for kids over there and is presently located in Guatemala City, where he built a
home and a school for 125 boys. We thought he should be the recipient for giving
of himself for people of another culture.''

Mr. Kupec, who is married and the father of seven children, has also been active
in behalf of the United Nations Children's Fund, for which he carried out an
inspection visit to the Middle East last year.

Some years ago, he recalled, he was driving with his children through a polluted
industrial area of New Jersey when one of them asked what one person could do to
rectify matters.

''It has to start somewhere,'' Mr. Kupec remembered replying.  ''Someone has to
be dedicated, to give of himself, to get other people to rally round - and maybe
the little ripple in the pond becomes a wave.''

Mr. Kupec said it was that sort of thinking that led eventually to the founding
of Syosset International, which is involved in an assortment of projects, among
them student and adult cultural exchanges and community projects at home and
abroad. Ultimately, Mr.  Kupec said, he would like to see the ideals of Syosset
International spread to other communities. ''Again,'' he said, ''from the ripple
to the wave.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of William M. Kupec

TYPE: interview

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 14, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

2 MILITARY CHALLENGES REAGAN IS AVOIDING

BYLINE: By James Fallows

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 874 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


In his graduation address at West Point, President Reagan re-emphasized his
determination to spend more money for defense. Sustaining the political momentum
for such increases may prove difficult; still, it will be easier than facing two
fundamental military challenges that the Administration has so far chosen to
avoid.

The first and most obvious of these is that of discriminating between weapons
that are effective and those that merely cost a lot of money.

To survey the first-line equipment of each service - the Army's new Abrams tank,
the Navy's Trident submarine and F-18 fighter, the Air Force's MX missile, F-15
fighter, and various ''smart'' missiles - is to see a common pattern. The
weapons cost between two and 10 times as much as the systems they replace; their
technical complexity leads to behind-schedule deliveries and long periods in the
repair shops; and their performance is better suited to computer-simulated war
games than to the unpredictability and disorder that have typified real combat.
In its proposal for increased spending, the Administration has asked for more of
the same.

The second challenge is more difficult. It concerns men rather than machines.
Although nearly all discussions of the United States military focus on weaponry,
those who have studied the history of combat or have commanded troops
consistently stress that machines count for less in warfare than do intangible
human qualities, such as ''leadership'' and ''esprit de corps.'' They say that
the effectiveness of a fighting force depends finally on the creation of a
series of human bonds. These bonds must run among soldiers in small groups,
between the soldiers and the officers who lead them, and between the military as
a whole and the nation it defends. They are described as ''moral'' bonds,
because they are woven through demonstrations of shared respect and mutual
sacrifice. Soldiers will take risks to defend their comrades who would do the
same for them. Armies will sacrifice to defend a nation that respects the
sacrifices they make.

To talk with soldiers these days is to hear that these bonds have been seriously
eroded by the creation of the All Volunteer Force.  One source of erosion is the
idea, inherent in the concept of a volunteer army, that military service is just
another job. In the past, the bonds among soldiers had grown naturally among men
who worked together, ate together, and slept in the same barracks.

They are far harder to create when half the enlisted force is married and lives
in town - and when soldiers, like other workers, have the right to ''quit.''

When President Reagan promised at West Point to provide ''better working
conditions'' for the United States military, he reflected the belief that the
economic incentives that motivate most parts of the labor force are appropriate
for the military as well. Many soldiers say that their duties are different from
those of civilians and that while increased pay may help convince skilled
technicians and noncommissioned officers to re-enlist, it is finally as
impossible to ''buy'' a dedicated fighting force as to buy dedicated doctors and
clergymen.

The ''moral'' bonds have been weakened in another, more complicated way. As many
in the armed forces are the first to notice, bonds of shared loyalty and respect
do not naturally grow between an affluent nation and the poor people to whom it
has contracted its defense.

I bring to this subject the perpective of a late-1960's college student who, for
reasons partly of principle and partly of expedience, avoided military service
during Vietnam.

What was true then - that an unfair system of conscription deflected the costs
of the conflict away from those with most influence in our society, thereby
demoralizing the Army and prolonging the war - has now been institutionalized in
more extreme form through the volunteer force. It is because of the experience
of those years, not in spite of it, that I am so concerned about the
consequences of having a volunteer force.

Today's Army consists of a cross-section of black America, plus the
least-educated and least wealthy whites. As the sociologist Charles Moskos has
pointed out, the enlisted ranks of the Army are the only place in major American
institutions in which the average black is better educated than the average
white. Meanwhile, a smaller and smaller portion of educated America has any
first-hand exposure to the military and any direct stake in its performance and
the uses to which it is put.

Spending more money on the military will not earn it the nation's respect. That
requires the creation of a force more representative of the country it is meant
to defend - which, in turn, will almost certainly require the draft.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
James Fallows, Washington editor of The Atlantic, is author of ''National
Defense.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of soldiers standing on a pedestal made from the
American flag

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Hanoi and Two Allies Reject U.N. Parley on Cambodia

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 118 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 14


Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia announced today that they ''once again categorically
reject the convening'' of next month's United Nations-sponsored international
conference on Cambodia.

The statement was read in Phnom Penh and broadcast over the Hanoi radio at the
conclusion of the Fourth Indochinese Foreign Ministers Conference.

The statement demanded that the delegate representing the ousted Cambodian Prime
Minister, Pol Pot, be expelled from the United Nations and his seat be given to
the Phnom Penh regime headed by Heng Samrin.

Secretary General Kurt Waldheim is scheduled to convene the Cambodian conference
on July 13 in New York.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

212 'Boat People' Are Rescued By a U.S. Seventh Fleet Warship

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 134 words

DATELINE: MANILA, June 14


A United States warship rescued 212 starving, dehydrated Vietnamese refugees
aboard three boats in the South China Sea, the Navy reported today. The rescue
brought to more than 2,100 the number of so-called boat people saved by the
Seventh Fleet since January, a spokesman said.

Survivors said 19 refugees had died at sea, but the Navy spokesman said details
about the cause of the deaths were not known. Four of the survivors were
reported in near-critical condition after the rescue yesterday.

The refugees, in groups of 84, 24 and 104, were rescued by the U.S.S. White
Plains about 200 miles southeast of Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon, a
spokesman said. The refugees said they had been at sea for about a week.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ESSAY;
INSIDE DENG'S MIND

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 862 words


And so another American Secretary of State comes to visit our Middle Kingdom,
trailing the running puppies of the media who obey his orders to identify his
views as those coming from a ''senior official.''

Mr. Haig's reason for coming is to threaten the Russians with the possibility
that Chinese-American friendship could turn into a military alliance, which
infuriates them; he comes also to persuade China not to worry about his too-soft
willingness to begin arms control treaty-making with the Russians, which
infuriates us.

In visions as rough and rosy as the skin of a litchi nut, Secretary Haig will
talk to us of ''strategic consensus'' against what we have long identified as
the Soviet southward offensive -through the Persian Gulf and India in the West,
and through Vietnam and Cambodia in the East.

I will listen, and shrug, and then I will force the Americans to humble
themselves as they did in the Carter years by acceding completely to our wishes
about Taiwan. I will persuade the Americans that black is white -that our desire
for Taiwan is greater than our fear of the million Russian troops on China's
border.

If I know Americans, they will respond by cancelling plans to sell modern
aircraft to Taiwan. Then, to justify selling Taiwan any arms at all, Mr. Haig
will offer us the forbidden fruits of military technology.

I will do him the great favor of accepting. The Americans feel a strange urge to
pay for what is obviously a parallel interest. After Iran fell to the fanatics,
the Americans offered us tons of surveillance equipment and computers to replace
Iran as the world's leading Soviet-watching station. It is an open secret that
we took it all, with the proviso that Chinese technicians be taught to operate
the machines and to give the Americans only that information we wished.

The American officials will tell their people that China really does not want
arms technology, only industrial help. Fine - we must not appear eager. When my
defense chief, Geng Biao, went shopping at the Pentagon, all he specifically
requested was the Cessna business jet, supposedly for photo reconnaisance. (In
truth, my generals want to fly around in executive jets.)

To satisfy my Army, and to defend China in ways we can afford, I need the kind
of military technology we can copy and produce here, and which suits our
suck-in-the-enemy strategy. The laser gunsight, for example: our old-fashioned
tanks could become a match for the latest Soviet T-72's if we could suddenly
increase our probability of kill with the first shot. And the shoulder-launched
''Redeye'' and ''Stinger'' missiles, which enable one guerrilla to shoot down a
helicopter, are weapons our friends in Afghanistan could use right now.

That is the sort of equipment I will get by throwing a temper tantrum about
Taiwan. Of course, I am too sophisticated to believe that a diplomat like Haig,
with no political power base, can deliver all he promises. I know that in
America, the right wing of the right wing can obstruct the transfer of arms
technology because they fear it might be used against the United States one day.

Accordingly, I have directed our Ambassador in Washington to invite eight
members of the powerful ''Madi-Sen Xituan'' to China. John Carbaugh, aide to
their Great Helmsman, and Michael Pillsbury, the Senate steering committee
adviser who has been predicting arms sales to the P.R.C. for years, will lead
this clique to Peking in August.

Unlike Haig, they will want to know how America will benefit directly from
giving us some arms technology. I can hear their questions now: Will China
increase its aid through Pakistan to guerrillas fighting the Russian invader in
Afghanistan? What will China do to penetrate the Soviet threat to the Saudis in
South Yemen - or will China let the Saudi friendship with Taiwan get in the way?
How can China, with its African connections, support the anti-Cuban Savimbi in
Angola?

I will do as little as I can and as much as I must. Before I die - and I cannot
hide the shaking of my hands from any visitor, though I will outlast Brezhnev -
I want to see China become the fulcrum between the barbarians of the East and
West, always helping the weaker to protect China against the stronger.

In February 1982 we will celebrate the 10th anniversary of our first playing of
the American card. I have already invited Richard Nixon and expect him to come.
Next I will invite President Reagan, who by next year will have to think about
personal involvement in foreign affairs. It would be nice to have Reagan and
Nixon here in Peking together, with Kissinger, too, and maybe Ford. Nixon's
influence would make it possible for Reagan to move closer to us than his right
wing would otherwise permit.

The Russians will have fits; the Americans will be in our hands.  With a Chinese
mind, one need not be a super-power to shape the destiny of the world.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 16, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BYLINE: By JUAN de ONIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 885 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 15


The State Department announced today that the United States and Pakistan had
agreed on a $3 billion military and economic aid program to strengthen Pakistani
defenses against a ''serious threat'' from Soviet troops in Afghanistan.

The agreement calls for the rapid restoration of United States military aid,
including the sale of F-16 aircraft. American aid has been suspended since April
1979, when the Carter Administration, seeking to curb the spread of nuclear
arms, halted assistance because Pakistan refused to submit its nuclear
development program to international inspection.

The Reagan Administration, aware of Pakistan's concerns about the 85,000 Soviet
troops in neighboring Afghanistan, has argued that resumption of American
assistance is the best way to restrain the Pakistani move toward nuclear arms.

'Relationship of Confidence'

''This Administration believes that by addressing those security concerns which
have motivated Pakistan's nuclear program and reestablishing a relationship of
confidence with it offer the best opportunity in the long run for effectively
dealing with its nuclear program,'' David Passage, a State Department spokesman,
said, reading from a prepared statement.

The announcement of the agreement was contained in a joint statement issued here
and in Islamabad at the conclusion of a two-day visit to Pakistan by James L.
Buckley, Under Secretary of State for Security Assistance. The statement made no
reference to the nuclear arms issue.

The military and economic aid program, beginning this year with cash military
sales, has a total value of about $3 billion, according to the statement. This
is believed to include $400 million a year in loans for military purchases and
$100 million a year in economic assistance over the next five years.

Pakistan's Strategic Position

Pakistan, which occupies a strategic position near Afghanistan and the Persian
Gulf, has grown in security importance for the United States since the Soviet
advance into Afghanistan and the loss of American military influence in Iran.

The joint declaration said Pakistan would remain a nonaligned Islamic country
and was not entering into any ''new alliance'' with the United States. However,
the military and economic aid program was presented as the Reagan
Administration's commitment to ''assist Pakistan in meeting unprecedented
threats'' through rapid delivery of equipment to strengthen the Pakistani armed
forces.

Advanced weapon purchases and nuclear developments have always caused tensions
in relations between Pakistan and India. The two nations have fought two major
wars since gaining independence from Britain.

India depends heavily on Soviet military supplies. State Department officials
said the recent sale of $8 billion in Soviet arms to India, including advanced
warplanes, far exceeded the United States program for Pakistan.

''Our aid to Pakistan is certainly not aimed at India,'' a State Department
official said. ''The United States is not fueling an arms race.''

Since India detonated a nuclear device in May 1974, Pakistan has made major
efforts to develop nuclear technology, with the help of French, Swiss and Dutch
equipment and the reported financial backing of Libya. Pakistan has not signed
the treaty against the spread of atomic weapons, and its nuclear facilities are
not under international inspection.

In an effort to clear the way for the Pakistani arms program, the Administration
won the support of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee for a modification of
the aid restrictions imposed in 1975 because of Pakistan's use of enriched
uranium and reprocessing of spent fuel without inspection. The Senate panel, in
this year's foreign aid bill, approved legislation permitting President Reagan
to waive the restrictions.

A Congressional Veto

However, the House Foreign Affairs Committee has not approved similar
legislation. As a result, the Pakistani arms program is subject to a
Congressional veto if it fails to obtain the support of majorities in both
houses.

The Administration has been attacking legislative restrictions on military and
economic aid that have been adopted since the Vietnam War. It has sought the
repeal of a ban on military sales to Argentina because of human rights
violations, the motification of an amendment barring United States aid to
Angolan rebels, and the relaxation of the ban on aid to Pakistan.

After an official visit here last week by Foreign Minister Rene Rojas Galdames
of Chile, Fred C. Ikle, Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, met with Senate
and House foreign affairs staff specialists to discuss, among other issues, the
ban on United States military assistance to Chile that has been in effect since
1977.

The Administration is also working through friendly members of congress to
modify an amendment approved by both the Senate Foreign Relations and House
Foreign Affairs Committees requiring Presidential certification that human
rights conditions are improving in El Salvador before military aid can be
released.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 17, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SENATE VOTES TO AID VETERANS EXPOSED TO TOXIC HERBICIDE

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 903 words

DATELINE: WASHNGTON, June 16


The Senate today overwhelmingly approved federally financed medical treatment
for veterans of the Vietnam War who were exposed to the defoliant Agent Orange.

The Senate action, by a vote of 98 to 0, marks the first time that Congress has
approved legislation for treatment of Vietnam veterans exposed to the herbicide.
Similar legislation was approved two weeks ago in the House.

Agent Orange was the code name for a defoliant sprayed by the Air Force on
Vietnamese crops and jungles to reduce food and cover for the enemy. The
defoliant contains dioxin, one of the most toxic chemicals known, and veterans
have blamed the herbicide for causing cancer, liver damage, malfunction of the
body's disease-fighting system, numerous miscarriages and a broad range of birth
defects in their children.

Medical Care Opposed by V.A.

Until now, the Veterans Administration has refused to provide free medical care
to Vietnam veterans who have attributed their health problems to Agent Orange
and has contended that there was no documented evidence that exposure to the
defoliant resulted in longterm health defects.

Congress has already ordered a study to assess the possible links between Agent
Orange and the veterans' health defects, an action that failed to satisfy former
members of the armed services who were exposed to the herbicide.

Senator Alan Cranston, the California Democrat who sponsored the measure, said
that Senate approval of the Agent Orange bill and other health programs for the
veterans ''will send a strong, positive signal to Vietnam era veterans that
their proposals have not been lost in the shuffle.''

Mr. Cranston's amendment to a $232 million bill continuing several V.A. programs
also contains a measure to provide medical care for veterans exposed to
radiation in nuclear weapons tests conducted in the late 1940's and the 1950's.
About 245,000 veterans participated in those tests, and an unspecified number of
soldiers and Air Force personnel in Vietnam were exposed to Agent Orange.

''We sent dedicated, capable servicemen and women to Southeast Asia,'' said
Senator James R. Sasser, Democrat of Tennessee. ''We have asked servicemen to
participate in atmospheric nuclear tests, and we have conducted defense-related
experiments on human subjects.  These veterans now suffer from a variety of
diseases and disabilities. We should provide an adequate level of medical care
to these veterans now.''

Mr. Cranston, the Senate minority whip, said that the measure would involve ''no
additional cost'' and that no new services or facilities would be added, but
that the veterans' agency would be ordered to ''adjust the manner'' in which its
health care resources were used. Thus, Agent Orange and radiation victims would
be given priority in V.A. facilities, ''ahead of those whose medical problems
have no link whatsoever to their military service.''

The Senate also followed the lead of the House in voting, 99 to 0, to extend for
three years a program that provides counseling at storefront centers throughout
the country for troubled Vietnam veterans. The highly popular centers, which
have treated more than 52,000 veterans, are in urban centers away from V.A.
facilities, which many Vietnam veterans do not trust.

No White House Opposition

The overall cost of the counseling program through 1985 is about $97.5 million.
Although the Reagan Administration initially opposed this measure and took no
firm position on the Agent Orange proposal, there was no major White House
lobbying effort against the counseling program. Except for the budget director,
David A. Stockman, who termed the program unnecessary, Administration officials
were relatively silent on the issue.

''The program is a visible and meaningful symbol of our determination to provide
assistance to those Vietnam veterans who still need help,'' Senator Cranston and
a co-sponsor of the measure, Senator John H. Chafee, Republican of Rhode Island,
said in a joint statement.

The Senate voted overwhelmingly in favor of the storefront program in part
because of the ''relatively small sum involved over the next few years,'' a
Senate aide said, as well as the fact that ''this was the one symbolic program
that we set up for Vietnam veterans and it was working.''

Beyond this, the 91 storefront centers were ''highly visible,'' and their
closure would stir nationwide publicity. Moreover, there were indications last
month that White House officials had second thoughts about its opposition to the
counseling program.

Robert O. Muller, executive director of the Vietnam Veterans of America, said
after today's vote: ''We're pleased that the Senate has extended the most
significant readjustment program for Vietnam veterans. We're also grateful that
the Senate has gone on record for the first time stating that there is a problem
because of Agent Orange and something has to be done about it.''

Mr. Muller, a former marine who was crippled in the Vietnam War, added, ''It
does remain an open question as to how effectively the V.A. will implement this
legislative mandate, but at least it's the first step.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 17, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
WEDNESDAY, JUNE 17, 1981

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 953 words


International
The sale of American weapons to China has been approved in principle, Secretary
of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. announced at the end of a three-day visit to
Peking. He told reporters that his talks with Chinese leaders had been
''unusually significant and successful'' and seemed to foreshadow ''a major
expansion of Sino-American friendship and cooperation.'' (Page A1, Col. 6.)
Israel apparently violated its accord with the United States on the use of
American-made weapons when it bombed an Iraqi nuclear reactor on June 6,
President Reagan said. But he also told a news conference that Israel ''might
have sincerely believed'' that the action was defensive. (A1:5.)
The issue of nuclear arms development in Iraq has concerned members of the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee. A Senator and Congressional aides said that
Israeli diplomats had failed to present convincing evidence to support Israel's
assertion that Iraq was developing nuclear weapons in the reactor that Israeli
jets destroyed. (A6:1.)
Israel would be sternly rebuked and punished with an arms embargo for its raid
on the Iraqi reactor, under a United Nations resolution drafted by third world
countries spurred by Iraq. In private, Western diplomats warned that unless the
draft was drastically modified, it would face vetoes in the Security Council by
the United States, Britain and France. (A7:1.)
The ouster of Iran's President appeared more likely as Parliament voted to begin
impeachment proceedings against Abolhassan Bani-Sadr today. Eight of the
President's staff members were arrested and several others were expelled from
his offices. There was no word on the whereabouts of Mr. Bani-Sadr, who has not
been seen in public for a week. (A1:3-4.)
National
President Reagan pressed budget cuts of his choosing and accused Congressional
Democrats of ''unconscionable'' efforts to sabotage his proposed reductions in
spending. At a news conference, Mr. Reagan threatened to fight for an
alternative bill to achieve the $35 billion reduction authorized by Congress
last month. (A1:1.)
Democrats in Congress are angry over President Reagan's effort to press the
legislators to adopt his economic program with no changes and no delay.
Representative Richard Bolling, the chairman of the House Rules Committee,
accused Mr. Reagan of trying to use the budget process to impose a
''totalitarian'' rule. (A25:2-3.)
Treatment for victims of Agent Orange by the Veterans Administration was
approved by Congress for the first time. Voting 98 to 0, the Senate authorized
medical care for veterans harmed by exposure to the herbicide, which was widely
used in the Vietnam War to defoliate crops and jungles. (A1:4.)
Drug use and a fatal Navy crash were linked by Representative Joseph P. Addabbo.
He said that autopsies indicated that most of the 14 sailors and marines who
were killed last month when a jet crashed on the deck of the carrier Nimitz had
traces of illicit drugs in their systems. An aide said the tests suggested
marijuana use, but that stronger drugs might also have been involved.
Representative Addabbo did not assert that drug abuse had caused the crash. The
Navy termed his information ''inaccurate.'' (A20:1-4.)
A contract proposal to air controllers has been made by the Federal Aviation
Administration. The 15,000-member union of air traffic regulators has threatened
a strike starting Monday that could severely curtail the nation's air
transportation. (A20:1-2.)
The Chicago Cubs were sold by William Wrigley for $20.5 million to the Tribune
Company, parent of The Chicago Tribune and The Daily News in New York. The Cubs
have been one of major league baseball's least successful franchises in recent
years. (A1:2-3.)
The impact of pressure groups on ads was suggested by the new chairman of
Procter & Gamble, television's largest advertiser. He acknowledged that the
company was refusing to sponsor shows that are ''broadly held'' to contain
excessive sex, violence and profanity.  (C30:5-6.)
Metropolitan
A major casino operator withdrew from Atlantic City under the cloud of a Federal
indictment in Nevada accusing the concern of criminal conspiracy. The Dell E.
Webb Corporation sold to its partners its 50 percent interest in a $150 million,
newly built casino-hotel. Last week, Attorney General James R. Zazzali of New
Jersey urged the Casino Control Commission to deny the facility a temporary
permit to open because of Webb's involvement. (A1:1-2.)
A broad insurance investigation is being conducted by New York State and a
Federal grand jury. The inquiry involves policies worth millions of dollars that
were bought by at least 20 American insurance companies from a group of small
foreign companies. Lawyers familiar with the inquiry said that questions about
the practices used in placing the reinsurance were leading many of the foreign
companies to stop paying claims. (B2:1-3.)
A Carey appointment created a stir. The Governor has hired, as a $48,000-a-year
special assistant, a 30-year-old political adviser who sought a post through Mr.
Carey's wife, Evangeline Gouletas-Carey.  Aides to the Governor were unable to
explain the future duties of the new assistant. (B6:5-6.)
It was the hottest day of 1981 in the New York metropolitan area.  The
temperature in Manhattan reached 93 degrees, accompanied by oppressively high
humidity and smog. (B3:1-2.)

Business Digest, Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 17, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

LEGISTALTORS FIND WHAT IT IS LIKE TO BE DISABLED Assemblyman Jose E. Serrano

BYLINE: By LENA WILLIAMS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Metropolitan Deskof

LENGTH: 553 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, June 16


A group of state legislators took part in a sensitivity project here today to
experience the absence of sight, hearing and mobility in the hope that they
might better understand the problems of New York's disabled.

They also wanted to win support for a legislative package for the disabled,
which is expected to be approved by the Assembly tomorrow.  Assembly Speaker
Stanley Fink, Democrat of Brooklyn, blindfolded and with a cane, walked
tentatively through the lobby of the Legislative Office Building with a woman
holding his arm.

Hands reached out to give Assemblyman Mark Alan Siegel, Democrat of Manhattan, a
push as he emerged from a crowded elevator in a wheelchair. And Assemblyman
Angelo F. Orazio, Democrat of Williston Park, L.I., stared intensely at a young
man seated across the table from him, trying to understand what the man was
saying by reading his lips.

Disabled Conducting Drive

Also taking part in the project were Assemblyman Vincent A.  Marchiselli,
Democrat of the Bronx, who was stricken with polio at the age of 3 and confined
to a wheelchair since then, and Assemblyman John A. Behan, Republican of
Montauk, who lost the use of his legs as a result of a military accident during
the Vietnam War.

For two days now, scores of handicapped New Yorkers in wheelchairs and with
canes have sat behind booths in the lobby, trying to interest passers-by in the
plight of the disabled through a series of brochures, displays and videotapes.

''It's going to make it difficult for anyone to vote against our legislative
package tomorrow,'' concluded Assemblyman Alan G. Hevesi, Democrat of Forest
Hills and chairman of the Assembly Task Force on the Disabled.

Fink Describes His Experience

The package of 13 bills, described by Mr. Fink as a bill of rights for the
disabled, includes a measure that would prohibit discrimination based on an
individual's disability with regard to housing, employment, public
accommodations, life insurance, college admission, real property and other civil
rights.

''My mother became blind six years ago, and we hovered over her,'' said Mr.
Fink, who described his simulated blindness as a ''very isolated'' experience.
''By creating a certain environment, she has now become self-sufficient.''

The legislative package also contains bills that would provide tax exemptions
for alterations, additions or improvements to certain residential properties to
accommodate the physically handicapped, expand transportation services to the
handicapped and allow nondrivers to obtain a driver's license for identification
purposes.  Chances of passage in the Republican-led Senate appear uncertain.

The Legislature also took these actions:

Joint Custody

The Senate gave final passage to a bill requiring judges to consider granting
joint custody of children in divorce cases if one or both of the parents
requested it.

Lawyers Registration

Lawyers would have to pay a $50 registration fee every two years under a measure
passed by the Senate and given a strong chance of approval in the Assembly. Half
the money would be put into a fund for clients defrauded by lawyers acting as
fiduciaries.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Assembly Speaker Stanley fink, and Rosemary
Lamb, and

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 18, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HAIG AIDE SAYS U.S. SEEKS SUPPORT FOR MILITARY PRESSURE ON VIETNAM

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 386 words

DATELINE: PEKING, June 17


An official traveling with Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. said here
yesterday that the United States would work with other nations to put pressure,
including military pressure, on Vietnam to force a withdrawal of its forces from
Cambodia.

Speaking at a luncheon of the American Club, John H. Holdridge, Assistant
Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs, said the United States was not
interested in normalizing relations in the hope that Vietnam would moderate its
policies.

''Our own history with the Vietnamese over the years suggests that they are very
tough people, and if you give them what they want, this does not make them
change their policy in any way,'' he said.

''So we will seek, if we can, to find ways to increase the political, economic,
and, yes, military pressures on Vietnam, working with others in ways which will
bring about, we hope, some change in Hanoi's attitude toward the situation.''

Haig Mentioned No Military Effort

Secretary Haig and his party left for Manila today to attend a meeting of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations on the Cambodian question.

At a news conference yesterday, Mr. Haig declined to say whether the United
States and China were prepared to cooperate in more than political and
diplomatic efforts against Vietnam. He said:

''There are other activities which one can contemplate in the future. There was
not nor are we contemplating what I think your question is driving towards.''

But even if anything were contemplated, he added, ''I would not say it.'' Mr.
Holdridge said the American objective was to get Vietnam out of Cambodia, and
the Soviet Union out of Vietnam.  ''What we are trying to do, he said, ''is to
bring international pressure to bear on Vietnam, to increase its sense of
isolation, to make it understand that its policies are not in the interests of
Vietnam.''

He said the Carter Administration had ''toyed with'' the idea of normalizing
relations. The idea that such a move would make Vietnam ''less troublesome,''
does not ''make much sense''to Reagan policymakers, he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 18, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HAIG IN PHILIPPINES TO DISCUSS VIETNAMESE ACTIONS

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 498 words

DATELINE: MANILA, June 17


Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. arrived here today from Peking saying
that he had come to consult with Southeast Asian foreign ministers on ''the
dangerous activities of Vietnam with the encouragement and with the support of
the Soviet Union.''

In particular, the Secretary said in a statement at the airport, the ministers
will concentrate on the Cambodian problem and on next month's United Nations
conference on that subject.

Mr. Haig's statement gave satisfaction to the Foreign Ministers of the
Philippines, Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore and Indonesia, who opened the annual
conference of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations today. Reporters
traveling with Mr. Haig were told that as long as Vietnam, acting as a ''proxy''
of the Soviet Union, threatened its neighbors, the United States believed in
applying ''political, diplomatic and a full range of pressures'' on Hanoi.

Today's meeting was dominated by concern over Vietnam's opposition to demands
from the region's non-Communist nations that it withdraw the roughly 200,000
troops that have been occupying Cambodia since the Vietnamese Army overthrew the
regime of Prime Minister Pol Pot two and a half years ago, and for creation of a
United Nations peacekeeping force and the holding of United Nations-supervised
elections.

Conference Called by Waldheim

The five ministers denounced Vietnam's refusal to attend the United Nations
conference next month, which was called by Secretary General Kurt Waldheim under
a General Assembly resolution, as well as the Soviet Union's identical position.

They described the Cambodian problem as the introduction of the Chinese-Soviet
dispute into the Southeast Asian region. ''Asean has no wish to be drawn into
these conflicts,'' said Carlos P. Romulo, the Philippines Foreign Minister and
chairman of the conference, referring to the regional organization by its
initials.

''A Kampuchea occupied by Vietnam is a direct threat to the territorial
integrity of Thailand and the other Asean states,'' said Suppiyah Dhanabalan,
Singapore's Foreign Minister, using the name for Cambodia that is preferred by
both the pro-Hanoi Phnom Penh Government and the Pol Pot forces. He declared
that as long as Vietnam remains on its present course, it will continue to be
isolated.

Raising another problem originating in Vietnam, the Malaysian Foreign Minister,
Prince Ahmad Rithauddeen, sounded an alarm over recent increases in the numbers
of Vietnamese ''boat people'' arriving on Malaysian shores. He said the problem
had been aggravated by a reduced rate of departure of refugees to countries of
asylum. There has been a drop in acceptances by the United States as a result of
a sterner attitude by the Immigration and Naturalization Service.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 18, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HAIG IN CHINA: GAIN FOR U.S.;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 914 words

DATELINE: MANILA, June 17


The significance of the Reagan Administration's decision to allow the sale of
arms to China is seen by Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. and his aides
not so much in its military implications as in its being a political
demonstration that, a decade after the historic Nixon visit, China is now
treated as a friendly country, free from the discrimination applied against the
Soviet Union and its allies.

The arms decision, in the American view, is also a signal to the Soviet Union
that the Chinese-American alliance feared by the Russians, while not yet
politically feasible, is a step closer.

Yesterday, in a news conference in Peking, Mr. Haig said that, while the arms
decision might have provided the most dramatic news during the visit, it would
be wrong to expect any large-scale sales soon. Today, on his plane en route to
Manila, some of his aides said the more important development might turn out to
be an agreement for closer coordination with China in all fields against the
Soviet Union.

U.S. Expected to Gain

They said the United States stood to gain from a strategic Chinese-American
consensus and they expected closer coordination on such issues as Soviet
influence in Cambodia and Afghanistan.

There were hints of an exchange of intelligence information and organized
diplomatic campaigns. Reporters gained the impression that Americans and Chinese
might work together to aid the Afghan rebels against the Soviet-backed Kabul
Government and to lend more than political support to a proposed Cambodian rebel
united front against the Phnom Penh Government supported by Vietnam and the
Soviet Union.

The main hazard to this new era of cooperation remains the Taiwan issue. After
declining to discuss the problem while in Peking, officials were more open about
it today. They said the Chinese had been blunt in warning the Americans not to
provoke Peking by selling an advanced plane to Taiwan.

Decision on the FX Still Pending

According to the officials, Mr. Haig replied by saying that no decision had been
made regarding the sale of the advanced plane, known as the FX. He was reported
to have assured the Chinese that he understood their sensitivity about arms for
Taiwan and that, while the United States was committed to provide defensive
equipment, the matter would be handled prudently and responsibly.

This attitude seemed to put Mr. Haig on the side of those in the Administration
opposed to providing the new fighter plane. The final decision may come from the
political aides in the White House who may believe it important for the
President to be seen as making a grand gesture to Taiwan.

Mr. Reagan has strong sympathies for Taiwan, as he indicated in his news
conference yesterday, and Mr. Haig's aides were uncertain what influence the
Taiwan lobby might have on the President.

Progression from Carter Period

Despite the dramatic impact of the decision to sell arms to China, Mr. Haig and
his aides strove to persuade reporters that the matter should be seen as a
routine progression from attitudes in the last months of the Carter
Administration, when nonlethal equipment such as transport planes was authorized
for sale.

The officials were evidently eager to avoid giving the impression that the
United States would now arm China in a large way, thus alarming not only the
Soviet Union, but a number of Asian countries.  China does not have the funds to
make more than limited purchases, and the United States will not give the arms
away.

The issue of arms sales to China remains a source of debate in Washington. There
are many who contend that it would be better to pursue a more active dialogue
with the Russians and not to arouse them by appearing to surround them
militarily.

The Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan buttressed those who favor
selling arms to China. Not only did the intervention in late 1979 mark the end
of a constructive East-West dialogue, but it forced the United States to think
about the strategic concerns of countries bordering on the Soviet Union.

China, Pakistan and El Salvador

Since China has the longest common frontier and ties down a fourth of the Soviet
Army, it was not surprising that this anti-Soviet Administration made the
political decision to treat China in the same category as Pakistan and El
Salvador, which in Mr. Haig's view are also threatened by the Soviet Union
directly or through proxies.

The Chinese seem to have taken the Reagan Administration's anti-Soviet policies
with the attitude of true believers welcoming longtime skeptics into the fold.
In Mr. Haig, the Chinese have a Secretary of State who sees no particular virtue
in an arms control accord with the Soviet Union and who finds detente just as
distasteful a word as the Chinese do.

Most of the decisions announced by Mr. Haig yesterday were gestures by
Washington, but the Americans contend that the United States gains as much from
the relationship, if not more, than the Chinese. Other than through trade, the
United States is said to benefit from having a country with a billion people on
its side, able to pin down Soviet forces along the border and thus helping
forestall any crisis in Asia that might cause trouble for the United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 18, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

8 Veterans Plan Capital Protest

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 78 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 17


Eight Vietnam veterans on a hunger strike said today that they would pitch a
tent in a park across from the White House and stay until President Reagan met
with them. The White House said the President had no plans to see them. Twelve
supporters, including the mother of a serviceman killed in Vietnam, sat down on
the White House lawn in sympathy with the hunger strikers and were arrested by
the Secret Service.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 18, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1173 words


Indians in Nicaragua clash with regime A2
Survivors' children haunted by Nazi nightmare A3
Soviet trying Viktor Braikovsky, a Jewish activist A3
Argentina arrests 1,000 striking workers A4
Moroccans and Polisario trade blows at meeting in Kenya A5
U.S. may ''disengage'' from Namibia talks, Crocker warns A6
Haig in Manila to discuss Hanoi's activities in Southeast Asia A10
Soviet bristles at Reagan's re- marks A11
U.S. seeking international pres- sure against Vietnam A12
Haig's visit said to bolster Deng in party meetings A16
Iranian Parliament postpones de- bate on removal of Bani-Sadr A17

Government/Politics
Mayors shift course toward Rea- gan at parley A20
Promotion of infant formula in U.S. assailed at House hearing A26
New York seeking review of rejec- tion of tax on oil companies B2
Issues of police and schools delay New York City budget B3
Miss Holtzman weighing race for Brooklyn District Attorney B7
House panel votes to continue U.S.  loans to students B11

General
Around the Nation A20
Boy, 6, may be key witness in Coast abduction trial A21
Order to merge school districts near Pittsburgh brings battle A24
Jury selection to be key factor in Lennon murder trial B2
New York City's traffic agents complain of abuse B3

Industry/Labor
Miners' council approves accord on ending strike A22

Home Section
Home Celebrities celebrate the urban garden C1

How to take care of fine mahog- any C7
A premium on men in retirement life C1
Design Notebook: Winterthur: More museum than house C1
Hers C2
Helpful Hardware C2
Home Beat C3
A program that provides materi- als for arts groups C3
Home Improvement C4
American craft museum shows five artists at work C6
How a London firm designed its success C8
At Your Service: The specialists in architectural antiques C8
Calendar of events C9
Gardening C12

Arts/Entertainment
Grand design rules Royal Ballet's ''Sleeping Beauty'' C13
Writers' strike idles half the be- hind-the-scenes workers C15
Procter & Gamble's guidelines for TV called ''conservative'' C17
Jules Feiffer's ''Grownups'' is staged at Harvard C18
David McCullough's ''Mornings on Horseback'' is reviewed C21
Quintero stages O'Neill's ''Weld- ed'' C22
John J. Geoghegan resigns as chairman of publishing house C32
New York City to honor seven for contributions to arts C32

Obituaries
Harry Gilroy, former foreign cor- respondent for The Times B14
Dr. Jule G. Charney, leader in weather research B14
Roy J. Carver, Iowa multimillion- aire and philanthropist B14

Sports
Baseball negotiators fail to meet; owners support Grebey B15
For two Mets, it's back to the sandlots B15
Cosmos beat Diplomats, 2-1 B15
Practice over, golfers brace for the start of the Open B15
State racing told to justify need for legislative assistance B16
Dave Anderson on the U.S. Open and Merion's mystique B19

News Analysis
Hedrick Smith analyzes deepen- ing U.S.-Soviet chill A1
Bernard Gwertzman assesses new Chinese-American relationship A15
Adam Clymer on dangers in G.O.P's focus on social issues B12

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A30

There's no ducking a transit tax Mr. Watt's regulatory strip Iran's own mess
Topics: school gates / new digs Letters A30
William Safire: ''those upraised hands'' A31
Anthony Lewis: living by the sword A31
Deborah Cramer: preserve bar- rier beaches A31
Karin M. Lissakers: why Con- gress barred bribery abroad A31

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 18, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

STATE TO ASK SUPREME COURT TO REVIEW TRANSIT TAX CASE

BYLINE: By RICHARD J. MEISLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 739 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, June 17


Governor Carey's administration plans to ask the United States Supreme Court to
review a Federal appeals court decision that struck down a key section of the
state's gross-receipts tax on oil companies. The tax is a major source of funds
for public transportation.

High-ranking state officials, in disclosing the plan today, said the Governor
was also considering a new tax proposal that would eliminate the section of the
law that was declared unconstitutional in the ruling earlier this week. That
section prevented the oil companies from passing the tax on to consumers.

The Carey administration decided to appeal the Federal court ruling, which was
issued by the Temporary Emergency Court of Appeals in Washington on Monday, to
try to defer as long as possible the question of whether the state can keep the
$159.7 million that has already been collected, aides said. The tax would be
abolished 10 days after a stay of the decision, now in effect, was lifted.

The new levy under discussion is an income tax on oil company profits, Carey
aides said. Details were sketchy, but the aides said early plans called for the
tax to be applied to a company's profits based on the fraction of its sales that
occurred in New York State.

The tax would be designed to produce more than the $235 million a year that had
been projected from the challenged 2 percent grossreceipts tax, to help
compensate for the growing deficits of the Metropolitan Transportation
Authority.

Additional provisions, based on current state statutes on pricegouging, would be
intended to prevent New York consumers from being charged higher prices than
those in neighboring states as a result of the tax, Carey aides said.

The aides said other methods of replacing the gross-receipts tax were also under
review, but the aides did not say what the other options might be.

The proposal for a new tax got a cautious response from the spokesmen for key
legislative leaders. ''I can't say that we're actively considering that,'' said
Richard J. Roth, a spokesman for Senator Warren M. Anderson, Republican of
Binghamton, the majority leader. ''But that is obviously someting that you can't
completely discard when you think of what happened this week.''

He reiterated, however, that the Senate would not accept any tax plan that would
''include any pass-through, or anything that would be construed as being able to
passed through to everybody around the state.''

In the Democratic-led Assembly, a spokesman for Speaker Stanley Fink said he was
''very interested in seeing the specifics.'' ''It's certainly something that, if
they've done their homework and they have the details to support the thing and
can show the dollar return, sounds very good,'' said the spokesman, David
Langdon.  ''Barring that, we remain committed to a mix of taxes if they can't
come up with the details.''

The Legislature was continuing to work today on a $5.85 billion, five-year plan
to improve the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's equipment and physical
plant, and leaders were hopeful that the plan could be on the floor of the
Legislature next week.

There were these other actions in Albany today:

Agent Orange

Governor Carey signed a bill that will make it easier for Vietnam veterans to
recover damages for injuries caused by exposure to the toxic defoliant Agent
Orange. The law will permit veterans who believe they have suffered physical
injury from exposure to the substance, which was sprayed on Vietnamese crops and
jungles, to sue within two years after discovering the ailment.

Supermarket Pricing

Mr. Carey approved a four-year extension of the state's ''itempricing'' law,
which requires that virtually all goods sold in retail stores carry readable and
conspicuous prices. The bill is designed to prevent supermarkets from marking
the prices with only computer hashmarks.

Mitchell-Lama

The Governor signed a bill that will allow owners of cooperatives in the
Mitchell-Lama middle-income housing program to recover not only the actual price
for which they purchased the unit -the legal limit before approval of the new
measure - but also to receive a return on the monthly carrying charges they
paid.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Governor Carey with Assemblyman Richard Connors

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 19, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. DEFENDS REPORT ON SALVADOR ARMS

BYLINE: By JUAN de ONIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 770 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 18


The State Department today issued a detailed rebuttal of criticisms of an
official report on Communist arms shipments through Cuba and Nicaragua to El
Salvador's guerrillas.

The State Department's response to articles in The Wall Street Journal and The
Washington Post questioning the accuracy of the report drew new critical comment
from Representative Michael D.  Barnes, Democrat of Maryland, who is chairman of
the House foreign affairs subcommittee on inter-American affairs.

The ''white paper'' on El Salvador, issued Feb. 23, formed part of a major
diplomatic effort by the Reagan Administration accusing the Soviet Union and
Cuba of supporting left-wing subversion in Central America and justifying United
States military aid to the militarybacked civilian Government of El Salvador.

The State Department, reaffirming its findings of external Communist political
and arms support, based on captured guerrilla documents and other intelligence
information, said that a ''few points of misstated detail or ambiguous
formulations'' in the report did not invalidate the conclusions about Communist
intervention.

'Preconceived Views' Charged

Representative Barnes, whose subcommittee has conducted extensive hearings on
United States policy in El Salvador, said the State Department's defense of the
white paper showed that the Administration was trying ''to force the situation
in El Salvador to fit preconceived ideological views.''

''We face a local insurrection with deep historical roots that countries hostile
to us are seeking to exploit to their advantage,'' Mr. Barnes said in a
statement. ''The appropriate response is to join nearly every other interested
party in seeking a political settlement that will provide avenues of political
participation to those whose only recourse is guns. Our Government has yet to
commit itself to that approach.''

The Administration, which is providing El Salvador with $35 million in military
aid and more than $100 million in economic assistance this year, has said it is
backing a Salvadoran Government that has promised elections next year and is
redistributing land to thousands of peasants.

Military Emphasis Criticized

Critics of the Administration's policies contend that excessive emphasis on
military aid, without regard for widespread human rights violations by security
forces against dissidents, has discouraged mediation that could bring about a
cease-fire and a political settlement of the conflict, in which at least 12,000
people have been killed, mostly civilians.

The political controversy over United States policy in El Salvador, spurred by
church and human rights activists, is closely related to the criticisms of the
white paper, which has been faulted for inadequately documenting allegations of
Communist arms shipments and political consultations between the guerrillas and
Soviet or Cuban officials.

For instance, a dispute exists over the volume of arms that the Salvadoran
guerrillas actually received after a guerrilla leader, identified in the white
paper as Shafik Handal, secretary general of the Salvadoran Communist Party,
made an trip to Eastern Europe, Vietnam, Ethiopia and the Soviet Union in search
of arms.

Quantity of Weapons Disputed

The Washington Post said in an article on the documentation underlying the white
paper that it could find ''no concrete evidence to support'' the State
Department's contention that nearly 200 tons of weapons had been delivered to El
Salvador's guerrillas through Nicaragua and Cuba.

The State Department reply said the figure was ''an intelligence community
conclusion'' growing out of a captured guerrilla document, which said that on
Nov. 1, 1980, there were 109 tons of arms awaiting shipment in Nicaragua, and
the subsequent capture of arms, including American-made M-16 rifles traced by
serial numbers to weapons lost to the enemy in Vietnam before 1974.

The State Department said the estimate of 200 tons was borne out by ''the arms,
munitions and other equipment actually used by the guerrillas during their
January offensive.''

The State Department said that if that offensive failed, it was not for lack of
arms but because of ''the populace's failure to answer the guerrilla's call for
mass insurrection, the guerrillas inexperience with unfamiliar arms and tactics,
and the high morale and unity of the Government and its forces.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 19, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ASIAN PARLEY URGES CAMBODIAN SOLUTION

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 724 words

DATELINE: MANILA, June 18


The five non-Communist nations of Southeast Asia ended a conference tonight at
which they laid the groundwork for their approach to next month's meeting at the
United Nations on Vietnam's continuing occupation of Cambodia.

The Foreign Ministers of the Philippines, Thailand, Singapore, Indonesia and
Malaysia declared that a political settlement must be based on three initial
steps: the introduction of a United Nations peacekeeping force, the withdrawal
of the Vietnamese Army and the disarming of the warring Cambodian factions once
the Vietnamese have left.

A senior diplomat from one of the members of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations said that the five countries' strategy was to convince Vietnam that it
was in its interest to reach a political settlement that would make Cambodia
neutral and thus satisfy Hanoi's security concerns.

''This is not directed against the interests of Vietnam but the beginning of a
common effort to enhance the longer-term interests of the region,'' said Carlos
P. Romulo, Foreign Minister of the Philippines. ''Asean urges Vietnam to see the
light of reason,'' he said, referring to the regional organization by its
initials.

Soviet Bloc Opposes Parley

Vietnam, as well as the Soviet Union and its allies, have rejected the call for
the conference, which was issued by Secretary General Kurt Waldheim acting under
General Assembly resolutions calling for a Vietnamese pullout. Vietnam and the
Soviet bloc maintain that the Cambodian situation is ''irreversible.''

Despite the Foreign Ministers' effort to appeal to Hanoi's sense of reason,
sterner voices were also heard today and found a favorable echo among some of
the Southeast Asian officials and diplomats of friendly powers here to consult
with the Asians for the next two days.

A comment made in Peking on Tuesday by John H. Holdridge, Assistant Secretary of
State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, was a subject of discussion. Speaking
at the American Club in the Chinese capital, Mr. Holdridge declared: ''We will
seek, if we can, to find ways to increase the political, economic and, yes,
military pressures on Vietnam, working with others and in ways which will bring
about, we hope, some change in Hanoi's attitude toward the situation.''

Officials traveling with Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.  explained in
a briefing for correspondents that Mr. Holdridge made his comments in the belief
that he was speaking off the record and was, in any event, not announcing any
American military involvement.  The policy, they said, is to seek a political
solution to the Cambodian problem and in the process to favor any action
undertaken by others that would persuade Vietnam to withdraw its forces.

Haig Calls for 'Collective Strength'

Strong language was also heard from Mr. Haig, who visited the war graves at the
Manila American Cemetery today and in brief remarks called for ''sacrifice with
vigilance and unity to insure that we maintain collective strength to prevent
the forces of evil who would resort again to conflict from having their way.''

Later Mr. Haig visited President Ferdinand E. Marcos at Malacanan Palace and
delivered a letter from President Reagan congratulating Mr. Marcos on his
re-election Tuesday to a six-year term. The Secretary also congratulated Mr.
Marcos in a luncheon toast.

The American endorsement, as well as the announcement that Vice President Bush
would represent Mr. Reagan at Mr. Marcos's inauguration June 30, disappointed
Filipinos who had hoped that the United States would be more perfunctory in its
acknowledgement of the election result.

----

Vietnam Assails U.S.

BANGKOK, Thailand, June 18 (UPI) -Vietnam condemned the United States today for
indicating that it would support military efforts to force Hanoi to withdraw its
troops from Cambodia and charged that Washington was preparing to intervene in
the region.

The statement, broadcast by Hanoi radio and monitored in Bangkok, was in
response to the statement on Vietnam made by Assistant Secretary of State John
H. Holdridge in Peking.

Hanoi radio said, ''Mr. Holdridge's statement means that the United States in
collusion with China is preparing for intervention in Cambodia.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 19, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WEAPONS ARE NOT A POLICY

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 552 words


In one sense, the President is right. He needs no foreign affairs speech to
prove that his Administration has a distinctive tendency abroad. It is plainly
buying friends with weaponry, wherever it seems even loosely to help contain the
Soviet Union.

This week brought two high-risk additions to the list: an offer of arms to China
- Communist China -and a $3 billion aid package for Pakistan. These commitments
have their own eloquence. They argue that Washington considers Soviet military
expansion to be the greatest challenge abroad, and that American arms can deter
it and make the recipients reliable partners of the United States. It is
supply-side diplomacy, asking altogether too little in return.

There is no doubt that weapons buy influence, and an American reach into remote
societies. They may add to a regime's feelings of security. They certainly
benefit the American arms industry. And sometimes, if denied, they would be
eagerly supplied by other nations, notably France.

But the coin of weaponry has another side. Buying influence can also buy new
trouble, particularly if the transaction embroils the United States in regional
quarrels between, say, India and Pakistan, or associates it with a narrowly
based regime whose insecurity is as much domestic as external, like the Shah's
in Iran. Most dangerously, it can distort the priorities both of the receiving
nation, which might be much better served by economic aid, and of the United
States, which might have higher objectives, like containing the spread of
nuclear weapons.

All of these risks very clearly apply in Pakistan.  The case for military aid is
considerable. Given its fragile domestic structure, Pakistan is indeed
threatened by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan - if not by the Red Army then
by the crossborder traffic in armed Afghans. And President Zia has been tempted
to try appeasing Moscow. A major American arms deal may end his wobbling, and
with a side benefit: Pakistan's new long-range F-16's could allow it to build on
its military ties to Saudi Arabia and add a further source of support for the
House of Saud.

And perhaps the new American influence can indeed be used to discourage Pakistan
from following India in the construction of a nuclear bomb. Mr. Reagan implies
that his carrots will work better in this respect than Jimmy Carter's stick. It
would be comforting to know that he aims to try.

But to believe that the influence gained will be wisely used to promote some
thought-out American purposes, one has to overlook the new Administration's
manifest instincts in approaching authoritarian regimes. Whether weighing their
intrinsic strength or human rights offenses or need for weaponry, Mr. Reagan has
been a soft touch for any that proclaim themselves anti-Soviet.

Even more explicit conditions would only diminish the risks of his arms deals.
Nations like Pakistan and China can have independent military purposes - toward
India or Vietnam, for instance - that may not serve American interests. The
implications of these deals are so serious that Mr. Reagan does, after all, have
to spell out his purposes - and limits. Failing that, Congress has a duty to
examine not only the fine print in these deals but their relation to the wider
objectives that the United States intends to pursue.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 19, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SETTLEMENT SOUGHT IN I.B.M. CASE

BYLINE: By BARNABY J. FEDER

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 858 words


Moving to explore what the lead attorney of the International Business Machines
Corporation called the ''last clear chance'' to settle or narrow the
Government's monumental antitrust case against the computer giant, the two sides
agreed yesterday on procedures for settlement discussions in the United States
District Court here.

William F. Baxter, Assistant Attorney General in charge of the antitrust
division, appeared before Judge David N. Edelstein yesterday to say that he
would review the 12-year-old litigation in late July and August and confer with
I.B.M. attorneys in September to discuss the possibility of narrowing or
settling the case.

To accommodate the review, Judge Edelstein agreed to postpone deadlines for
filing post-trial pleadings and motions by two months.  The occasionally
acrimonious six-year-long trial of the case ended June 1.

The suit, filed on the Johnson Administration's last day in office, charged
I.B.M. with monopolizing the general-purpose computer market, consisting of
companies that sold computer hardware, software (programming) and services. The
suit sought to break I.B.M up into several smaller companies.

Mr. Baxter cautioned that the procedure for discussions announced yesterday
should not be taken as a sign that the case would be settled or even simplified.
''I can't possibly even have a view on that yet,'' he told Judge Edelstein.

I.B.M. Backs Procedure

Nevertheless, the procedure was heartily endorsed by Thomas Barr, I.B.M.'s lead
attorney, who had asked Judge Edelstein to invite the recently appointed Mr.
Baxter to involve himself in settlement negotiations.

Mr. Baxter said yesterday that it was ''an invitation I couldn't refuse.'' His
superior, Attorney General William French Smith, has excused himself from
involvement in the case because he had previously been associated with a law
firm connected with a civil suit against I.B.M.

Speaking in support of Mr. Baxter's request for the postponement of post-trial
filings and motions, Mr. Barr told Judge Edelstein, ''I am convinced that the
type of procedure he has proposed will lead us to the point where we can engage
in serious discussions.''

I.B.M. has been pressing the Government to review the case in light of recent
decisions in antitrust cases involving the American Telephone and Telegraph
Company and the Eastman Kodak Company. Those decisions, along with changes in
the computer industry since the complaint was filed in 1969, may have
substantially weakened the Government's position, I.B.M. believes.

The A.T.& T. and Kodak cases upheld pricing and marketing practices by the
defendants that I.B.M. says are comparable to its own. Both were decided by the
United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, the same court that would
hear any appeal of Judge Edelstein's decision.

The approach to settlement discussions developed by Mr. Baxter builds on a
post-trial procedure in which each side submits proposed findings of fact and
conclusions of law to the trial judge. Mr.  Baxter has instructed the
Government's trial team to forward its draft findings to him for each segment of
the case as it develops them this summer.

I.B.M. will be given a schedule of when Mr. Baxter is to receive the trial
team's assessment of each segment and will be invited to explain its views in
writing. Then, in September, Mr. Baxter will review the case on a
segment-by-segment basis with the trial team at a series of meetings to which
I.B.M. will be invited. Mr. Baxter expects the meetings to last into October.

Talks Failed Last Fall

The settlement discussions would not be the first in the litigation that Robert
H. Bork, a Yale University law professor, has termed ''the antitrust division's
Vietnam.'' Negotiations broke down last fall even though Sanford M. Litvack,
then Assistant Attorney General for antitrust, was known to be open-minded on
the possibility of settling the suit without dismembering I.B.M.

Hopes for the newest attempt to at least simplify the case are partly based on
the belief that Mr. Baxter and the I.B.M. lawyers have forged a better personal
relationship than existed between the lawyers who tried the case. A former
Stanford University law professor, Mr. Baxter has been praised for his knowledge
of both law and economics.

''He is the first person I know of in his position to take this much time to
really try to understand the case,'' Mr. Barr said in an interview following the
30-minute hearing before Judge Edelstein.  ''Mr. Litvack started to but ran out
of time when President Carter lost.''

In approving the motion to postpone the date for filing findings of fact to Dec.
1, post-trial motions to March 1, 1982, and final summation until March 9-11,
1982, Judge Edelstein repeated his willingness to offer ''guidance,
understanding and insight'' to settlement negotiations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 20, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

HAIG IS TOLD JAPAN REFUSES ARMS PLAN Sonoda

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 955 words

DATELINE: MANILA, June 19


The United States and Japan resumed high-level talks today after more than a
month of strains in their relationship but found they were still at serious odds
over Tokyo's refusal to increase its military spending enough to suit
Washington.

Japanese officials said that the new Foreign Minister, Sunao Sonoda, told
Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. that despite continuing American
pressure for a larger Japanese defense budget, Japan will be unable to meet the
American goals. The United States, at a meeting of experts last week in Hawaii,
outlined to Japan a military program that Japanese officials claim would lead to
a major increase over the already planned rise. No details were provided.

Mr. Sonoda, Japanese officials said, told Mr. Haig that when Joji Omura, the
head of Japan's Defense Agency, goes to Washington later this month for talks
with Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger, he will not be able to accept the
American goals and the United States should not expect him to.

In response, Japanese participants said, Mr. Haig said that Japan should
harmonize its system so that its military is given the same kind of emphasis as
its successful economy.

The Reagan Administration, which is carrynig out a major military spending
campaign of its own, has been pressing Japan to do more in this field. But
lately, despite an effort by Prime Minister Zenko Suzuki to paper over the
dispute on a trip to Washington last month, the Japanese have begun to speak
more firmly about the impossibility of meeting Washington's plans.

U.S. Tries to Avoid Public Dispute

Officials traveling with Mr. Haig have sought to avoid public controversy and in
their press briefing merely said that talks would be continuing within the
context of the communique issued when Mr.  Suzuki was in Washington.

In that statement, Mr. Suzuki pledged to do more in the way of military
spending, but Japanese officials said today that Mr. Sonoda reminded Mr. Haig
that Mr. Suzuki had also said he was severely limited by budgetary and
constitutional constraints in what he could promise. During the visit to
Washington, the Prime Minister's aides said Mr. Suzuki had told President Reagan
that Japan could not raise military spending much from $11 billion in the fiscal
1981 budget.

At the briefing, an official said that the United States had not told Japan in
advance that China would be eligible to buy arms from the United States. But he
added that the Reagan Administration would consult with Japan and other friendly
nations before making actual arms sales to Peking.

A Japanese official said that his Government was satisfied with the way the
United States had handled the question of selling arms to China.

Relations with Japan have been taut over a series of developments that followed
Mr. Suzuki's visit to Washington.  Because of a controversy over the use of the
word ''alliance'' to describe American-Japanese relations in a communique at the
time of the visit, Mr. Suzuki's Foreign Minister resigned.

Before the visit, an American submarine accidentally rammed and sank a Japanese
freighter and left the scene. Two crewmen died and the survivors spent 18 hours
in lifeboats before being rescued.

Then, a dispute arose over a statement by a former United States Ambassador to
Japan, Dr. Edwin O. Reischauer, that American planes and ships have carried
nuclear weapons as they transited Japan despite an ambiguous agreement not to
''introduce'' such weapons into Japan.

Because of these developments, Mr. Haig canceled plans to visit Japan on his way
to China and arranged instead to meet for the first time with Mr. Sonoda as they
both took part in consultations with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
which just ended its annual meeting here.

Haig Said to Criticize Ex-U.S. Envoy

American and Japanese officials said that the controversy over nuclear weapons
was not raised by either side, but that Mr. Haig did utter a scathing criticism
of Mr. Reischauer, who served as Ambassador to Tokyo in the early 1960's and has
just retired as a professor at Harvard.

Mr. Sonoda told Mr. Haig that although his predecessor, Masayoshi Ito, had to
resign in the dispute over the word ''alliance,'' this did not weaken ''the very
strong ties that exist between the United States and Japan.''

Mr. Haig reviewed for Mr. Sonoda, as he did in a series of meetings through the
day with the Foreign Ministers of Thailand, Malaysia and Indonesia, his trip to
China, which he described as having put Chinese-American relations on a ''new
plateau.''

Aides to Mr. Haig said they were not surprised or bothered by the commentary
from Peking today that again warned about the sale of arms to Taiwan. The aides
said the commentary was quite positive overall and that the statement was not
unexpected because China wants to keep the issue in Washington's consciousness.

The main political discussion at the meeting of the Southeast Asian nations
centered on laying the groundwork for the United Nations conference on Cambodia
to be held next month in New York. The group has decided to try to persuade
Vietnam to change its mind about boycotting the conference by lowering the tone
of its oral attacks on Vietnam for having invaded Cambodia and having installed
a puppet government.

American officials said that Mr. Haig assured the Foreign Ministers that the
United States would follow the lead of the group in trying to arrange a
political solution in Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Secretary of State Haig with Japanese Foreign
Minister Sunao

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 20, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Reagan Names a Chief For Strategic Air Unit

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 185 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 19


President Reagan has named Gen. Bennie L. Davis as commander in chief of the
Strategic Air Command, effective Aug. 1, the Pentagon announced today.

General Davis, now chief of the Air Training Command, will be the first chief of
the air command who did not serve in World War II. He will succeed Gen. Richard
H. Ellis, who will retire at the age of 62 after more than 35 years of service.

General Davis, 53, was born in McAlester, Okla., and graduated from West Point
in June 1950, the month the Korean War broke out. He was trained as a bomber
pilot and spent nearly 13 years in the Strategic Air Command before entering the
National War College in 1966.

He was later sent to Southeast Asia, where he flew more than 142 missions over
Vietnam. After the war he rose gradually in various staff and command posts and
became head of the Training Command in April 1979.

In his years at West Point General Davis was known as ''Mr.  Up-Front'' for two
of the football team's most celebrated running backs, Glenn Davis and Doc
Blanchard.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 20, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT WASHINGTON;
THE PRESS CLUB READMITS AN ANGRY YOUNG MAN, 73

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 806 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 19


I.F. Stone has rejoined the pack.  Mr. Stone, the premier loner and dedicated
maverick of American journalism, was welcomed back into the National Press Club
yesterday after having been ostracized by that section of the journalistic
Establishment for trying to take a black friend to lunch at the club 40 years
ago.

''This town was full of such cowards,'' Mr. Stone recalled of the McCarthyite
time 25 years ago when he pressed his grievance and could find only nine
supporters in the club of hundreds, when he needed 25.

He went over the facts of the incident not for personal retribution but to try
to find a historic lesson and caution in them.  ''These are not just the
peccadiloes of the past; these are the crimes of the future,'' the 73-year-old
reporter and leftist -wing social critic declared as an audience of more than
200 reporters and press agents sat and, it seemed at times, squirmed.

Taking Aim at Reagan

Under Mr. Stone's gaze, which is fading physically but hardly spiritually, the
audience flinched at some of his words, applauded others, but, most clearly,
listened very, very carefully to what he had to say. He gave them only a bit of
the forgiving nostalgia they might have wished for. Instead, he took the
opportunity to dwell on the present and the future and lambasted the new
Administration of President Reagan.

''He hasn't talked to someone who stood on a street corner and waited for a
public bus in one hell of a while,'' Mr. Stone said.  Contending that the
Administration was recycling the ''Red menace'' scare and attaining a type of
economic reform that shifts more than $100 billion of subsidy and economic
opportunity from the poor to the rich, Mr. Stone said that its success was made
easier by ''the drying-up of the reservoir of benevolence that exists in the
middle class and wealthy'' in noninflationary times.

''Unleash greed and everything will be hunky-dory,'' was Mr.  Stone's brief
analysis of the Reagan economic theory. He augmented this with lengthier
criticism and various budget figures that he read carefully and with some
difficulty from his reporter's notecards.

The View From Palm Springs

He punctuated his data with appeals framed with open sympathy for the poor -
''these dreadful little people who want to eat twice a day instead of just
once,'' he said, his tone mocking his imagining of the rich. ''How awful to
contemplate this from the summer homes at Palm Springs and Palm Beach and the
ranches of the people who form the entourage of Ronald Reagan.''

The audience laughed and applauded, but whether for the substance or audacity of
his remarks was unclear. Everything about the luncheon scene seemed to underline
the fact that while Mr. Stone had finally received a new membership card, he was
hardly back home.

In a town afflicted with expense-account journalism where the fork sometimes
seems mightier than the pen, the audience sat back sated from luncheon plates
while Mr. Stone stood up from his monk's fare of hot tea. To make the point even
clearer, he invited his own circle of ''fellow outcasts'' to join him on the
dais and thus such special publications as The Crisis and The Progressive got
featured introductions.

''I don't know why I'm here today, to tell you the truth,'' said Mr. Stone.
''Except I want to make a contribution to world peace by showing that even the
most inveterate enmities could be resolved without bloodshed.''

Mr. Stone left conventional journalism in 1952 and for 20 years single-handedly
put out his own weekly newspaper that became backdoor must reading for various
bureaucrats and editors and more than 70,000 other subscribers.

''I could never get in trouble with the Establishment by repeating the same damn
nonsense everybody else repeats,'' Mr. Stone declared, smiling proudly out at
this latest version of the Establishment.  ''How glad I've been over the years
not to have agreed about Castro.  How glad I've been not to have agreed about
Vietnam. How glad I've been not to have agreed about Joe McCarthy. My proudest
awards are my scars.''

Mr. Stone took care to praise the nation and the opportunity of the First
Amendment and to express his joy at 57 years in journalism. But then he got back
to basics, criticizing government and journalism, and telling of his recent odd
fashionability with the editors of the op-ed pages of the Establishment inviting
him to write. Recalling one editor who wanted him to rewrite, Mr. Stone suddenly
seemed himself, angry at the Establishment.

''He wanted me to regurgitate the same drivel!'' he complained.  ''Who the hell
does he think I am? Where does he think I came from?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of I. F. Stone

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 20, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ANSWERS TO QUIZ

SECTION: Section 1; Page 21, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 560 words


Questions appear on page 15.  1. A manufacturer is marketing a ceramic shade
shaped and painted like a goosehead on a lamp, often called a ''gooseneck'' lamp
because of its flexible arm.

2. President Abolhassan Bani-Sadr of Iran; a Parliamentary debate on his
impeachment.  3. President Reagan, countering an assertion by the Speaker of the
House, Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., that the President did not understand the working
class.

4. The Chicago Cubs.  5. The successful surgery, performed on a childless
40-year-old woman pregnant with twins, was undertaken to destroy an abnormal
fetus in order to increase the normal twin's chances for survival.

6. The survey indicates that the average American author earns less than $5,000
a year from his or her writing.  7. France. The Socialist Party is expected to
win a majority in the National Assembly, since it won by a landslide in the
first round of elections.

8. What is said to be the world's largest flag, measuring 411 by 211 feet, was
unfurled across a field to raise $650,000 for permanent rigging for the flag on
the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge.

9. Veterans of the Vietnam War who were exposed to the defoliant Agent Orange.
10. A remark by John McEnroe, who defeated Gottfried to win the championship,
that it is harder for men to play with a woman umpiring a match because it is
''harder to get upset with a woman umpire.''

11. A Federal judge, ruling that the portraits had been stolen by American
troops in 1945, ordered that they be surrendered for return to East Germany.

12. He fired several pistol blanks at Queen Elizabeth II as she rode a horse to
the Trooping of the Colors.  13. Prison conditions. The Court ruled that as long
as they do not violate a ''contemporary standard of decency,'' two prisoners can
share a cell designed for only one.

14. Prince Charles was there.  15. The number of housing units lost to
abandonment and demolition; the average number of people in each household.  16.
For the first time, Americans are drinking more wine than distilled liquor.  17.
China and Pakistan.  18. The Indiana Pacers, the Denver Nuggets and the Detroit
Pistons.  19. Procter & Gamble said it would not sponsor programs that contained
excessive sex, violence and profanity. The announcement was made two weeks
before the Coalition for Better Television was to announce a boycott of the
sponsors of the shows it deems most offensive.

20. Switzerland. The amendment was approved.  21 Potter Stewart; swing vote.

22. That Iraq had been stockpiling uranium for at least a year before Israeli
planes destroyed its French-built reactor on June 7.

23. It withdrew under the cloud of a Federal indictment in Nevada, accusing it
of criminal conspiracy.  24. Britain and Mexico.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 20, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

PEACE CORPS, AUTONOMY IN SIGHT, MARKING 20TH YEAR

BYLINE: By KAREN DE WITT, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 588 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 19


The Peace Corps began celebrating its 20th anniversary at a conference here
today, an event enhanced for many of the 2,000 participants by this week's
Senate approval of legislation to make the agency independent once again.

The Peace Corps lost its separate status in 1971 under the Nixon Administration
when it was made part of Action, an umbrella agency that includes the Foster
Grandparent Program, Volunteers in Service to America and the National Center
for Service Learning.

Under the Carter Administration the Peace Corps regained some of its autonomy,
but supporters of the agency continued to feel that under Action it suffered
from a lack of visibility and identity.

Wednesday's move to restore the corps' independent status was precipitated by
the Reagan Administration's appointment in March of Thomas W. Pauken to be
director of Action. Mr. Pauken served as a military intelligence officer in the
Vietnam war. The Peace Corps has a prohibition against having former
intelligence agents serve in the agency.

Fears Over Credibility

An aide to Senator Alan Cranston of California, who led Democrats in drafting
the legislation that would make the Peace Corps independent again, said there
was considerable sentiment that the agency could not operate with the necessary
credibility and independence from the Government if it were organizationally
under the direction of Mr. Pauken.

Wednesday's action came up as part of the State Department reauthorization and
was a defeat for Senate Republicans, who failed in a 45-to-52 vote to table the
move to make the Peace Corps autonomous. The motion was then passed by voice
vote. A similar motion has been approved by the House Foreign Affairs Committee
but has not yet reached the House floor.

Earlier this week, Loret M. Ruppe, director of the Peace Corps, said in an
interview that there was no need for the agency to be more independent than it
already was under Action. As a result of a Carter Administration executive
order, the agency became autonomous within Action, with its director reporting
directly to the President. Mrs. Ruppe, appointed to head the agency by President
Reagan in February, reports through the office of Edwin Meese 3d, counselor to
the President.

Shunning Intelligence Work

At the opening of the conference today, Mrs. Ruppe drew sustained applause from
the audience of former volunteers when she said that she was committed to a
strict policy of keeping the agency out of United States intelligence work in
foreign countries. She said that on May 15, she and Secretary of State Alexander
M. Haig Jr., sent a joint communique to all United States embassies reaffirming
the agency policy that overseas volunteers not engage in spy or intelligence
activities.

Although the agency is eliminating its operations in Korea, Colombia, Nicaragua
and the Ivory Coast because of budget restraints, Mrs. Ruppe said that the Peace
Corps, under the auspices of the United Nations Volunteer Agency, would soon
send its first volunteer to China. She said that eventually other volunteers
would be sent to China, which wants highly skilled workers.

The two-day conference, being held at Howard University, is focusing on American
international relations during the next decade and the role of development
abroad.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 21, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MCNAMARA WARNS U.S. OF PERILS IN REDUCING AID TO WORLD'S POOR Washington

BYLINE: By LEONARD SILK

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2570 words


Robert S. McNamara, who will retire at the end of this month after 13 years as
president of the World Bank, believes that United States economic and political
interests will be seriously injured if this country retreats further from its
earlier commitments to aid the poor people of the third world.

In an interview in his office in Washington last week, Mr.  McNamara said
Congress was ''on the verge of repudiating'' agreements made by the Carter
Administration, and endorsed by the Reagan Administration, to provide $658.3
million as the American contribution toward a general increase for the World
Bank and $3.2 billion over a period of three years to the sixth replenishment of
the International Development Association, the bank's ''soft loan'' affiliate
that lends to the poorest countries.

'We Are Bankrupt Today'

''With respect to I.D.A.,'' he said, ''essentially we are bankrupt today. At the
end of next week, the end of our fiscal year, we will have about $1 billion of
I.D.A. credits approved by our board, but for which we have no commitment
authority, and hence no authority to sign.''

And, he added, ''those are for projects that are to deal with these very basic
problems,'' of poverty and financial crisis, ''the solution to which will
benefit not only the developing countries but the United States.''

If the United States fails to support the development affiliate, Mr. McNamara
believes that other countries will exercise their right under a trigger clause
tied to the United States contribution and will withhold their own support, and
the affiliate will collapse.

Reduced to $1.9 Billion

While the Republican-dominated Senate, following the White House endorsement,
has voted the full authorization of $3.2 billion for the development affiliate,
the Democratic-led House Banking and Currency Committee has cut the
authorization to $1.9 billion.

But since there is actually little support for even the truncated bill among
Republicans or Democrats in either the House of Representatives or the Senate,
it may be excluded from the huge reconciliation bill that ultimately emerges
from Congress.

Thus, with just over a week to go in his present job, Mr. McNamara is worrying
and working down to the wire. At 65, he looks thin and fit; his eyes are bright
and restless behind silver-rimmed spectacles. He is deeply tanned, both from his
wanderings in the hot countries of the third world and from the tennis courts of
Washington; last week, however, he was wearing a surgical harness on his right
arm, having just broken his wrist playing tennis.

He still works in shirt-sleeves, donning a jacket only for picturetaking. He
seems as passionately involved in his job as he did when President Lyndon B.
Johnson accepted his resignation as Secretary of Defense in 1968 during the
Vietnam War and backed him for the presidency of the World Bank. This post has
always been held by an American, and Mr. McNamara's successor will be A.W.
Clausen, former chairman of the Bank of America, with headquarters in San
Francisco, which was also Mr. McNamara's hometown.

It was President Carter who named Mr. Clausen to the post, with Mr. Reagan's
concurrence, although the extent of the Reagan Administration's commitment to
the World Bank's aid program remains in doubt.

Roll-Call Vote Shunned

So unpopular is foreign aid with voters, at a time when even domestic food stamp
and welfare programs are being slashed, that the Democrats in Congress are loath
to support foreign aid on a roll-call vote, lest they be attacked by their
Republican rivals as ''big foreign aid spenders.''

The crucial factor that will determine whether the authorization of aid for the
World Bank Group dies in Congress or passes is likely to be the pressure exerted
by President Reagan and his lobbyists on Capitol Hill on behalf of the bill.

But the White House appears reluctant to fight hard for foreign aid, hoarding
its capital for what it regards as more urgent causes.  Some high Administration
officials, such as David A. Stockman, the director of the Office of Management
and Budget, are on record as favoring deep cuts in foreign aid, including funds
for the World Bank.

Wide-Ranging Talk

In last week's interview, Mr. McNamara talked extensively on a wide range of
economic, political and technical subjects, rarely consulting notes for data.
But the McNamara personality is not computerlike but a blend of precision and
emotion. He himself speaks of the need to combine ''a soft heart and a hard
head.''

His uppermost immediate concern is to rescue and strengthen United States
support for the World Bank. He said he believed American economic and political
interests would be seriously injured if this country retreated further from its
earlier commitments to aid the poor people of the third world, which appears
likely as Congress wrangles over economic legislation.

''The United States contribution to development assistance,'' he said, ''is
disgracefully low; it has declined in relation to national income 90 percent
since the Eisenhower Administration at a time when national income in real terms
per capita has more than doubled. It is today the 15th lowest among the major
industrial nations. There is no other large industrial nation providing as low a
proportion of its national income to development assistance; it is
disgraceful.''

'A Hard-Headed Look'

Mr. McNamara declined to criticize the Reagan Administration for not lending the
bank stronger support. ''The Administration,'' he said, ''is a reflection of the
views of the American people.'' But he said: ''I think our people have failed to
recognize in the last 10 or 20 years what has happened to the world they live
in. They do not understand how our nation should respond to these changes in
ways that address its national interest. I am not talking about 'dogoodism' now.
I am talking about taking a hard-headed look at where the nation's interests
lie.''

Mr. McNamara said that if the United States slashed its support for poor
countries, the country would be penalized in the following areas:

- Inflation, because the World Bank finances production of essential
commodities, the scarcity of which could raise world prices - foodstuffs and
energy, for example.

- Economic growth, because third world countries absorb roughly a third of
United States exports. If lack of financial support erodes this market, domestic
production and employment could be badly hurt.

- Strategic interest, because lower rates of economic and social advance in the
developing countries are almost certain to bring political instability damaging
to the United States, adding to its military costs and adversely affecting its
national security.

Mr. McNamara, who will leave the World Bank on July 1, is in a sense the last of
the generation of post-World War II crusaders for a better world order to hold
high public office. It was a group who combined a militant anti-Communism with a
concern for world economic development.

Commissioned Pentagon Papers

Although Vietnam was for a time called ''McNamara's War'' - it was he who
commissioned the Pentagon Papers, which explored the origins of the war -he
declined in the interview to give his present views on the American involvement
in Vietnam, saying: ''I have not talked about my period in Vietnam, and I am not
going to start today. I may some time, but not while I am in this institution.
It is inappropriate for an international civil servant to do that.''

With both the cold war and the drive for social and economic reform at home and
abroad in their background, Mr. McNamara and others like him have been attacked
from the left as self-interested capitalists pretending to be socially
responsible and from the right as socialists undermining the free-enterprise
system.

Mr. McNamara considers such charges to be baseless and ignorant as applied to
himself and the institution he has headed. When asked about the assertion made
by some on both the right and the left that the World Bank is supported by
American commercial bankers as a kind of bailout operation for banks that lent
too heavily to the developing countries, Mr. McNamara responded:

''On the contrary, it's supported by individuals in this country who understand
that our own economy will suffer, not the banks. The banks are intelligently
managed; their loans to developing countries are a relatively small percentage
of their total loans outstanding; they have appropriate reserves in relation to
them; they are concentrated in some of the stronger developing countries.
Brazil, for example, is a very rich country, even if it does at times have
liquidity problems. Over the long run the banks aren't going to lose a lot of
money on Brazil.

''So the charge that this bank is moving in ways that are designed to bail out
U.S. commercial banks is absurd. This bank is, however, moving in ways that are
consistent with the broad economic interests of the U.S. And if this bank is
prevented from continuing to move in those ways, not only will the developing
countries be hurt, and particularly the poorest people in those countries, but
the U.S.  economy will be hurt, and the American people will be hurt.''

Criticism Rejected Harshly

Mr. McNamara rejects harshly the criticism, offered by a host of conservatives,
including some within the Administration, that the World Bank is undermining
private enterprise and promoting socialism. He called the accusation an extreme
hindrance to the bank's operations, especially in the United States.

''They are ignorant,'' Mr. McNamara said of the conservative critics. ''They are
ignorant of what the bank is doing. The bank in a very real sense is the largest
single source of financing of private enterprise in the developing world,
without qualification.''

Mr. McNamara noted, for instance, that more than 30 percent of the bank's
financing went to agriculture, almost all of it for financing individual,
private farmers. He said the bank urges developing countries to increase their
efficiency by relying on the price system to direct resources and to stop
subsidizing the urban centers at the expense of the poor rural people. ''We
consistently urge real interest rates,'' he added, ''that is, avoidance of
interest subsidies, in order to stimulate savings and assure a directing of
capital investment to situations where there will be a real rate of return. We
consistently advise against, and as a matter of fact we'll refuse to loan for
investment in utilities, public utilities, electric companies, water companies,
railroads where the tariffs, the prices, are not set to yield profits, real
rates of return so that they are self-sustaining investments.''

He feels that the bank has made great strides in its attack on absolute poverty.
The most obvious accomplishment of the bank under his administration, he said,
had been to increase its annual commitments of loans from $1 billion in 1968 to
$13 billion in the fiscal year ending June 30, which has meant, after allowing
for inflation, quadrupling or quintupling its real lending. But the most
important accomplishment, he feels, was learning to focus resources and
technical assistance on the poor, raising their productivity and hence their
output and real income.

With the statistical exactness for which he has long been noted, first as a
Harvard Business School professor, then as a statistical controller in the
United States Air Force during World War II and as president of the Ford Motor
Company, Mr. McNamara reeled off the rates of return from investments in
antipoverty programs in Bangladesh, Pakistan, Burundi and other poor countries.
These rates of return ranged as high as 50 percent and averaged 19 to 20 percent
on invested capital.

Greatest Accomplishment

This, he feels, was his greatest accomplishment: the discovery that the bank
could help the poor and society simultaneously.  It is with some regret that Mr.
McNamara will leave his post at the World Bank. ''I don't want to quit yet,
either,'' Mr. McNamara said.  To that end, he has already accepted a number of
appointments to the boards of nonprofit institutions, including the Brookings
Institution, the Ford Foundation, the Urban Institute and the California
Institute of Technology, as well as to the boards of such corporations as Royal
Dutch/Shell, Corning Glass and The Washington Post.

''I am going to divide my time roughly 50-50 between the public and the private
sectors,'' he added. ''I hope to be active in continuing to advise both our own
Government and other governments in fields that I may have some competence in. I
am not wealthy, but I don't have to choose my activities on the basis of
compensation, and I don't care about status or prestige. I am willing to do
anything that will be of assistance to either our Government or other
governments.  I do believe in public service, I am interested in it, excited
about it. Foreign governments have asked me to provide advice and I will be
doing so. And I am not going to accept compensation. I'm just going to do it
when I feel like it, and when it will be helpful.''

Disappointments Cited

Has he any disappointments as he looks back over his performance as president of
the World Bank?  He said he had, among them ''the deferral of certain actions
that I had hoped to initiate.'' One of them would have been a ratio change - a
higher proportion of lending relative to the bank's capital.  Another, he added,
'' would have been an expansion of our research program, a very substantial
expansion, because I think that through that we would increase the world's
understanding of the development program and how to accelerate it, with
advantage to all parties.''

He said his greatest disappointment was that ''we and others have failed to
inform the people of the industrial countries of the nature and magnitude of the
changes in the relationships among nations, economically and politically, over
the last decade'' - especially their greater interdependence.

''For that reason,'' he said, ''we have failed to show them where their own
narrow interests lie. We have failed to convince them that there is a plus-sum
game as part of which they can move to assist the developing countries to
achieve economic and social advance with benefits to both the developing and
industrialized countries.''

''Now that is my strong belief,'' he added. ''It is a belief I think is shared
by most of my associates, and by many others outside the institution, and it is
that failure which I think is leading to less than rational action by many of
the nations, particularly the United States.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Robert S. McNamara during interview at World
Bank in

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 21, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HAIG CONDEMNS VIETNAM FOR OCCUPATION OF CAMBODIA

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 618 words

DATELINE: MANILA, June 20


Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. joined five of the non-Communist
nations of Southeast Asia today in condemning Vietnam over its occupation of
Cambodia and did so in terms far stronger than Vietnam's neighbors.

''The United States will not normalize relations with a Vietnam that occupies
Kampuchea and remains a source of trouble to the entire region,'' Mr. Haig said,
addressing the Foreign Ministers of the Philippines, Thailand, Indonesia,
Malaysia and Singapore.

Kampuchea is the name that the Communist regimes in Cambodia have demanded
foreigners use in reference to their country. This name has always been used in
Cambodian.

''We will continue,'' Mr. Haig said, ''to question seriously any economic
assistance to Vietnam, whatever the source, so long as Vietnam continues to
squander its scarce resources for aggressive purposes.''

Hanoi Said to Cause Instability

Amplifying on his statements at a news conference, the Secretary said in an icy
tone and with vigorous gestures, ''The United States sees no great value - in
fact we see just the opposite - in letting them have their cake and eat it,
too.''

Mr. Haig accused the Hanoi Government of unwillingness to ''convert its military
machine into more productive endeavors.'' This, he said, ''perverts the
aspirations of its people and generates instability in this region.''

To counter what he called threats by the Soviet Union and its ''proxies,'' the
Secretary reiterated the United States' determination to stand by its security
commitments to Thailand and the Philippines.

Mr. Haig's address and subsequent comments were made on the last day of a
conference of the five foreign ministers of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, their colleagues from the United States, Japan, Canada and Australia,
and the Dutch Foreign Minister representing the European Common Market.

The Secretary of State left Manila tonight for Wellington, New Zealand, for
talks with New Zealand and Australia in the Anzus Treaty framework.

Mr. Haig's sharp tone, if not his purpose, contrasted with the communique issued
Thursday by the five Southeast Asian ministers. In an effort to persuade Hanoi
to reverse its decision not to attend a conference on the Cambodian conflict to
be held next month under United Nations auspices, the Southeast Asian leaders
stressed the benefits in regional and international acceptability that might
result from a more conciliatory Vietnamese attitude.

Strategy Disclosed by Japanese

In a surprise move, the Japanese Foreign Minister, Sunao Sonoda, disclosed what
amounts to a negotiating strategy for the Southeast Asian alliance in a public
speech in the meeting with his five colleagues. He put forward a detailed plan
for step-by-step Vietnamese withdrawal, introduction of an international
peacekeeping force, elections under United Nations auspices and repatriation of
refugees.

The plan had been worked out over many months by the Southeast Asians, together
with their friends, but had not been made public in the hope of persuading
nonaligned nations to support it. Its disclosure at a meeting with Japan and the
Western nations is believed by diplomats to diminish its chances. ''I feel
upstaged and upset,'' a senior Asian diplomat said.

At a news conference of all the ministers, most of the questions were addressed
to Mr. Haig. The Secretary was at pains to assure Asians that no arms sales to
China were imminent despite his disclosure in Peking that the ban on such sales
had been lifted.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 21, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ART BY INMATES FROM NEW YORK SHOWN IN SOUTH

BYLINE: By LYNN ROSELLINI, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 33, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 719 words

DATELINE: ALEXANDRIA, Va. June 19


Rikers Island is not exactly the kind of place where men's creative souls soar.
Yet inmates there and at other New York City prisons have produced an impressive
array of paintings, drawings and collages that will be shown at the Firebird
Gallery on the Potomac waterfront here beginning Sunday.

''It breaks the idea of what inmates are all about - this idea of savages and
animals locked up,'' said Jerome Miller, the gallery director, who was unpacking
the canvases in the sun-streaked rooms the other day.

The 50 artworks were produced by inmates of the Rikers Island complex and the
Brooklyn, Bronx and Queens houses of detention, working in classes sponsored by
three New York prison art projects.  The purpose of these projects is to serve
as an outlet for tension, allowing inmates - who must cope with the daily
violence of prison life - to express their feelings in an acceptable manner.

'Incredibly Chaotic Situations'

''Our main goal is to offer a place in the jail where a little bit of order,
sanity and conceptual thinking can go on,'' explained Bill Polyn, field
coordinator for Facing Time, one of the prison art projects that furnished works
for the show.

''These are incredibly chaotic situations,'' he said. ''A man may be confronted
in the morning with someone two cells away who has hung himself. If he can sit
down and focus and do some creative things away from the madness around him,
that will help him.''

Not surprisingly, much of the art in the 40-day Firebird show has an idyllic,
wishful quality. One oil painting, done by a drugaddicted Vietnam veteran jailed
for robbery, shows a white dove emerging from behind black bars against a bright
blue background.

Another painting, done by a former drug dealer, depicts a brightly colored
landscape with blue sky, an orange house and a patch of daisies.

Dali Painting on View

In addition to works by inmates, the Firebird show will include the $75,000
''Crucifixion,'' by Salvador Dali. The painting, a gift to Rikers Island inmates
from Mr. Dali in 1965, was recently rediscovered hanging in a prison dining
hall.

The artworks were brought to the Washington area last week for the same reason
that has brought many special-interest groups here lately: money. Most of the
paintings are for sale, ranging in price from $75 to $200, with proceeds divided
between the artists and the nonprofit gallery. But more important, supporters of
the financially strapped prison arts programs hope the show might attract some
Federal or corporate financial support.

''If we don't get any funding in three months, we'll have to close,'' Mr. Miller
said, alluding to his gallery. Mr. Miller is president of the National Center on
Institutions and Alternatives, an organization that deals with issues related to
those in prisons, mental hospitals, reform schools and other institutions.

Federal Grant Running Out

The Firebird Gallery, which is a project of the center, was set up in March with
a $10,000 grant from the National Endowment for the Arts. But Mr. Miller said
that the money would run out at the end of next month, and he feels that, at a
time of budget-cutting by the Reagan Administration, it would be fruitless to
reapply for another grant.

The New York arts projects involved in the show - Facing Time, the Find Arts
Workshop and a program run by Henrietta Carter, a volunteer teacher - depend in
varying degrees on private and government financing, some of which is
threatened. Find Arts, for instance, operates on a $129,000 grant from the Law
Enforcement Assistance Administration that will run out in August.

Much of the inmates' work is classic ''prison art'' - idealized portraits of
beautiful girls - which can be traded to other inmates for candy or cigarettes.
But some inmates also produce creative art, and it is largely this type that Mr.
Miller has gathered for this show.

''It's important that people don't look at it as an arts and crafts show and
think, 'Isn't it nice what those freaks have done,' '' said Mr. Miller. ''We
want it to be able to stand on its own merits.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 21, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

3 NEW YORKERS ACCUSED OF BUYING ARMS FOR I.R.A.

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 40, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 632 words


Three New York men who reportedly told undercover agents they were interested in
''social justice'' in Northern Ireland were arrested by Federal authorities
Friday night and yesterday morning on charges of supplying weapons to the Irish
Republican Army.

Two of the men - Thomas Falvey, a 56-year-old laborer, of 90-29 187th Place,
Hollis, Queens, and George Harrison, a 67-year-old security guard, of 465 East
Ninth Street, Brooklyn - were seized outside Mr. Falvey's home Friday evening,
hours after they had paid an undercover agent of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation $16,000 for 42 automatic rifles, submachine guns and handguns.
Both were born in Ireland, the F.B.I. said.

The third man, Patrick Mullin, a 43-year-old telephone company employee, was
taken into custody at 7:40 A.M. yesterday at his home at 575 Ridgewood Avenue,
Brooklyn, where the authorities found seven automatic rifles similar to the
M-16's used in Vietnam, a machine pistol, a pre-World War II 20-millimeter
cannon and a flame thrower.

''All of these weapons were to be delivered to the Irish Republican Army in
Ireland for use in the continuing acts of terrorism by the I.R.A. in that
country,'' said Donald J. McGorty, the agent in charge of the F.B.I. division
charged with investigating international terrorism.

At a news conference at F.B.I. headquarters in lower Manhattan, where some of
the weapons were displayed, Mr. McGorty said none of the men arrested were
members of any of the Irish-American organizations that have been sympathetic to
the fight against the British in Northern Ireland.

But he said Mr. Falvey and Mr. Harrison had been seen at demonstrations in New
York backing the hunger strikers at the Maze prison in Belfast and at the
anti-British protest at Lincoln Center last week when Prince Charles attended a
performance of the Royal Ballet.

After the three men were arrested, Mr. McGorty said, they told authorities that
they had begun obtaining weapons for the Irish Republican Army for reasons of
''social justice, not money.''

All three were arraigned in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, then released on
$100,000 bail each.  Mr. McGorty, who said the F.B.I. had worked jointly with
Customs agents in the investigation, said that while he was certain the men
intended to export the weapons, he could not say precisely how the shipping was
to have been done.

Mr. McCorty said the F.B.I. began to focus on the three men after it had learned
that they were particularly interested in obtaining ammunition for the
20-millimeter cannon recovered in Mr. Mullin's basement.

After delivering 24 rounds of ammunition for the cannon, which Mr.  McCorty said
was to be ''used to shoot down British helicopters,'' undercover agents offered
to provide the assortment of 42 weapons for $16,000.

Mr. McCorty said an agent delivered the arms to Mr. Falvey's garage at 9:30 P.M.
Friday and left with the $16,000. At 10:50 P.M., he said, several agents ''saw
Falvey and Harrison leaving with a bag, and that's when they were arrested.''

When the agents arrested Mr. Mullin the next morning, Mr. McGorty said, they
found several thousand rounds of ammunition, apparently for small arms, and
''numerous rifle parts,'' as well as the other weapons.

Mr. McCorty said the men faced up to 10 years in prison and fines of up to
$10,000, for violation of firearms statutes.  He said the agents had been unable
to determine where Mr. Falvey and Mr. Harrison had obtained the money to buy the
weaponsk, whose serial numbers had been obliterated.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 21, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Richard H. Mansfield 3d Weds Jacqueline Snelling

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 53, Column 2; Society Desk

LENGTH: 130 words


Jacqueline Taylor Snelling and Richard H. Mansfield 3d were married yesterday at
Trinity Episcopal Church in Shelburne, Vt. The Rev. Charles R.Lawrence performed
the ceremony.

The bride is a daughter of Gov. Richard A. Snelling of Vermont and Barbara W.
Snelling, vice president of the University of Vermont.  The bridegroom is a son
of Mary Louise Mansfield of Bethesda, Md., and the late Mr. Mansfield Jr.

Mrs. Mansfield is a special assistant to William Clohan, Under Secretary of
Education in Washington, where her husband is an associate with the law firm of
Webster, Chamberlain & Bean. He served as a captain with the Marine Corps in
Vietnam and was awarded two Purple Hearts.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 21, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SECRETARY HAID PLAYS THE CHINA CARD IN SPADES

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 388 words


In foreign affairs, the compass of the Reagan Administration is fixed almost
exclusively along one axis: East-West. The spires of the Kremlin are what make
the needle in Washington flutter. The same is true in Peking. There, more
closely attuning the policies of both nations, Alexander M. Haig Jr. last week
pronounced China a ''friendly nation with which the United States is not allied
but with which it shares many interests.''

Underlining that declaration, the Secretary of State announced a major policy
change under which the United States will be prepared to sell China arms on a
case-by-case basis. Even more startling was the disclosure that since American
listening stations in Iran were overrun 1979, China and the United States have
been jointly running a new station in western China to monitor Soviet missile
tests.

The Carter Administration began redrawing what had been a triangular
relationship among Washington, Peking and Moscow to reflect its greater alarm at
Soviet advances in the third world. But it held back from open military
cooperation with China while it had hope for a strategic arms limitation
agreement with the Soviet Union.

SALT is no such constraint for the Reagan Administration. In Asia, it joins
China in opposition to the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan and the occupation
of Cambodia by the Russians' Vietnamese allies.  However, Mr. Haig's sharp
anti-Hanoi remarks to a meeting of non-Communist Southeast Asian countries in
Manila last week -he called Hanoi's behavior the greatest threat to the region -
upset diplomats who have been urging Vietnam not to boycott a United Nations
conference on Cambodia next month. Other critics of the new American line fear
that the United States, in playing the China card, is throwing away a deterrent
to a Soviet invasion of Poland.

Mr. Haig stressed that arm sales to China were not imminent, noting that he did
not sense in China ''an appetite for American arms.'' A greater impediment to
growing security ties could be weapon sales to Taiwan, but that issue was
apparently finessed last week. Delighted by the new American assessment of the
Soviet threat, the Chinese were ''all hearts and flowers,'' an American official
said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Deputy Chairman Deng Xiaoping with Secretary of
State Alexander M Haig Jr in Peking

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 21, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Ideas & Trends in Summary;
AGENT ORANGE VETS MOVE UP THE LINE

BYLINE: By Eva Hoffman and Margot Slade

SECTION: Section 4; Page 8, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 292 words


If good things come to those who wait, then two beleaguered groups of veterans
may have waited long enough. Following quickly in the footsteps of the House,
the Senate last week overwhelmingly approved Federally financed medical
treatment for veterans exposed to the defoliant Agent Orange in Vietnam.
Veterans exposed to radiation in nuclear weapons tests conducted in the late
1940's and 1950's will also receive medical care. Some 245,000 veterans
participated in those tests; the number of Agent Orange victims is uncertain.

The Senate's 98-to-0 vote ordered the Veterans Administration to ''adjust the
manner'' in which its health care resources are used, that is, to give priority
to Agent Orange and radiation victims. The agency has been treating these former
soldiers, but on a low-priority basis because their problems were not considered
service-related. The Senate measure, its sponsors said, would involve no
additional appropriations, no new programs or treatment facilities. The
veterans' agency said that since veterans' families in general are not treated
in V.A. facilities, without special legislation the dependents of Agent Orange
victims will not benefit from the Senate action.

Vietnam veterans have long charged that exposure to Agent Orange has resulted in
illnesses such as cancer, skin rashes and liver disorders and has caused birth
defects among their offspring. The Government, contending that there is no such
documented evidence, has refused them disability benefits. As a result, veterans
and their families are seeking compensation through product liability lawsuits
against the defoliant's manufacturers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 21, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

OUTLASTING ROCK

SECTION: Section 6; Page 16, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 7284 words


Sidney Zion, whose book, ''Read All About It!'' will be published this winter,
has been a music fan all his life. By Sidney Zion etween the rock and the hard
disco, the melody began to slip back in. A piano bar here, a big band there, a
touch of Gershwin, a spot of Kern. In gay places and out-of-the-way places.
Exuberant, but a little wary, like a gambler with a short bankroll. When was it,
two years ago, three?

Well, look at it now.  Big bands swinging coast to coast. Jazz flourishing in
the cities, waking up on the college campuses, born again in the high schools.
Singers we haven't heard from in years belting out the old haymakers, crooning
the old smoothies. Piano bars, sassy and smart, popping up all over the country.
Hotel dances and dancing cheek-to-cheek at chic parties. Kids jitterbugging.

And the theater. Consider the theater.  David Merrick rolls for the sky with
50-year-old evergreens by Harry Warren and Al Dubin and turns the movie musical
''42d Street'' into such a jackpot that to meet the demand - at a $50 top - he
moves the show to the biggest available house on Broadway. And then it wins a
Tony Award for best musical of the year.

The Duke Ellington songbook is lavishly made into ''Sophisticated Ladies,'' and
it's instant boffo.  Lena Horne, all by herself, is selling out to audiences
across all generation lines. She, too, receives a Tony.  ''Sugar Babies,'' a
tribute to burlesque and the old standards of Jimmy McHugh, is a great big hit.
''Ain't Misbehavin','' a salute to Fats Waller, has been running forever. Ditto
''One Mo' Time,'' a celebration of black vaudeville.  And ''A Day in Hollywood
... ,'' featuring songs by the illustrious Richard Whiting, continues to attract
large audiences.

New productions of classic musicals score on Broadway and on the road, while
others wait in the wings or, like ''My Fair Lady,'' march majestically through
the country on the way to New York.

And disc jockeys are spinning Sinatra, Ella, Bennett, Benny. Radio stations -
752 of them - are playing big-band music, according to a list compiled by Ray
Anthony, the head of Big Band 80's, an organization of band leaders across the
country. A New York station switched a year ago to 24 hours of ''the sounds that
swing,'' and radio stations in big cities across the country are following suit.
Booming cottage industries are selling packages of old music to former rock
stations. And young rock and country singers are beginning to record 1940's
tunes.

Suddenly, it appears, the Return of Style is at hand. Songs that swing or carry
the torch or conjure up dinner dates and flowers. Wit, charm, savvy, romance.
Music by Rodgers, lyrics by Hart. A blue piano, a swaggering trumpet. Frank
Sinatra serving orange juice for one. Ella Fitzgerald scatting with the Basie
band. Bobby Short vainly fighting the old ennui. Fred Astaire doing anything at
all.

Style.  For nearly three decades the music has been keyed to the young, one Hot
Tuna after another Who. The only wonder was that no rock group called itself
Gresham's Law.

So a question begs about this resurgence. Is it the real thing or simply a bash?
In an effort to find out, I spent the last year talking with people in all
corners of the entertainment world. I asked: Will the giant record companies
continue to ignore the adult audience that never went for rock-and-roll? Will
radio market this audience in a serious way? Will kids be exposed to the great
songwriters and their troubadors? To Irving Berlin, Cole Porter, Rodgers and
Hart, Schwartz and Dietz, Harold Arlen, E.Y. Harburg, Johnny Mercer, Jimmy Van
Heusen, Sammy Cahn, Burton Lane, Frank Loesser, Jule Styne? To Tony Bennett,
Mabel Mercer, Margaret Whiting, Mel Torme, Rosemary Clooney, Betty Carter,
George Shearing, Sylvia Syms, Anita Ellis, Woody Herman?

Will young songwriters be encouraged to write the kind of melody and
sophisticated lyrics that were the signature of 1930's and 40's music? Can they
do it? And what about the singers and musicians, young and future? Will they tap
the treasury and build on it or just find another way to spell ''new wave''?

These questions touched sensitive nerves, drawing contentious, often fiery
responses. Something was happening, and it quickly became clear that more than
fortunes were involved. I felt like a cop who happens on an accident and begins
to suspect a crime. What's everybody so upset about?

Drugs, sex, the breakdown of the family, the Vietnam War, Watergate -from these
words alone one can reconstruct a quartercentury of culture shock. Rock-and-roll
music fits neatly into this pantheon.

Everything is interconnected, of course. But in the past we had drugs, we had
sex, we had divorce, we had wars, we had scandals and, as lagniappe, we had a
Great Depression. What we didn't have was rock-and-roll or anything else that so
clearly and dramatically delineated a generation gap.

The American popular song has undergone significant change since it came into
its own as a native music around the turn of the century.  But the changes were
gradual, the links strong - melodically, rhythmically, lyrically. People born on
the lip of World War II - even during the war - connected naturally with
everything from ragtime to pop, from the waltz to the Lindy hop.

''Bill Bailey'' was written in 1902; ''Alexander's Ragtime Band'' in 1911; ''St.
Louis Blues'' in 1914, ''Poor Butterfly'' in 1916, ''For Me and My Gal'' in
1917; ''After You've Gone'' in 1918, ''There'll Be Some Changes Made'' in 1920.

Kids were singing these songs and their sophisticated offspring - written by
Harold Arlen & Co., played by Benny Goodman & Co., sung by Frank Sinatra & Co. -
and dancing to them at high-school proms as late as the mid-1950's.

Within a couple of years, the younger brothers and sisters of these kids
couldn't hear that music. It was still in the air, but it was Swahili to them.
They heard Bill Haley, Little Richard, Elvis Presley, Chuck Berry and, later,
the Beatles, the Rolling Stones, the Jeffer-
son Airplane, the Grateful Dead, The Clash. It didn't seem to matter if a young
person was on drugs or not, if he was sexually active or not, if his parents
were married or not - or even if he was fighting in Vietnam or participating in
an antiwar demonstration - the music was still rock-and-roll.

While not without roots in blues, jazz and country music, the harsh beat, the
often angry - sometimes even violent - lyrics and the attendant electronic
revolution served to obliterate the past to all but the cognoscenti. (There was
always country-western music, of course. But it has its own history and its own
evolution and wasn't really a part of the musical generation gap.)

Most people saw it - and still see it -as a grass-roots revolution, a
spontaneous breakaway by teen-agers and preteen-agers looking for their own kind
of music. The radio stations and record companies, according to this view,
noticed that a giant generation was developing its own kind of music and seized
the opportunity to expand their profits to unheard-of limits.

There were those who disagreed, who strongly believed that it was all a hype -
an effort to sell a lower form of music to impressionable adolescents. But as
the rock kept rolling, the thought seemed to have disappeared, swept away in the
euphoria (or disgust) that marked the Era of the Kids. By the late 1960's, when
''Never trust anybody over 30'' became the slogan of a generation, the
popular-music business had decided that nobody over 30 existed.  Whether
grass-roots or hype, it was a revolution for fair. In its wake, the great
prerock treasury of American song was left for dead.

A few of the once-ubiquitous troubadors survived and even continued to wax rich.
Some of the household names made occasional television specials. Others, less
well-heeled, kept trucking in second-hand joints around Middle America or in
Europe, South America, Japan. Many simply gave up.

The superstars kept the songs going and the bucks flowing in Nevada as loss
leaders for the big casinos. One wonders what would have happened to them and
the music had gambling not been legal there.  Bugsy Siegel wrote with a
different kind of typewriter, but for inventing Las Vegas there should be a
special niche for him in the Songwriters' Hall of Fame.

The casinos were always attractive to performers. But, eventually, there were
few alternatives. Most big-city nightclubs closed, as a result of a variety of
factors: rising costs, crime in the streets, the exodus to suburbia - and the
disappearance of the stars from the airwaves and the record stores.

The concert halls and arenas, once the stamping grounds of the swing bands and
pop singers, became the occupied territory of rock, aided by hyperpromotion from
the record conglomerates and the news media. The smaller rooms, traditionally a
home for jazz groups, satellite stars and aspiring young talent, fought
valiantly for a time. But with few exceptions they had
1st jump
gone under by the dawn of the 1970's. Rock-and-roll had become rockand-rule.

A couple of years ago, however, rock found itself in trouble. The attributed
reason was disco. When discomania died, rock was back, or so said the record
companies. But the record industry is experiencing difficulties. If some of the
biggest companies are showing profits again, it's largely a result of
belt-tightening. The platinum album is becoming harder to attain and double
platinum is now something of a rarity (platinum is awarded to albums that sell a
million units; gold, for a half-million). And in the first quarter of 1981,
singles showed an average 10 percent decrease in sales over 1980, according to
figures released by Record World, an industry trade publication.  Many reasons
are heard for this trend: inflation, recession, the end of the baby boom,
bootlegging and home taping of records. But something more fundamental may be at
work.

Rock-and-roll is 27 years old, which is a long run for a musical genre - the
Swing Era lasted only 10 years. And swing was the music of the whole nation, not
just the younger set. So perhaps rock simply overstayed its welcome or, if you
will, its need.

''There is no future in rock-and-roll, only recycled past.'' So said, of all
people, Mick Jagger, lead singer of the Rolling Stones in an interview last
summer with Rolling Stone magazine.

''Basically,'' he added, ''rock-and-roll isn't protest and never was. It's not
political. It's only - it promotes interfamilial tension. It used to. Now it
can't even do that, because fathers don't ever get outraged with the music ... .
So rock-and-roll's gone, that's all, gone ... . You can't rebel against the
Rolling Stones or the Beatles.''

Mick Jagger may have been overstating, but objective criteria, such as the
bottom line and the lack of big-selling new groups, may support that view.
Slumping record sales, depleted box-office revenues at rock concerts and a small
but discernible radio trend away from rock, particularly on the AM band, are
among the indicators that the rock may indeed be nearing the end of its
spectacular roll.

Even so, and despite the upsurge of the old tunes, the record moguls refuse to
mine the treasury of songs and songsters. There is life - and even sex - after
30, but there is no melody. So they said and so they say. Can the record
companies weather the storm by ignoring America's greatest contribution to
popular culture?  A Sunday morning last winter. My 15-year-old daughter is
having a breakfast party. A dozen kids, 14 to 18. Bagels and cream cheese.  The
radio is on, but they're not listening because it's not ''their'' music. It's
Jonathan Schwartz doing what he always does on Sunday morning in New York:
spinning Sinatra, Ella, Basie, Bennett, Torme on WNEW-AM. For the last 10 years,
there was Sunday morning and Jonathan Schwartz. And only Jonathan Schwartz
(until the station switched a year ago to 24 hours of music from the golden
treasury).

This winter morning, Schwartz is playing a couple of song-and-dance men - two
records, back to back, from separate eras. By Bing Crosby and Fred Astaire.

I order the bagel-chompers to be quiet. ''Listen in,'' I say.  ''Listen and tell
me who's singing.'' The kids look at my daughter. But I've already warned her to
stay mum.  They don't know.  None of them know Bing Crosby. None of them know
Fred Astaire.  I'm not given to apocalyptic notions. But I've got a bunch of
very bright kids in my apartment, and, when they don't know the voices of Crosby
and Astaire, I can't call it anything less than cultural genocide.

Who's to blame? Not the record industry, not the radio. Just ask them. They say:
We give the public what the public wants.  So blame the public. Who's the
public? The kids. Adults don't buy records. They say.  Frank Sinatra is the
drop-dead king of the world. Translation: When Blue Eyes walks into a room, the
room drops dead at his feet. And it's been true for 40 years. For this reason
alone it was only right that he should have been the one to discomfit the record
industry by putting the lie to its claim that adults don't buy records.

There's another reason. Sinatra, despite playing to sell-out crowds all over the
world, has never been a megamillion record star. He had his share of gold
records, but even in his halcyon days, he seldom hit No. 1 on the charts. In the
rock age his sales were generally paltry next to the big stars and not too
terrific even against the lesser groups. So the industry liked to point to
Sinatra as proof positive that adults don't buy records. As if in tacit
agreement, the Chairman of the Board hadn't cut an album since 1975.

Last year, Sinatra made ''Trilogy,'' a three-disc album celebrating the past,
present and future. A few weeks before the release date, I had dinner with him
in New York. ''You're gonna like this one, baby,'' he said. But he seemed a
little anxious about it, and why not? He'd worked long and hard on the album at
considerable cost to himself.

A lot of hopes were riding on him, particularly among singers out of the old
school. If Sinatra could hit big with this one, they buzzed, maybe the record
companies would wake up to what was going on in the country.

With this talk around and about, I sought out Jerry Wexler, one of the few
record executives respected in the various worlds of jazz, swing, pop and rock.
A former partner in Atlantic Records, Wexler is a consultant to Warner
Communications, one of whose record companies would release ''Trilogy.''
2nd jump

I said, ''You must be excited about the Sinatra album.'' Wexler said, ''Would
you like to go to the baths with me on it?'' ''The baths?'' I said. ''I keep
hearing it'll sell a half-million records.'' ''The Messiah will have to come
before we'll sell 50,000,'' Wexler said.  ''Then why are you making it?'' Wexler
smiled and said, ''Frank Sinatra wants a monument.'' So?  ''So nobody has the
nerve to tell him to forget it.'' When the album, which retailed at $20.98, hit
No. 16 on the chart published in Billboard, another of the industry's trade
magazines, I called Wexler and asked him when I could meet the Messiah.

''It's a miracle,'' he said. ''And since it's three records you have to triple
the number to understand how great it's doing.'' I said, ''I assume the record
industry is going to reconsider its ways, in view of Sinatra's success.''
''Look,'' Wexler said, patiently. ''That music is gone, finished.  The young
people won't go for it. Try and understand; it's a fact of life.''

I went into the litany. The live stage, the radio, the Broadway scene, the piano
bars, the depressed state of the record industry, the general marketing
recognition of ''gray power.''

Suppose the music industry produced a new Sinatra - a young guy or girl whom
kids could identify with - wouldn't he be the rage? Or if somebody like Billy
Joel or Linda Ronstadt cut an album of old standards?

Wexler answered: ''Stop dreaming.'' I said, ''O.K. Assuming you're right about
the kids, what about the adults?'' ''Adults don't buy records.'' ''Who's buying
'Trilogy'?'' ''We're at an impasse,'' Jerry Wexler sighed.  A year later.
Sinatra's 'Trilogy' has sold 500,000 copies and, being a three-in-one album,
it's platinum-plus. Moreover, his single ''New York, New York'' is even being
played in discos around the country. And now an item appears in The New York
Times: Linda Ronstadt is cutting an album of standards, songs made famous by
Billie Holiday, Mildred Bailey, Ella Fitzgerald. The producer? Jerry Wexler.
The Reader's Digest record club is one of the most successful clubs extant. In
1965, the club produced a 10-disc album, ''The Great Band Era,'' and sold 1.5
million copies at $17 per. It's selling still, at about 36 bucks now, and is one
of the most profitable albums ever sold. Throughout the rock age, The Digest has
scored brilliantly with thick albums out of the music treasury, marketed to
buyers whose average age is about 50. One probable reason for the success of the
mail-order business is that the ambiance of most record stores, with their
psychedelic posters, blaring sounds and clerks who never heard of Peggy Lee,
drives adults away.

When I tell William Simon, head of The Digest's record club, that the
conglomerates (which own most of the major record companies) are convinced
adults don't buy, he chuckles.

''Shhh,'' he says. ''If they didn't operate on that principle, we wouldn't be in
business.'' Numerous record clubs are ''in business'' for the same reason, as
are those entrepreneurs who coin money selling collections through television
commericals.

The record industry has no explanation, nor can it explain why standards sell
gold and platinum - even in the record stores. Unless ''miracle'' is an
explanation.

So, Willie Nelson's ''Stardust'' album, a double platinum disc containing
nothing but evergreens, is a miracle. Barbra Streisand has always been a
miracle. Mitch Miller's sing-along albums, which sold 20 million units in the
1960's, were miracles. The Golden-Age-of-Broadway show albums, from ''My Fair
Lady'' to ''Fiddler On The Roof,'' were miracles. Hit standards by rock stars
are miracles. And Frank Sinatra is a transcendent miracle.

Perhaps the record companies are finally beginning to see money in those
miracles. In addition to Linda Ronstadt, Carly Simon is currently cutting a
record of old torch songs, Willie Nelson has come back with another hit album
called ''Somewhere Over the Rainbow.'' And the growing audiences of swing bands
like the Widespread Depression Orchestra cannot go unnoticed.

The question remains: Are there any young talents who can write songs in the old
tradition? Some, like the early Paul McCartney, Paul Simon, Bob Dylan and Billy
Joel, have shown that they can do it.  ''All that's needed is encouragement,''
says the composer Cy Coleman. ''Music is a language. Songwriters are authors who
have learned to express themselves musically. The disgrace of the music business
is that instead of pushing people to write top quality, they push 'em to write
Top Ten.'' Tony Bennett and ''Sold Out'' signs have been synonymous for 30
years. But Bennett hasn't had a record contract with a major company since 1972,
when Columbia dropped him - at the same time, he says, that they let go Duke
Ellington, Leonard Bernstein and the New York Philharmonic. ''We cut the tissue
and left the cancer,'' Coleman says a Columbia executive told him, and if that's
not a metaphor for the record industry, what's a metaphor?

Everywhere I went, Tony Bennett's name popped up. His open, easy style - on- and
offstage - belies a reputation as controversial as any in the music business.
Loved and respected by his fellow troubadors, Bennett raises hackles among
record executives, who call him a ''fanatic'' and a ''troublemaker.''
3rd jump

''I wouldn't sing the garbage they were peddling,'' Bennett said in a recent
interview. ''The record companies were forcing artists to take a dive, and I
resisted. I thought the only important thing was to be trusted. And I made a
stink about it. I still do. Naturally, they don't like me; I consider it a
compliment. Remember, we're talking about lawyers, accountants and marketing
guys; they're in charge of the business. Imagine an industry run by people who
don't know anything about the product?''

Despite his complaints, Bennett is negotiating with a major company right now.
''That shows that things are beginning to change,'' Bennett said. ''But whether
I make a deal with them or not, there's a tremendous business injustice going
on. The record companies have been saying for years that people like me can't
sell, but we keep selling out wherever we go. To me it's 20 times harder to get
people out on the town - and at least that much more expensive - than to get
them to buy a record. The truth is the industry won't sell the records, not that
we can't sell 'em.''

Virtually all of the major artists of the prerock age are either without record
contracts from major record companies or are released by small independent
labels -companies with less financial backing to allow for the advertising and
promotion - no matter that they appear around the world to large audiences.
Peggy Lee, Mel Torme, Billy Eckstine, Joe Williams, Franie Laine and Margaret
Whiting - the list is endless. Business injustice aside, we see the results
everywhere. How many people under 30 even know the names of these stars?

''Rock was sold to the kids,'' Bennett said. ''The name of the game is peer
pressure. It started in 1954. I was there; I saw it happening. The record
companies took their cue from the automotive industry: They began a program of
planned obsolescence. When I came up, the idea was that when you made a record,
it was supposed to last forever. Now it was the opposite. The new god was called
'turnover.' Put one rocker on and then shove in another and another. A hit in
the morning, a golden oldie in the afternoon. Quality was out. It took a few
years to set in, but it started in 1954.''

In retrospect it's easy to see 1954 as a watershed, since that was the year Bill
Haley and his Comets made ''Rock Around the Clock,'' the record that launched
the era of rock-and-roll. But among college kids, the rage was still Dixieland,
and on the campuses the king was Stan Rubin of Princeton. In 1954, Rubin and his
Tigertown Five staged the first college jazz concert in the history of Carnegie
Hall, and it made page one of The New York Times.

Last year, Rubin was back in The Times with a big swing band that garnered a
rave review from John S. Wilson, a Times music critic.  Rubin re-creates the
sounds of Artie Shaw, Benny Goodman, Glenn Miller, Harry James, the Dorseys with
verve, joy and muscle.

''Symphonic pop is what it is,'' Rubin told me one night at Manhattan's Red
Blazer Too, where he plays every Wednesday night.  ''We use the original
arrangements, and we don't fool around. Does the Philharmonic Orchestra fool
around with the classics? In the same way, we're doing our best to preserve the
great American swing classics.''

I asked Rubin what happened after his big night at Carnegie back in 1954. He
said, ''We were hot tickets; we played all the campuses, society parties, the
works. We did Grace Kelly's wedding in Monaco.  And then the big break: We cut a
record for RCA. But just before the release date, they canceled. 'Sorry, kid,'
they said. 'We're going with something else; it's going to be the new music.' It
was Elvis Presley and 'Heartbreak Hotel.' A perfect title. I didn't know it
then, but it was the beginning of the end.''

But Rubin is once again making the campus scene. And this spring, he cut four
albums (at his own expense) under the rubric ''Hall of Fame Hits of the Swing
Era,'' which he's been marketing through television advertisements. ''It's
moving well and we've been getting radio play,'' he says, ''but to really make
it go, we need a record company behind us.''

Rubin is a good example of Tony Bennett's theory that what the music industry
needs is a ''genius'' who will figure out a way to distribute records for
independent labels.

The major companies shipped on consignment and shipped big. They gave free
promotional records to the stores, which got them vital window space. They
promoted the radio programmers and jockeys. They advertised. They sent groups
out on tours and helped underwrite club dates. Most important, they ''booted''
the albums with singles, which are necessary billboards, and these singles went
to the radio stations and juke boxes.

Since the slump set in a couple of years ago, much of this promotion has been
cut back. Companies recently stopped shipping on consignment and are now
permitting retailers to return only one-fifth of their unsold discs. Thus stores
are being discouraged from stocking the quantity of records they did a decade
ago, and the young rock groups are getting a taste of what happened to the great
stars of earlier days. With radio stations falling back on established rockers,
Catch-22 is catching up with the new kids on the block. If you can't get radio
time, you can't get the big pressings, and if you can't pressings, you can't get
radio time.

A few independent labels have been successful selling the old music - notably
Concord Jazz, whose portfolio includes Rosemary Clooney, Woody Herman, George
Shearing, Charlie Byrd, Dave McKenna, Marian McPartland.
4th jump

Concord barely skims the available market, averaging about 10,000 sales per
album. But it is setting an example that may have a serious impact: a small
company servicing a discerning audience at a profit. ''The main trouble with the
record industry,'' says Bob Golden, Concord's director of artistic development,
''is that the corporate structure has become larger than the sales it can
generate.'' The inevitable result is that corporate politics has overtaken
productivity, according to Golden, and the solution may well lie in
decentralization. ''Then record companies could focus on what they do best,'' he
adds, ''and on the audience they're trying to reach.''

That solution is not necessarily limited to the kind of music that Concord
produces. Already new-wave music is having difficulty making it in the mass
market: Many of the groups are recording on small independent labels. Though
artists generally complain about the failure of the conglomerates to promote
them, it may turn out to be a healthy development for them and for music itself.
The mass market - with its boom-or-bust philosophy - is certainly not synonymous
with quality.

This is not to say that a decentralized record industry would have to be made up
entirely of companies as small as Concord. After all, the demand may be much
larger than the resources or the ambitions of such labels. Indeed, Steve
Lawrence and Eydie Gorme are counting on it. They have recently found some
backers to form a new company, Applause, which will press, distribute and
promote their records and those of their contemporaries. And they say that the
new label has been negotiating with a roster of artists that includes Vic
Damone, Peggy Lee, Sammy Davis Jr., Shirley Bassey, Frankie Laine, Carmen McCrae
and Ray Charles.

Over lunch recently, Steve and Eydie explained that all these stars had
ready-made product that needed only to be sold. ''The record companies have
declared us dead,'' Lawrence said, ''no matter that we pack 'em in all over the
world. This new company will sell the records. The artists will produce a
finished master record at their own cost -many of them have already cut them -
and Applause will do the rest. Unlike the big companies, we'll pay from the
first album sold, nobody's going to wait for money.'' Though the big record
companies haven't yet acknowledged the resurgence of the old sounds, the radio
stations are starting to. In New York, the switch from soft rock a year ago at
WNEW-AM, the flagship of Metromedia, was the beginning. ''We died, and we went
to heaven,'' says Jim Lowe, the station's Mr. Broadway, and the businessmen at
Metromedia, smiling at advertising revenues, agree.

Since then, the WNEW format has been picked up by stations across the country,
according to Jack Thayer, general manager and vice president of WNEW, who ticked
off the following cities: Los Angeles, San Francisco, Dallas, Minneapolis-St.
Paul, Boston, Tampa, Seattle, Charlotte. Tony Bennett agrees: ''It's taking off
like gangbusters.  There are three stations in Miami, Chicago, San Francisco and
L.A.  playing our music - three in each city.''

At the same time, a cottage industry has been flourishing. Three years ago, a
man named Al Ham, who was a top executive at Columbia records in the 1950's,
began a new business called ''Music Of Your Life.'' Using records that he owns,
borrows or buys, Ham taped the popular songs of the last 50 years - excluding
rock and country - and leased them to AM rock stations whose ratings were
flagging. (The stations pay the royalties.)

When I interviewed Ham last year, he was long on optimism but short on clients.
He had 30 stations signed and piles of letters from listeners, but the industry
and media brushed it all off as a nostalgia trip, a fad that would soon fade.
Today, Ham has more than 70 stations, from Boston to Hawaii.

Ham delivers round-the-clock programming to his clients, who require his service
because their libraries are bereft of all but rock. Many former rock stations
have programmers and disc jockeys who have never heard of Artie Shaw.

''No matter what I did, it wouldn't work if the advertisers weren't convinced.
And now they are; more and more, they're recognizing the purchasing power of
people over 35.''

The big money is no longer in the hands of teen-agers, whose numbers have
dropped sharply since the great post-World War II baby boom. By 1990, according
to the United States Census Bureau, the teen-age population will have declined
by about 17 percent, or 4.6 million. Soon, in fact, they will be exceeded by the
over-65 population, whose numbers will be up 20 percent by 1990 to almost 30
million.

Companies tied to consumer markets are already adjusting to these trends. But
the record industry, which directed its attention almost exclusively to
teen-agers for two decades, seems incapable of anything more than a
retrenchment.

If the radio is now reacting to the new numbers, it will not be the first time
it has moved faster than the major record companies. It was the advent of the
Top-40 radio format in the early 1950's that helped usher in the rock-and-roll
age.

The Top-40 programmers took note of the booming, affluent teen-age market, and,
together with such disc jockeys as Alan Freed, made a direct hit on the kids.
They were aided in no small measure by Broadcast Music Incorporated (B.M.I.),
which had been organized in 1940 with the financial backing of radio
broadcasters who didn't like paying the rates demanded by the American Society
of Composers, Authors and Publishers (ASCAP) for air play of its members' songs.

Since ASCAP, formed in 1914, was the only music licensing group extant, B.M.I.
began with an empty portfolio. ASCAP was, for all intents and purposes, the
controller of the musical treasury, its membership a virtual Songwriters' Hall
of Fame.

But B.M.I. had ownership of the radio stations, and it began by signing the
young singers and songwriters whom ASCAP had ignored and encouraging disc
jockeys to play their stuff and ''keep the profits in the family.'' A 1940
B.M.I. pamphlet distributed to the jockeys was cynically prescient: ''The public
selects its favorites from the music it hears and does not miss what it does not
hear.''

The ASCAP-B.M.I. war has been the subject of court battles and would require
volumes to do either side justice. Suffice it here to say that great bitterness
remains among the older ASCAP songwriters, many of whom blame B.M.I. for the
destruction of their music.
5th jump

Radio was in a panic in the early 1950's over the threat of television and began
to zero in on the teen-agers with a hard sell that carried a hot message to
kids: Rhythym and blues, rock-and-roll, is ''your music.''

The timing, as it turned out, could not have been better. Kids had more money
than ever before, the move to suburbia was in overdrive and family life was in a
major state of flux. If parents didn't like it, so much the better. As Mick
Jagger said, ''The whole rebellion in rock-and-roll was about not being able to
make noise at night and not being able to play that rock-and-roll so loud and
boogie-woogie and not being able to use the car and all that.''

Nearly all of the major record companies resisted, leaving the field to the
small, independent labels. By the late 1950's, the majors began to come around
to ''all that,'' and, by 1964, when the Beatles stormed America, the new world
was ready for them. The older artists and their songs had largely disappeared
from the record stores and the air waves. It was a world for the children, by
the children and of the children.  Nat Cole worked easy, and those who knew him
said it went with his nature. Tony Bennett recalls sitting around a Las Vegas
dressing room with Cole one day in 1964, a few months before he died. The King
picked up the phone and called his record company, Capitol. A minute later, he
slammed down the receiver and walked around the room in a quiet rage.

''What happened?'' Bennett asked. Cole didn't answer for what seemed to Bennett
like an eternity. Finally, he hissed: ''The girl picked up and said, 'Capitol
Records, Home of the Beatles.' ''

''I never saw him that way,'' Tony Bennett said. ''He just went wild. 'Home of
the Beatles,' he kept saying, 'Home of the Beatles.' What's goin' on, man,
what's goin' on?''

''What could I say?'' Bennett asked. ''Nat Cole made Capitol. Jeez, it was
terrible.'' It was no longer the same Capitol, founded 20 years earlier by,
among others, the great lyricist Johnny Mercer. Capitol had been bought by
Electric and Musical Industries of England (now called English Music Industry,
or E.M.I.) in 1955.

On Dec. 30, 1963, the company released its first Beatles single, ''I Want to
Hold Your Hand,'' and sold a million copies in less than three weeks. Two months
later, the Beatles came to New York amidst fabulous hoopla, appeared on ''The Ed
Sullivan Show,'' and their career skyrocketed. A decade before, Elvis Presley
had gained national prominence on Tommy Dorsey's television show. In view of
what happened to adult music after Presley, and then after the Beatles, it's
ironic that both phenomena were showcased on prime-time adult shows.

By April 1964, the Beatles had the five top singles and two top albums in the
country. According to ''The Book of Golden Discs,'' the Beatles had 15 titles in
the top 100 at one time in 1964, and ''60 percent of all discs in the U.S.A.
airwaves were by the Beatles - the most amazing avalanche in disc history.''
(Who was the first to knock the Beatles off their No. 1 perch? Louis Armstrong
with ''Hello Dolly!'' in May 1964, when the record companies were so sure adults
didn't buy records that David Merrick, the producer of the show, had to pay
$3,000 to get Armstrong's single released.)

Some people don't believe that the Beatles avalanche was a natural phenomenon,
but rather was one of the greatest hypes in the annals of popular music.  Ahmet
Ertegun, founder and head of Atlantic Records, a seminal figure in the industry,
says that all talk about promotion and hype is nonsense. This is the general
line of the establishment, but nobody puts it straighter than Ertegun.

''There's nothing we can do to make a record sell,'' Ertegun tells me. ''The
public creates the demand; we simply fill it. That's all there is to it.''

In the early 1950's, Atlantic was a great jazz and pop label, but the big money
rolled in later when the company signed the Rolling Stones, Sonny and Cher,
Crosby, Stills, Nash and Young, among many others. These were some of the most
heavily promoted groups in history. And here is Ahmet Ertegun telling me that he
can't make a record sell.

''The promotion is for their egos,'' Ertegun asserts. ''All these tours, they
don't matter, they don't sell records. The people buy the records because they
want them.''

I tell him what I've been hearing in my travels: that radio decided to go after
the kids; that the major record companies joined in; that the catalogues of the
top artists were slowly but inexorably withdrawn from the market; that the
treasury of American music was denied to the children; that a lower form of
music was pushed on the market and, following Gresham's Law, drove out the gold;
that the record industry was now barring a return of taste.

Ertugen says, ''That Great Age you talk about, you know what it was? A claque of
publishers and songwriters from Tin Pan Alley and Hollywood, European in origin,
feeding a foreign music to the American people.''

Cole Porter? European?  ''He wrote in the same vein,'' Ertegun says.  ''White
Christmas''? ''God Bless America''? Foreign?  ''Well, consider Irving Berlin's
movie 'Top Hat.' About a guy at the Savoy in London. The cotton-picker in
Mississippi, the dockwalloper in New Orleans, the lumberjack in Washington, the
gasstation attendant in Houston - what did any of them have to do with that?
American music was derived from the blues, there was none of that European
sophistication to it. It was forced on the country, simple as that. When rhythym
and blues came in, rock-and-roll, it hit a nerve; it was what the American
people wanted; it was their music.''

And, according to Ahmet Ertegun, better music. In Celebrity Register, he is
quoted as saying: ''I think that the rock-and-roll writers are lyrically head
and heels above the Gershwins and Cole Porters for poetic content. I think Mick
Jagger and Keith Richard write better lyrics than any of those old writers.''
Looking at my children, their friends, and the children of my friends, I
discovered something odd. In school, they take more or less the same courses we
did; they read the same sort of books; they're taught the same foreign
languages. After school, they play the same games we did. They even watch the
same kinds of television shows - even soap operas - as their grandparents. They
cheer and agonize over baseball, football, basketball, hockey, the fights. They
go to the movies with us and, when we can afford it, the theater. But the music,
no. The one thing we can't do together is listen to music.

Why is that? How come kids read Hemingway, Fitzgerald, Salinger, Twain, even
Shakespeare - while the stereo blasts heavy metal? How is it that young adults
work at similar jobs as their parents, and, when the bell rings, go to similar
bars and drink the same drinks - and then drop quarters in the juke box and
shake to sounds that are unrecognizable, wierd, not only to mom and dad, but
even to their older brothers and sisters?

If the music industry is right, if the rock audience made its own market,
wouldn't it be something akin to a mutation, a new breed?  Yet, if so, why
didn't it happen across the board? Sure, kids are different. ''The kids of
today'' are always different. But it's a difference in degree. They still get
married, have babies, go to church; and while it is true that the divorce rate
is up, drugs are much more prevalent, sex is looser, it bears reiterating that
there were always drugs, divorce, sex, scandal, war. Degrees. The rock is a
difference in kind. And it's isolatable. It's the only thing absolutely
isolatable in the good old generation gap.

A cultural convulsion of that dimension does not happen by itself.  Teen-agers
and preteen-agers do not change the world; they do not create markets; they do
not destroy a music treasury.

I have to go along with Cy Coleman, who says of the music business: ''They have
cut out our entire past and they did it willfully; it was willfully done.''

And the future?  Again Cy Coleman. ''If they get behind this terrific resurgence
of taste, particularly the record industry, which holds the key, we're in for a
fabulous new age of music.''

Stay tuned.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Cole Porter photo of Tony Bennett photo of Mick
Jagger with Linda Ronstadt photo of Lena Horne photo of Count Basie and his band
photo of Cab Calloway photo of Peggy Lee photo of Sarah Vaughan photo of a young
Frank Sinatra

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 21, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EXPOSING THE LIBYAN LINK

SECTION: Section 6; Page 32, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 8224 words


Five years ago, two former operatives of the Central Intelligence Agency made a
deal with Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi to supply the Libyan strongman with explosives
for huge sums of cash. They also hired former Green Berets to set up a secret
training school to teach the Libyans the latest techniques in assassination and
international terrorism. As a cover for these operations, the two men, Edwin P.
Wilson and Frank E. Terpil, operated several seemingly legitimate export
companies. To head one such company, they hired another former C.I.A. employee,
Kevin P. Mulcahy. For a long time, Mulcahy let himself believe that the entire
operation was really part of an unofficial but approved American intelligence
operation being carried out by an ''old-boy'' network of former Government
workers, intelligence agents and Green Berets with strong and lasting
connections to Washington officialdom. In this, the second of a two-part series,
Mulcahy discovers that the Qaddafi connection is illegal and not an intelligence
operation, and, at considerable personal risk, goes first to the C.I.A. and then
to the F.B.I.  Seymour M. Hersh, a former reporter for The New York Times, is at
work on a book about Henry Kissinger to be published by Summit Books. By Seymour
M. Hersh hortly before midnight on a muggy Washington Sunday in September 1976,
Kevin P. Mulcahy, a former C.I.A. analyst who was then in the export business,
telephoned the duty officer at agency headquarters in McLean, Va. ''There are
problems overseas,'' Mulcahy said without elaboration, and he had to talk
immediately to the agency's assistant to the deputy director of clandestine
operations. Mulcahy would wait for a return call.

The call came within the hour. On the telephone was Theodore G.  Shackley, one
of the most influential men in the C.I.A. Mulcahy had a disturbing tale to tell.
The firm of which he was president had agreed to sell the hardware of terrorism
- explosives and delayed-action timers - to Libya's Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi.
Moreover, the firm had also agreed to set up a training school to teach Libyans
the latest in the techniques of terrorism and political assassination. Only days
before, Mulcahy told Shackley, he had been ordered to purchase an American-made
Redeye missile, a weapon capable of shooting down a commercial airliner, for
delivery to the Libyan ruler. Mulcahy's two business partners, Edwin P. Wilson
and Frank E.  Terpil, who had brought Mulcahy into the firm, were themselves
former C.I.A. operatives.

Now, on the telephone, Mulcahy asked Shackley: ''Is this a C.I.A.  operation or
not?'' Shackley was noncommittal, and Mulcahy now knew that his worst suspicions
were correct: The Wilson-Terpil operations did not have the sanction of the
C.I.A. He knew that in the close-knit world of Government intelligence word
would somehow get back within days to Mulcahy's partners that he had gone to the
authorities. So he quickly went into hiding, disguising his appearance and using
a false name.  But he anticipated that his partners and their associates would
be quickly seized, convicted and imprisoned. He expected this would happen not
only for his own well-being, but also to stop an operation he believed inimical
to the national-security interests of his country and to world peace.

But things did not work out that way. The Federal law-enforcement agencies
eventually became enmeshed in a long series of bureaucratic rivalries and
intrigues that hampered and delayed the investigation.  There was another
complication: a lack of Federal statutes that expressly barred acts of terrorism
by Americans abroad.

Mulcahy found himself in limbo, not a fugitive from justice but, in a sense, a
captive of it. Over the coming months, there were no quick arrests. And while he
was in hiding, Wilson and Terpil were steadily expanding the scope of their
operations inside Libya. They arranged for illegal shipment of more than 40,000
pounds of explosives to Libya and continued to recruit former Green Berets and
Government ordnance experts for their training school. Qaddafi is believed to
have relied on the American-provided materiel and training in his efforts to
expand his influence in the Middle East and North Africa, including the invasion
earlier this year of neighboring Chad. The Libyan ruler is suspected, too, of
having ordered the political assassination of 10 or more of his political
enemies living in exile, with the aid, in at least one case, of Wilson and
Terpil. It would be four years before the two men would be indicted by the
United States Attorney's office in Washington on charges that included illegal
export of explosives as well as conspiracy and solicitation to commit murder.
They are both at large to this day. As a result, Mulcahy has now, in
frustration, decided to tell his story publicly for the first time. evin
Mulcahy's business partnership began to unravel in Europe in late August 1976
after he was ordered by his partners to purchase the Redeye missile for Qaddafi.
He then left Wilson and Terpil and flew to Washington to find out all that his
company, Inter-Technology, was doing in Libya. After he arrived, he went to the
company offices and went through the files. It was what he found there -
documents marked ''secret'' which he, the firm's president, had never seen -
that led him to call the C.I.A. duty officer. There were contracts and
correspondence which explicitly defined the corporation's ostensible business
dealings with Libya as cover operations, and which contained forgeries of
Mulcahy's signature.

The documents outlined a 26-week ''training program for intelligence and
security officers in the field of espionage, sabotage and general psychological
warfare,'' and one page said the program's emphasis would be ''placed on the
design, manufacture, implementation and detonation of explosive devices.''
Mulcahy further learned that his partners had proposed to Qaddafi that the first
graduates of the terrorist school demonstrate their skills by blowing up an
Aramco pipeline in Saudi Arabia.

Mulcahy knew he was in trouble. Wilson and Terpil, he says, ''had set me up
beautifully. By then, I was in deep enough, and I knew they had me. I picked up
an ashtray from Frank's desk, threw it across the room, and broke a lamp.''

As president of the company, he knew he could be held criminally responsible for
its activities, and, he says, ''I had to think - what the hell do I do now? I
had to find out. Was this a C.I.A. operation or not? Did it involve national
security? I still wanted to think there was a possibility that Ed and Frank were
acting on behalf of the C.I.A. If it was a C.I.A. operation, I had two options -
continue to do it, or get out. If it wasn't C.I.A., then I could make up my
mind: Do I want to make a lot of money or do I get out and take my chances?''

He knew only too well the dangers. A few months earlier, Terpil had passed a
message to Wilson, through Mulcahy, reporting that ''the hit's been taken care
of.'' Mulcahy learned from the talkative Terpil that Wilson felt he had been
cheated six or seven years earlier by a merchant in Paris on a transaction
involving British woolen uniforms in storage in Nova Scotia. The ''hit''
referred to by Terpil apparently was a bomb that went off under the mer-chant's
auto, severely injuring his wife, who apparently was alone.

Kevin Mulcahy's initial belief was that Wilson and Terpil were operating with
the full sanction of the C.I.A. He had been told the exported explosives and
other materials were to be used to clear mines planted in Libya's harbors and
battlefields during the 1973 Arab-Israeli war. Mulcahy clearly wanted to believe
the cover story.  His own allegiance to the C.I.A. was deep; he had worked for
the agency as an intelligence analyst in the 1960's, and his father had begun
working there in 1947, the year it was chartered. In 1968, Mulcahy resigned to
take a job in the electronics industry, and in 1976 Ed Wilson offered him a
high-paying position in his export company. Mulcahy knew Wilson had served with
credit in the C.I.A.; knew he was widely respected by his former agency
associates, and was led to believe that important ties still existed.

Indeed, one night, not long after Mulcahy joined the business, Wilson took him
to Theodore Shackley's home. Shackley later said he welcomed such visits from
Wilson because they produced useful intelligence. Among other things, Mulcahy
recalls, Wilson and Shackley discussed Wilson's forthcoming visit to Libya for a
meeting with Qaddafi. Wilson's main purpose for the meeting, however, Mulcahy
says, was to seek Shackley's intervention in the granting of a Government export
license for a pending sale of high-grade communications gear, whose export was
about to be disapproved by the State Department. It is not clear what
significance Shackley gave to the visit, but Mulcahy certainly thought he
understood the point: that the export business was covertly approved by the
C.I.A.

After Mulcahy's alarming discovery in his company's files, he knew he needed
help, that he had to talk to someone. ''My first instinct was not to hurt
anybody,'' he says. ''If it was a C.I.A. operation, I didn't want to blow it by
exposing it to an outsider or to some underling at the agency. I felt there was
no one I could safely talk to about what I had found.'' So he turned to
Shackley. If the Wilson-Terpil operation was C.I.A., Mulcahy knew he could
discuss it with Shackley without jeopardizing it.

But while waiting for Shackley to return his call, Mulcahy also telephoned an
old family friend who worked in the C.I.A.'s Office of Security, and asked him
to come over and review the Inter-Technology documents. ''My thought was that no
matter what Shackley decided to do, or not do, I wanted someone else in the
agency to be aware of the Libyan operation,'' Mulcahy recalls. ''I wanted a
second reporting source.''

Mulcahy's family friend was particularly concerned that there was evidence
linking Patry E. Loomis and William Weisenburger with the Wilson operation;
Loomis and Weisenburger still were on active duty with the C.I.A. The Office of
Security official suggested that Mulcahy report his information to the F.B.I. He
did so with a sense of betrayal: Nothing in his life had prepared him to be
disloyal to for-mer colleagues and associates, particularly in an agency so
closely tied to the life of his family. It was that loyalty, perhaps, so
widespread throughout the C.I.A., that enabled Wilson and Terpil to operate so
openly for so long.

On the very day that he began talking to the Government, Mulcahy received a
message from Wilson, who was still overseas: ''He told me to 'shut up, just
knock it off.' He'll explain everything when he returns.''

A secretary at Inter-Technology later passed an explicit warning to Mulcahy:
''She knew it was not a C.I.A. operation and she said, 'Ed is going to kill
you.' '' Mulcahy decided to go underground. He armed himself with an M-16 rifle
and spent three weeks camping, shifting campsites every evening. Presently, he
moved to a small town in the Shenandoah Valley and established a new identity
for himself, with a birth certificate, driver's license, passport and credit
card, and took a job as a drug and alcoholism counselor. A few years earlier
Mulcahy had successfully overcome a drinking problem with the aid of such
counsel. e also began talking extensively to Federal agents from six
investigatory agencies, traveling at his own expense to Washington as often as
three days a week. The F.B.I. assigned a group of agents to the case, and
Mulcahy was encouraged. ''They said they needed more stuff and we started going
through all the paperwork I had. I was drawing diagrams for them, giving them
organizational charts, the details of possible political payoffs. I gave them a
long statement, agreeing that I would continue to cooperate with them as long as
I would never have to testify publicly against Wilson and Terpil, and that my
name would never be mentioned in the press. I knew these guys were looking for
me. I was afraid of them. They had called members of my family and the woman I
was seeing, trying to locate me.'' A constant fear was the safety of his two
sons, both of whom live in the Washington area with Mulcahy's former wife and
had visited Wilson's farm.

Meanwhile, the Government received unsolicited first-hand corroboration of his
allegations. In early October 1976, John Henry Harper, a former C.I.A. bomb
technician who had been hired by Ed Wilson, returned from Libya and, after
learning of Mulcahy's defection, went to the C.I.A. where he, too, described the
program that Wilson and Terpil were setting up for Qaddafi. Harper said that he
and his fellow Americans had constructed a laboratory and were manufacturing
assassination bombs disguised as rock formations, ashtrays, lamps and tea
kettles.

Wilson and Terpil also hired three Cubans who had worked for the C.I.A. to carry
out an assassination on behalf of Qaddafi. Wilson paid the three men $30,000 in
expenses with a personal check drawn on his account in a Middleburg, Va., bank.
Instead of carrying out their assignment, the Cubans returned from Europe and
reported to the C.I.A.; they told the agency that they had initially believed
that their assassination target would be the international terrorist Carlos
Ramirez, known to police as the Jackal, the man who planned the 1972 Olympics
massacre at Munich. However, after meeting in Geneva with Wilson, the Cubans
said they learned that the target would be Umar Abdullah Muhayshi, a Libyan
defector who had plotted to overthrow Qaddafi's regime. The Cubans refused the
assignment and returned to the United States. All of this information was made
known to the Federal investigators by the C.I.A.

At about this time, Shackley was ordered by a superior to draft a memorandum of
his late-night telephone conversation with Mulcahy, about which he had never
made a formal report, senior C.I.A.  officials discovered. Now Shackley depicted
Mulcahy as being irrational, paranoid, alcoholic and an unreliable informant. A
copy of the Shackley memorandum eventually was provided to the U.S.  Attorney's
office in Washington and to Federal investigators.  Shackley's suggestion - that
Mulcahy was not in full control of his faculties - would be taken at face value
by many over the next few months. Mulcahy remains hurt and bitter today about
the memorandum.  ''It was a cheap shot to use my past illness, for which I'd
long been treated, to discredit me.''

Wilson and Terpil continued to expand their operations inside Libya. Those in
their employ included Pat Loomis, who was still under assignment with the C.I.A.
as a liaison officer between its headquarters and its overseas stations; Loomis
and others began meeting with Green Berets near the John F. Kennedy Special
Forces training center at Fort Bragg, N.C., and urg-
ing them to retire from the military and join the operations in Libya. In those
contacts, the Green Berets later told a Federal grand jury, there once again was
the suggestion that everything had been sanctioned by the agency.

Evidence in the Wilson-Terpil case had been forwarded by the F.B.I. to the
Foreign Agents Registration section of the Department of Justice. Complicating
the F.B.I.'s investigation was the fact that there are no Federal laws
prohibiting the aiding and abetting of terrorist or presumed terrorist
activities outside the United States. There was yet another factor that
obviously inhibited the initial investigation and made the Wilson-Terpil case
seem less urgent; this was the political assassination in September 1976 of
Orlando Letelier, the former Chilean Ambassador to the United States. Solving
Letelier's murder, which took place in downtown Washington, became a high
priority of the United States Attorney's office in Washington, draining off
manpower and the emotional energy of the staff.

The tension began to build for Mulcahy. He seemed to be unable to get anyone in
the Federal Government to share his concern about the vital importance of
rapidly stopping the flow of timers and explosives to Libya. Mulcahy knew that
assassination weapons were being made in Libya by late 1976; there could be
blood on his - and America's - hands before long. Wilson and Terpil had
responded to Mulcahy's accusations by hiring prominent defense attorneys and
depicting Mulcahy as an alcoholic Vietnam veteran for whom they had showed
compassion by giving him a job - only to learn that he was unstable and
irrational.

In April 1977, a report in The Washington Post on the Justice Department's
pending investigation of Wilson's ties to Libya brought the matter to the
attention of Stansfield Turner, the newly apppointed C.I.A. director. Turner
moved to take personal charge of an inquiry into the Wilson operations and
quickly learned of Mulcahy's charges. The C.I.A. director then called in Pat
Loomis and Bill Weisenburger (two active-duty employees who were moonlighting
with Wilson and Terpil), questioned them and fired them. He also ordered a
shake-up in the C.I.A.'s clandestine service, replacing Ted Shackley and his
immediate superior, William Wells. ''They were both nice guys,'' Turner says,
''but not right for the job.'' He will not elaborate. The C.I.A. director
further had a directive posted in the agency's headquarters and sent to every
office abroad warning that no employee was to associate with Ed Wilson.

What Turner did not do was call in Kevin Mulcahy. If he had, he might have
learned the extent of Wilson's contacts in Libya and that Wilson's access inside
the C.I.A. transcended Loomis and Weisenburger. Turner also might have learned
that the clandestineoperations division had been warned that Wilson was
attempting to arrange a political assassination on behalf of Qaddafi, as the
Cubans had told the C.I.A. control officers. Moreover, no one in the agency
seems to have bothered to inform Turner of John Harper's account of the weapons
laboratory and training programs in Libya undertaken by Wilson and Terpil. The
failure of the lower-level officials of the C.I.A. to report fully to Stansfield
Turner does not mean that Wilson's activities were approved of or endorsed in
any way, but it does reveal an astonishing and not fully understood modus
vivendi of the intelligence business: The primary loyalty of the men in the
clandestine service was to Ed Wilson, their former colleague and associate and
not to the new Director of Central Intelligence, who was viewed as an outsider
who could not understand the mentality of an operative in the field. Kevin
Mulcahy had violated the code.

Shipments of explosives for use in terror weapons continued to flow into Libya,
and a second generation of timers - far more sophisticated than the first group
shipped in 1976 -began arriving in Tripoli. Ed Wilson, with his charm and his
C.I.A. expertise, had struck up a warm personal friendship with Qaddafi and he
emerged by the end of 1977 as the man in charge. Frank Terpil became
disenchanted with his reduced role -and the reduced personal profits - and began
spending less time in Libya. Terpil eventually moved on to Uganda, where he
received a $3.2 million contract to provide arms, explosives and torture
devices, among other things, to the regime of Idi Amin.

Wilson's contacts with Jerome S. Brower, a California explosives manufacturer,
intensified during this period and Brower - who had supplied the first shipment
of explosives to Libya in the summer of 1976 -began recruiting bomb experts for
the Wilson operations.  Federal authorities learned later that two of the
experts recruited by Brower - Robert E. Swallow and Dennis J. Wilson (no
relation to Ed Wilson) - were civilian Navy employees at the China Lake Naval
Weapons Center in the Mojave Desert in California, where some of the Navy's and
C.I.A.'s most sensitive ordnance research is conducted.  Swallow and Dennis
Wilson, Federal authorities say, spent their annual leave in 1977 on site at Ed
Wilson's training camp in Tripoli. Both men returned to their Government jobs
without informing anyone about what was going on in Libya. The men are now under
investigation by the United States Attorney's office.

Not everyone kept his peace. One of the Green Berets reported to military
intelligence that he had been approached by Loomis. In another case, as later
told to a Federal grand jury, a former Green Beret who had worked in the
Wilson-Terpil operations in Libya was extensively debriefed by military
intelligence upon his return and referred to the F.B.I. for further questioning.
None of these reports seemed to make any difference: The F.B.I. investigation
continued at a slow pace; Wilson and Terpil continued their terrorist-supply
operations, and Mulcahy continued to hide and to worry every time he started his
car.

By mid-1977, Mulcahy had been hired to design and implement a residential
treatment program for alcoholics and drug addicts in suburban Washington. But
his past association with Wilson and Terpil continued to be a major part of his
life, and he began to be annoyed with the F.B.I., not only by the slowness of
its investigation, but also by the manner of some of the agents. ''I was sick
and tired of talking to the F.B.I. We had a falling out. They kept me totally in
the dark about what they were doing, but began to accuse me of holding out on
them.'' Mulcahy particularly was angered by the agents' insensitivity: ''They
would walk into our treatment center unannounced, right into the middle of the
house, looking like Mutt and Jeff, with their trench coats on and their collars
turned up.'' Such visits inevitably alarmed the patients in the center, many of
whom had unresolved problems with the law, and some began to view Mulcahy as a
Government informant or under investigation himself.

Mulcahy had no illusions about his status inside the C.I.A. that summer. He had
telephoned the Office of Security to see if the agency would provide some
protection in case Wilson and Terpil decided to move against him. ''They flatly
refused,'' Mulcahy recalls. ''It was almost like I was a turncoat. I felt it was
National Igloo Week.''

In December 1977, after more than a year of inquiry, the Foreign Agents
Registration Office of the Justice Department concluded that Wilson and Terpil,
despite conducting ''nefarious'' business activities, had violated no American
laws. They wrote pro forma notes, known as letters of declination, to the United
States Attorney's offices in Alexandria, Va., and Washington, recommending that
the case be dropped. A copy of the letter was shown to Eugene M. Propper, an
aggressive assistant United States Attorney who was then directing the Letelier
prosecution in Washington. Propper had interviewed Wilson briefly the previous
April, and Wilson emphatically denied any involvement in the sale of the timers
to Libya; it was a lie that Propper vividly recalled when the Justice Department
sought to drop the case. Propper learned that the Justice Department attorneys
had relied solely on F.B.I. interviews in their investigation and he thought he
could ask better questions and get better answers if he could bring witnesses
before a grand jury.

The key was Mulcahy, who reluctantly agreed now to testify - taking a step he
had vowed he would never do. ''I liked Gene,'' Mulcahy recalls. ''He's an
impressive guy, so I said, 'All right, I'll go before the grand jury, but I'm
not going into court and testify publicly against these guys.' I gave the grand
jury everything I had'' - Propper was doing the questioning - ''and I did it
without immunity. What I was telling them was the truth. If I did something
wrong I was willing to pay for it.' '' Federal officials acknowledged in recent
interviews that Mulcahy's grand-jury appearance provided the core of the
subsequent indictments.

They also said that Mulcahy had little to fear in refusing immunity. ''Kevin
wasn't a criminal,'' one Federal official said.  ''He was just doing what his
employer wanted.'' Mulcahy had committed technical violations of the Munitions
Control Act, the official added, but the United States Attorney's office viewed
them as not prosecutable. ''What we had on Kevin showed that he had not done
anything to bother anybody,'' one official said.

Mulcahy spent much of 1978 working intensely with lawyers in the United States
Attorney's office. Still nothing happened, and by the end of year, he wanted
out: ''The whole thing was a farce as far as I was concerned; no one was telling
me what was coming down and yet I know that Wilson and Terpil were still doing
business in Libya.'' He was reassured somewhat, he says, when a Federal official
told him that Government authorities had visited Wilson at his farm in Virginia
and graphically warned Wilson of reprisal in case anything happened to Mulcahy
or his children. ''It made me feel better,'' Mulcahy says. ''The Feds paid a
visit to Ed late in the night, and told him that if anything happened, they
would come looking for him.''

Federal officials subsequently explained that the delay in obtaining indictments
did not reflect adversely on Mulcahy or his testimony, but resulted from a basic
gap in the law, which does not specifically make it a crime to use American
equipment and know-how to further terrorism overseas - as long as no overt acts
are done in the United States. Wilson and Terpil were careful, as much as
possible, to strike their business deals out of the country. When Eugene Propper
initially began his investigation, the jurisdiction of the United States
Attorney's office was limited because of the lack of statutes. Though there was
evidence through the Cubans that Wilson and Terpil had conspired with Qaddafi to
assassinate one of his political enemies, solicitation to commit murder - that
is, asking or hiring someone else to do the killing - is not a Federal crime,
and there was no criminal statute in the District of Columbia barring such
solicitation.

Propper got an inspiration. He had discovered in prosecuting an earlier case
that any crime in the Maryland code not in conflict with the District of
Columbia code could be charged in Washington, since the District of Columbia had
adopted all of its criminal law from Maryland in 1801. Using that precedent,
Propper was able to investigate Wilson and Terpil on solicitation charges in the
District of Columbia. Another provision in the Washington code also enabled
Propper to make the solicitation charge a Federal violation. So the United
States Attorney's office had its jurisdiction after all, but, once again, there
were problems. The Letelier case was going to trial and Propper and a chief
aide, E. Lawrence Barcella Jr., were unable to handle both cases at the same
time.

By this time, Mulcahy had become deeply embittered, especially toward the
F.B.I., which, he said, ''never assigned Special status to this case - which
means that the agents assigned to it are working exclusively on it. At first,
the F.B.I. didn't believe me,'' Mulcahy insists. ''Every person they interviewed
supported Wilson's and Terpil's cover story and made me look like a guy with a
wild tale to tell. Then if I ever asked the F.B.I. anything, one agent would
look at the other to decide whether they could answer the question. It was a
one-way street and I felt I couldn't help them anymore without some kind of
dialogue, without their willingness to tell me what they wanted and what they
didn't know.''

Officially, the F.B.I. does not comment on pending investigations, but one agent
who did spend much time on the case disputed Mulcahy's assessment in an
interview. ''Kevin is very impatient,'' the agent said. ''He thinks he can give
us some facts one day and we should begin making arrests on the next.'' ''He
doesn't understand the complexity of the case and the fact that no one is
exactly cooperating with us. It's been a long drawn-out affair, trying to get
some of these witnesses to give us a straight line. This is not a very easy case
to make. We had to start from the beginning, and I think it's very unfair to
criticize us or the United States Attorney's office. We've been working hard on
this for a long time.'' Other Federal officials, however, echoed Mulcahy in
raising questions about the Justice Department's decision not to give the case
higher priority, which would have meant the authorization of more F.B.I.  agents
for field work. Even now, only one agent in Washington is assigned to monitor
developments in the case, and he was pulled off that for months early this year
to handle background investigations of pending Reagan Administration
appointments.

A major development, in Mulcahy's view, came in mid-1978, when the Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms assigned a new two-man team to the case. Richard
Wadsworth and Richard Pedersen decided early in their investigation that Mulcahy
was telling the truth. Now, for the first time, Mulcahy believed that he had
someone inside the investigation with whom he could communicate. Mulcahy agreed
to cooperate in an undercover investigation with Pedersen and Wadsworth, aimed
at gathering first-hand evidence of Wilson's illegal weapons dealings in
Washington - the kind of specific evidence that seemed essential to a
prosecution. The operation failed after five months, but the B.A.T.F. agents
developed a close relationship with Mulcahy and learned vast amounts about the
way Wilson operated, information and insight that later helped them crack the
case.

Mulcahy continued to live in low profile, routinely changing his appearance. His
fears were compounded late one night when he saw a truck owned by one of
Wilson's trusted associates parked across the street from his home. Mulcahy fled
the scene and stayed away from the area for two days. ''It was over three years
and I wanted out again,'' he said, ''and so I disappeared - just went to Arizona
under another name and worked in the construction business.''

Meanwhile, Wilson and Terpil began spending some of the money they were earning.
By the end of 1978, they had purchased more than $4 million of real estate in
the United States and England, paying in cash. They spent another million
dollars for a hotel in Crewe, England, and a town house in London's posh
Lancaster Mews. Federal authorities believed the hotel was to serve as a stop on
an underground railway for terrorists. By that time, Qaddafi had set up ''hit
teams'' that began to terrorize the Libyan exile community in Europe. At least
10 of Qaddafi's political enemies were assassinated by the gunmen, who later
would have access to the hotel to hide from authorities.

Another factor in the investigation of Wilson was his continued high-level
political lobbying in the United States, which revolved around the social use of
his estate in Virginia. By the mid-1970's, Wilson was regularly throwing parties
and offering hunting excursions at the estate, where senior members of the
Carter Administration mingled with influential politicians and members of the
intelligence community. Ted Shackley was also one of the guests. ''The name of
the game is legitimacy,'' one Federal official said. ''Ed Wilson brings three
guys from the C.I.A. and Carter's man brings two senators. Everybody's
legitimizing everybody else.''

''Every place we went,'' the official added, ''Ed Wilson popped up - not on the
surface, but if you looked far enough, it led to Wilson.''

In early June 1979, the United States Attorney's office told Wadsworth and
Pedersen of the B.A.T.F. that there was not enough evidence to charge Wilson and
Terpil with illegally exporting explosives to Libya. The Government had no
evidence that any explosives had in fact been shipped to Libya without the
proper licenses and without accurate labeling and bills of lading, which are
required to insure proper storage of the materials during shipment.  All of the
witnesses interviewed by the F.B.I. had stuck to the cover story in connection
with the shipments to Libya; as far as they were concerned, all that
Inter-Technology had undertaken was a contract with the Libyan Government to
manufacture timers for use in mine-clearing operations. No explosives had been
shipped, the witnesses claimed. Rick Wadsworth decided to make one final effort
to find evidence of the shipment before bowing out of the case. He spent most of
the Memorial Day weekend in the Federal courthouse in downtown Washington
reviewing all of the documents and testimony. He found a work sheet buried in
the files that had been turned over by Mulcahy to the F.B.I. in 1976. The work
sheet with Brower's handwriting on it stemmed from the meeting in August 1976 at
which the California manufacturer agreed to ship RDX (cyclotrimethylene
trinitramine) and the other explosives, suspended in 55-gallon drums, to Libya.

At this point, Eugene Propper was in the process of resigning from the United
States Attorney's office to practice law in Washington and write a book on the
Letelier case; Lawrence Barcella suddenly found himself in charge of the
Wilson-Terpil case. Barcella agreed, after being shown the work sheet, to permit
Wadsworth and Pedersen to fly to California and interview Brower once again.
Wadsworth and Pedersen had discovered that the work sheet, on which Brower had
listed the type and weights of the explosives ordered by Wilson and Terpil,
precisely matched the bills of lading for a shipment of explosives that week
from Brower's factory. The Government now had its evidence.

Over the next year, however, Brower stubbornly continued to insist that he knew
nothing about illegal activity in the United States. In two appearances before
the Federal grand jury in Washington, he denied that the conspiracy meeting in
August 1976, as described by Mulcahy, ever took place. But the evidence, in his
own handwriting, proved to be overwhelming and Brower eventually agreed to
cooperate with the prosecutors in return for dismissal of all but one of the
charges against him - conspiring to ship explosives with the intent to use
unlawfully. When he did testify in late 1980, Brower acknowledged that Mulcahy
was right; that there had been a key meeting in August which resulted in the
initial shipment of the timers and explosives to Libya. He is now serving a
four-month prison sentence.

Mulcahy describes Pedersen and Wadsworth as the heroes in the case that no one
in the Federal Government seemed to want: ''They worked on their own time, in
their own cars, because they knew there was truth in what I was telling them.
What they didn't have was proof.  ... They were constantly being told to close
the investigation, but they told their superiors that if they wanted it closed,
they could sign the file shut themselves.''

Mulcahy says now he believes that the laggard pace of the prosecution was not
due to a Government cover-up but rather - more frustrating - was the result of
bureaucratic inefficiency, rivalries, petty jealousies and what he saw as ''a
simple lack of commitment'' in the United States Attorney's office. He says,
too, that the F.B.I., the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms and the
Customs Service were reluctant to share information with one another at a time
when Wilson and Terpil were continuing to expand their involvement in Libya:
''My most vital concern was that Wilson's and Terpil's activities eventually
would result in a lot of deaths in the United States. Only then would the full
resources of the United States Attorney's office be committed.''

The revolving door in the United States courthouse was still another
complication. Carol Bruce was assigned to the case in 1979.  It was her first
assignment to a major crime, and she began, as her predecessors had, by
reviewing the files and spending hours with Mulcahy. He was encouraged once
again: ''She was like a breath of fresh air. She understood the case and grasped
its importance.'' Coming to it late had an advantage; Carol Bruce was able to
add objectivity to what had evolved into an emotional dispute and series of
competitions among the investigative agencies. ''She came in with a chain saw,''
Mulcahy says, ''and got things on track again.'' In late 1979, Carol Bruce and
Mulcahy had lunch, and the young prosecutor explained to Mulcahy that he had to
continue to cooperate, and that he had to testify publicly against Wilson and
Terpil at a trial. If he continued to insist that he would not do so, she
warned, he could be indicted himself for his technical violations of the law as
president of Inter-Technology.

The grand jury was convened and witnesses again started to come in for
questioning. Seymour Glanzer, Wilson's attorney, made clear that he would
involve the C.I.A. as a major component in his client's defense if the
Government chose to indict Wilson. At one point, Federal officials said, Glanzer
seemed to suggest that he would offer the prosecutors valuable information about
the Letelier case in return for the dropping of charges against Wilson. The
prosecutors also were offered a chance to interrogate Wilson in Europe, but they
refused to do so and insisted that any plea bargaining would have to include a
jail term. Glanzer, asked for his view of the matter, said, ''I can't comment on
the Federal prosecutors' thought processes, and I'm not commenting on mine.'' In
late December

1979, Frank Terpil and an accomplice were arrested in New York in the
culmination of a secret operation in which two New York City undercover
detectives posed as Latin American revolutionaries anxious to purchase any kind
of weapons. The investigation, led by the office of Robert M. Morgenthau, the
Manhattan District Attorney, accumulated hours of taped conversations involving
Terpil, who was trying to impress, as usual. In one tape, Terpil bragged of his
ability to sell any weapons, including missiles, and told of his team of former
Green Beret experts who were willing to travel anywhere to train terrorists. By
then, Wilson's and Terpil's team had been at work for more than three years in
Libya. The New York evidence was shared with Washington, and was considered
essential - although much of what Terpil revealed had already been provided to
the Government by Mulcahy. ''I heard Frank was singing like a bird,'' Mulcahy
says.

Terpil was charged shortly after his arrest with illegal weapons possession.
Some of the New York authorities who handled the Terpil investigation privately
raised questions about the slow pace of the Federal inquiry in Washington.
''This is one time,'' said one senior official in New York, ''that I'd want to
be appointed as a special prosecutor (in Washington) or an assistant United
States Attorney for about six months.'' His obvious point was that the
Washington case against Wilson and Terpil should have been handled much more
expeditiously. The New York official acknowledged, however, that the case in
Washington had been severely hampered by a ''lack of help from the investigative
agencies.''

In April 1980, four months after the arrests in New York, Wilson, Terpil and
Brower finally were indicted by a Federal grand jury in Washington. Terpil, who
had been released on bond after pleading not guilty in the New York case, was
arrested a few days later by Wadsworth and Pedersen at the Secret Service
training academy in suburban Maryland. At the time, characteristically, Terpil
was attending an industrial-security show, looking for equipment that he could
sell overseas. The Federal indictment centered around conspiracy charges
stemming from the August 1976 meeting in the office of Inter-Technology, as
depicted in Mulcahy's grand-jury testimony. The indictment also accused Wilson
and Terpil of conspiring to assassinate the Libyan dissident. Mulcahy's relief
over the indictments was short-lived, however, because a Federal magistrate
subsequently reduced Terpil's bond from $500,000 to $75,000, of which only
$15,000 had to be put up in cash. ''To me, it was the most absurd thing in the
world,'' Mulcahy recalls. ''I knew he was going to split - I knew him, his life
style, the fact that he had at least six different passports.'' Mulcahy also
knew that Wilson and Terpil had been quietly disguising their ownership of their
business ventures and properties in the United States to avoid Federal seizure.
''I took the reduced bond as a reflection of the importance the Government
attached to this case - a $15,000 cash bond when millions of dollars and the
resources of the Libyan Government were at his disposal.''

On Sept. 3, 1980, more than four months after his indictment in Washington and
the day before he was to begin trial on the New York charges, Terpil fled to
Europe.

With Terpil jumping bond, and Wilson choosing to remain abroad as a fugitive,
Mulcahy concluded that it was time to get out. He had accomplished very little
by his four years of cooperation. So he moved to the Middle West.

There were questions that still disturbed him. ''Why didn't the C.I.A. cooperate
fully and aggressively with the United States Attorney's office? Why didn't the
Government ask the agency for its assistance in locating and apprehending Wilson
and Terpil? Why wasn't a combined Federal task force set up to coordinate the
investigation? Why wasn't a special prosecutor used? Why did the F.B.I. give
this case such low priority? Where are we going to find Qaddafi's bombs in the
future? What does it take - short of a big body count - to get the attention of
the Congress and the White House to a potentially lethal situation? What is the
responsibility of the United States to the world in a case like this?''

Mulcahy returned to Washington late last year ready to end his own involvement
with the prosecutors. ''I had been forced to live a lie,'' he says. ''I had
often lived under an assumed name, with a car and a business registered in other
people's names.'' By that time, Mulcahy had set up a successful construction
business, specializing in historical restorations. He began research for a book
on his experiences, but that did not solve what he viewed as his immediate
problem: ''How to exorcise my entire involvement with the case.'' What he
learned in early 1981 convinced him that it was time to take a step he had not
contemplated before - going to the news media. A former C.I.A. colleague -
Mulcahy will not say who - told him that Wilson and Jerome Brower had conspired
in late 1977 to ship 40,000 pounds of C4 plastique to Libya, the largest illegal
shipment of explosives known to Federal investigators. Mulcahy later confirmed
that what he had heard was true -the shipments had been made from a Texas
airport in the fall of 1977, aboard a chartered DC-8 cargo jet. An employee of
one of Wilson's firms, Around World Shipping and Chartering, of Houston, Tex.,
was known to have been involved.

Brower and his California company had made a profit of $1 million on the C4
shipment alone, Mulcahy was told. ''What I felt was absolute horror,'' Mulcahy
recalls. ''I was horrified that they could have shipped explosives in that
quantity, involving as many people as they did - lawyers from two different
states, commercial airlines, commercial freight forwarding companies - and not
have been detected. There had to be a cast of characters of more than 10 people,
including pilots and the companies that sold the C4. When I learned of it, the
shipment was more than three years old and the F.B.I. and the United States
Attorney's office were fully aware of it. Yet no one had been charged, or even
called before a grand jury. That was the final factor in my decision to go
public. The only option left to me was the press.''

In interviews a few weeks ago, prosecutors at the United States Attorney's
office declared that the case still was open and that more indictments would be
issued before the end of summer, expanding the ranks of those known to have been
involved in the Wilson-Terpil operations. Some former C.I.A. officials, among
them Ted Shackley, are known to have been talking with the prosecutors, and
apparently have been shedding new light on Wilson's connection - or lack of
connection - to the agency. Meanwhile, Frank Terpil was tried in absentia by New
York City authorities on 10 conspiracy and weapons charges, found guilty and
sentenced, June 8, to 17 2/3 to 53 years in prison, the maximum.

Mulcahy believes the Government is now focusing its attention on the lesser
lights who flitted about the Wilson-Terpil operations. He knows that Wilson
operated in Washington so freely because of his ability to reach into the top
layer of Government and Congress; because of his connections in a city where
connections are so important. Mulcahy also knows that Wilson and Terpil are not
the only former C.I.A. and military men selling information and materiel to the
highest bidder. Most important, Mulcahy believes that the United States
Attorney's office in Washington was guilty of what he calls ''Government
complicity by omission'' by not demanding that Federal agencies, at the very
least, cut off the flow of men and terrorist equipment to Libya.

Mulcahy remains a believer: He believes in the value and importance of the
C.I.A. and the due process of the American judicial system. ''The system can
work,'' he says, ''but it can't work unless the people who are the system put it
to work.'' If he had it to do again, he says, ''I know I wouldn't have
approached any Government agencies. I would have taken every document I had to
the White House or hand-delivered them to the most responsible journalist I
could find. I'd never go to a Government agency again - because of the way I was
treated, the lack of commitment and the half-truths that I've heard for the last
five years.''

Edwin Wilson could not be reached for comment. Someone who answered the
telephone at his office in Tripoli declined to give his name and hung up when
asked to take a message.

Despite the formal disavowal by the C.I.A., Wilson remains an outsider who knows
a great deal about secret American intelligence activities. Last August, four
months after his indictment, he was seized by officials in Malta and held in
custody for more than three days. Somehow, before he could be turned over to
American authorities for extradition to Washington, he managed to flee, flying
from Malta to Heathrow Airport near London on his revoked passport. Federal
officials now suspect a $10,000 payoff through a laundered bank account was made
in Malta on Wilson's behalf. There are those in Washington who believe that,
even today, there are some elements in the C.I.A. who protected Wilson in Malta
and will continue to shield him.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Libyan mission in U.S. photo of Theodore
Shackley C.I.A. official photo of Sayad Qaddafi, Mulcahy, Wilson, Terpil in
Britain photo of Frank Terpil, 1979, arrested in New York photo of Kevin Mulcahy
in May 1976 photo of Edwin Wilson's Virginia estate

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              305 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 21, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Behind The Best Sellers;
LEN DEIGHTON

BYLINE: By Edwin McDowell

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 674 words


Len Deighton is one of a number of British writers who, because their books do
well on both sides of the Atlantic, make one wonder if Shaw was right in saying
that Britain and the United States are separated by the same language. He has
had a number of big sellers in both countries, including ''Funeral in Berlin,''
''The Ipcress File'' and ''Billion-Dollar Brain,'' and now his ''XPD'' is also a
trans-Atlantic best-seller.

''When I read books by American authors I'm usually very critical of the way
they handle British dialogue,'' said Mr. Deighton in a recent phone conversation
from his home in Ireland. ''I feel that the single most important thing in
writing about foreign characters is writing dialogue as convincingly as
possible. Some of the spellings are changed between my British and American
editions, but I would feel a bit humiliated if I made any bad errors.''

Mr. Deighton need not worry unduly on that score, for he spends several months
of each year at his house north of Los Angeles, and he lived in New York for
three months in the 1950's while he was an illustrator for an advertising
agency. Later he took off for Mexico and parts west, then spent 1956 and 1957
flying around the world as a steward for B.O.A.C. His first book, ''The Ipcress
File'' (1962), was an immediate success, and it has been followed by about a
dozen others - most of them novels, but also two cookbooks, a guidebook to
London and histories of the wartime fall of France and the Battle of Britain.

''It probably seems that I write a book every year or so,'' he said, ''but from
start to finish I've never done a book in less than five years. The one I'm
doing now, a novel about the American air corps in Britain during the war, I've
been working on for some time.  I want it very close to being historically
accurate, so I've had to find the people involved, write to them, wait for
answers and so on.''

A book on which he spent three years never got off the ground. ''It was going to
be about the air war in Vietnam, about the fighter pilots and how they compared
with those of the First and Second World Wars. The Air Force said I could go to
Vietnam provided I didn't get in the way, so I spent a few weeks at two air
bases in England and one in Germany, to learn how things work, but then the war
ended.''

For many years Mr. Deighton, age 52, the son of a chauffeur, drew a series of
illustrated strips teaching French cooking to readers of The Observer, but
eventually he had to give that up. ''I'd find myself in some far part of the
globe,'' he said, ''and I'd get a telegram from a feature editor asking where's
the next one.''

As a writer primarily of spy thrillers - ''XPD'' is about a clandestine meeting
between Winston Churchill and Hitler in June 1940, to discuss the possibility of
England's surrender - Mr.  Deighton follows a long British literary tradition.
''I came to writing spy books because I didn't know enough about police
procedure, for instance, to write those kinds of books,'' he said.  ''So I wrote
my first books the way people would write science fiction, because they gave me
much more latitude to invent situations.''

These days, though, he is a stickler for detail. He learned scuba diving in
preparation for his novel ''Horse Under Water'' (''The British Navy taught me,
and I didn't let them know I couldn't swim until it was all over'') and he
learned to fly a helicopter while preparing to write ''Billion-Dollar Brain.''
More recently he flew with the United States Air Force while it dropped a
simulated atomic bomb off the coast of Britain.

''I pursue some idiosyncratic interests because enough people share them and are
willing to go along with them,'' he said. ''I feel that readers of my books pay
me to do the things they would get a kick out of doing themselves.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Len Deighton

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              306 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 21, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Television Week

BYLINE: By Carol Lawson

SECTION: Section 2A; Page 3, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 948 words


Travels With Walter
Remember the hoopla that surrounded Walter Cronkite's retirement?  Well, he
remained ''retired'' for all of 36 hours after turning over his anchorman's
chair to Dan Rather on the CBS Evening News. Ever since, Mr. Cronkite has been
on a globe-hopping adventure in preparation of ''Walter Cronkite's Universe,''
his new science ''magazine'' for CBS. The program, an outgrowth of a pilot
miniseries last summer, has its season premiere Sunday evening at 8.  His
friends at CBS picked that particular time because it's an advantageous one,
following the widely-watched ''60 Minutes.''

Mr. Cronkite opens his half-hour program by going 900 feet below the Pacific
Ocean off San Diego in a Navy submarine to investigate the phenomenon of
bioluminescence. The purpose of this plunge is to look at fish being studied by
the Navy because of their ability to create their own light. The second segment
of the show, narrated by CBS correspondent Charles Osgood, is a look at how
computers and other scientific novelties are being used to restore great works
of art. The program closes with a short pictorial essay, narrated by Mr.
Cronkite and set to an electronic score, on crystallization.

The second espisode of ''Walter Cronkite's Universe'' - there are 13 episodes in
all - will be shown Tuesday night at 8, and will continue in that time slot each
week during the summer. Episode No. 2 opens with Mr. Cronkite in China, in
pursuit of the mysteries of herbal medicine. Both Chinese and American
scientists are researching the healing powers of herbs, common remedies in China
throughout its history. The program also includes a visit with the scientist who
is predicting ''the earthquake of the century'' for Peru later this year, and a
look at China's two baby pandas, the newest in captivity.

''Budget is no problem,'' says Jonathan Ward, producer of ''Walter Cronkite's
Universe.'' ''Walter is living out his fantasies.''

America at Work
The example is dramatic: The television camera goes into the factory of the Lee
Jeans company and focuses on 40 layers of denim on the cutting board. But
instead of seeing a human being with a pair of scissors in hand cutting through
the material, the viewer sees a computer doing all the slicing.

This is only one of many examples of the changing nature of work - and the work
force - shown in the NBC White Paper, ''America Works When America Works,''
which will be televised Thursday at 9:30 P.M.

''The nature of work in this country is changing more rapidly than at any time
in the past, but the work force is not,'' says Reuven Frank, executive producer.
The program points out that while certain skills are no longer needed, creating
legions of unemployed workers, there are no large-scale programs to train people
for jobs in new industries.

''America Works When America Works'' is the sequel to last year's award-winning
White Paper ''If Japan Can...Why Can't We?,'' which focused on the need for
increased productivity in the United States.  ''America Works When America
Works'' was put together by the same team, with Lloyd Dobyns as reporter, Ray
Lockhard as producer, and Mr. Frank.

''We are in a time of tremendous turmoil,'' Mr. Frank says. ''All you can do in
a 90-minute program is show a little of the change here and there and stimulate
some thought.''

Classic Documentaries
''The prevailing mentality in television is, if a program is shown once, it's
enough,'' Bill Moyers was saying. But for some of Mr.  Moyers's colleagues at
WNET, once is not enough when it comes to certain documentaries produced by CBS.
Friday night at 9, WNET will begin a five-part series, to be introduced by Mr.
Moyers, of memorable CBS documentaries.

The first will be ''Harvest of Shame,'' Edward R. Murrow's 1960 report on the
plight of migrant farm workers in the United States.  At the close of the
documentary, Mr. Moyers will interview Stephen Nagler, director of the Migrant
Legal Action Program in Washington, D.C., to ask what, if anything, has since
changed in migrant workers' arduous working conditions, low wages and
substandard living conditions.

The series, which will continue weekly through July 24, will also include ''The
World of Charlie Company,'' about United States combat soldiers in Vietnam;
''The Tenement,'' a study of nine black families living in a Chicago tenement;
''Don't Count the Candles,'' an essay on growing old, filmed in Britain by Lord
Snowden; and ''The Silent Spring of Rachel Carson,'' in which Eric Sevareid
interviews the scientist Rachel Carson about the harmful effects of pesticides.

''These documentaries are classics,'' Mr. Moyers says. ''We are taking them down
from the shelf for a new generation.''

Trevor Times Two
Trevor Howard, seen last month on Channel 13 with Celia Johnson in ''Staying
On,'' based on a Paul Scott novel about India, is back on Channel 13 this week
not once, but twice. Sunday night at 10:30 he will be seen with Martin Sheen in
a repeat of ''The Catholics,'' Brian Moore's film adaptation of his own short
novel.

Wednesday night at 8:30, Mr. Howard stars with Robin Nedwell, Diane Keen and
Jack Douglas in ''And the Band Played On,'' a comedy about a brass band seeking
the county championship in the quaint village of Shillingsbury. Mr. Howard plays
Old Saltie, the band's aging conductor who is replaced, with mixed results, by a
pop musician from London.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              307 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 22, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

JETS TO TAIWAN: FROM HAIG'S VIEWPOINT, NO URGENCY

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1199 words

DATELINE: WELLINGTON, New Zealand, June 21


Secretary of State Alexander M.  Haig Jr. was reported today to see ''no
urgency'' in dealing with the possible sale of advanced jet fighters to Taiwan.

The Secretary was also said to hope that the decision on whether to provide the
equipment, which is strongly opposed by China, would be based solely on Taiwan's
genuine defense needs and not on political grounds to balance possible arms
sales to China.

In a briefing meant to outline the Reagan Administration's new Asian policy,
reporters traveling with Mr. Haig were also told that there was a major and
potentially difficult situation developing over Japan's refusal to spend as much
on defense as urged by the Reagan Administration.

Mr. Haig's position, as explained to reporters, is that even though he shares
the Pentagon's desire to see Japan take more of a role in its defense, ''there
are limits to which the United States should or can do in pressuring a friendly
regime.''

Haig Hears Japanese Complaint

In a meeting Friday with Mr. Haig in Manila, Foreign Minister Sunao Sonoda of
Japan complained about pressure by the Defense Department over the spending
question.

Mr. Haig told Mr. Sonoda that the United States wanted Japan to be a truly
international power so that it was ''not an economic giant and a military
pygmy.'' However, reporters were told today that ''it serves no useful purpose
to embarrass Japanese leaders and play into the hands of their opponents.''

As a result, an impression was created of differences in approach between the
Defense and State Departments over the issue.  The ''new policy'' that was
outlined without direct attribution to Mr. Haig was meant to provide a framework
for what he talked about and accomplished in meetings in Peking and Manila in
recent days. He arrived in the New Zealand capital this afternoon for a two-day
session with Australia and New Zealand in the 30th meeting under the Anzus
Treaty.

Policy Was Drawn Up During Trip

The policy stresses American flexibility and a determination to combine
political, economic and security aspects to promote American interests in Asia.

No such policy statement was issued before Mr. Haig left Washington for Asia,
and this was drawn up by his aides midway through the trip, in part to deflect
attention being given to the decision to allow Peking to become eligible for
arms sales.

Nevertheless, what the reporters were told of Mr. Haig's position on the Taiwan
issue served to keep up interest in the subject. While in Peking, Mr. Haig had
been told that if the United States went ahead with arms sales to Taiwan,
particularly of the advanced fighter plane known as the FX, this could have
extremely serious consequences for American-Chinese policy.

The question ''has to be dealt with in terms of need, it has to be dealt with in
terms of the purpose to which it would serve,'' reporters were told.

''I see no urgency on this subject at all,'' reporters were told.

A 'Rather Impregnable' Base

In the discussion of the Asian policy, Taiwan was not mentioned, but it was
described in answer to questions as ''a rather impregnable aircraft carrier in a
vital sea lane.''

Several of Mr. Haig's aides have said privately that there was no military
necessity for Taiwan to receive either of the two FX models, the F-5G or the
F-16/79, since China was unable to mount a credible threat to Taiwan and in fact
was trying to persuade Taiwan to enter into conciliatory discussions.

Therefore, the aides said, it is vital for Mr. Haig when he returns to the
United States to make a major effort to persuade President Reagan not to go
along with pressure from Capitol Hill or other Taiwan supporters for an early
decision in favor of the FX while the new approach to China is just entering
into a new phase.

In Peking, Mr. Haig began to talk in terms of continuing the unofficial ties
between the people of Taiwan and the United States and refused to be drawn
publicly into saying what he would recommend on sales of the planes.

Policy Goes Beyond Arms Sales

The Reagan Administration's Asian policy, reporters were told, is based on a
''fundamental strategic perspective,'' but it was said that ''we're not
interested just in strengthening our military presence or in selling arms.''

''We are seeking to forge an integrated political, economic and security mosaic
that is structured to be responsive to local needs and necessities while above
all serving United States global interests and objectives,'' reporters were told
of the Haig approach.

In explaining the policy, a senior official said that the United States was not
trying to repeat the past. For instance, he said, there was no desire for new
military alliances to replace such treaties as the Southeast Asian Treaty
Organization that collapsed as a result of the Vietnam War.

Nor was there any desire, he said, to pressure ''the truly nonaligned'' into
security relationships. He said the United States was seeking ''a far more
subtle, resilient, complex and flexible overall structure.''

Carriers Will Play Key Role

In particular, reporters were told, the Reagan Administration sees as important
the increase in American defense spending that will provide additional aircraft
carriers, thereby strengthening the American presence in the area to counter a
perceived growth in Soviet naval and air power.

Reporters were told that when Mr. Haig met privately with the foreign ministers
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations in Manila, the American
willingness to show determination and strength in the Pacific as well as the
decision to treat China more flexibly met with ''total unanimity, total support
and total enthusiasm for what we're doing.''

Some of the Southeast Asian foreign ministers had told reporters that they were
wary of a rearmed China that could threaten them more than the Russians over the
long run. To this, the senior American official said that this subject was
raised in the talks in Peking, and China was urged to moderate its support for
local Communist parties.

The reporters were told that ''you can't say that China will be Marxist
forever.''

No Overtures to Vietnam

As for Vietnam, whose Government Mr. Haig assailed yesterday in Manila,
reporters were told that the American policy was to maintain pressure on Hanoi
in the hope that this would persuade it to accept the offer of the Asean
countries to take part in a conference to lead to a new government in Cambodia
and the withdrawal of Vietnamese troops.

''Clearly they would be welcomed with open arms if they change their policy,''
the official said of the Vietnamese. He said, however, that it would be wrong to
offer incentives to the Vietnamese in the form of aid or expanded contacts
before they signaled an intention to change.

----

Hanoi Complains of Collusion

BANGKOK, Thailand, June 21 (UPI) -Vietnam said today that the threat to
international peace ''comes straight from Peking'' and not from the Soviet Union
and its ''proxies'' as alleged by Secretary of State Haig.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. with
Roger Perrin

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 22, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Essay;
THE REAL TIMERMAN ISSUE

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 897 words


By William Safire WASHINGTON - Is Jacob Timerman the courageous accuser of
anti-Semitism in Argentina, whose personal witness of torture and repression
shames the don't-make-waves Jews of that country and demonstrates the need for
the U.S. to put pressure on dictatorships of the right?

Or is Mr. Timerman a left-wing idealogue who was arrested primarily because his
financial backer was a looter of banks and suspected of being a banker of
terrorists, and whose suffering is being used to validate the Carter foreign
policy and discredit the Reagan ''quiet diplomacy''?

Sorry, everybody - the answer is probably both.  The duty of every minority is
to stand up for its rights. Blacks should outspokenly combat racism and Jews
should slam back hard at threats to dignity as well as survival. If I lived in
Argentina, I like to think I would be in trouble with the authorities all the
time. Mr. Timerman's outrage is well placed and extremely well directed; his
testimony deserves the attention it has been getting because it will do some
good.

But to admire Mr. Timerman - even to identify with his fury at the vestiges of
Nazism that survive among some in the country that ultimately deported him -is
not to agree with his conclusions about American foreign policy.

Doves who have enshrined him as ''a Solzhenitsyn of the left,'' in Irving
Kristol's phrase, suggest that nobody who has not gone through his torture has
the standing to differ with his recommendations.

Although I do not have the credentials of one who has suffered, let me suggest
that Mr. Timerman cannot assail U.S. policy - as he did with his presence at the
Lefever hearings - and remain unassailable himself.

Those who use Timerman as their political shield cannot fairly equate his
detractors with his torturers.  Many of the users of Mr. Timerman today denounce
the ''corrupt dictatorship'' in Saigon during the Vietnam War. We do not hear
much about the dictatorship in Ho Chi Minh City today. It is not corrupt.  With
honesty and efficiency, the Communist regime shoots or imprisons opponents; it
lets no imprisoned editors go free to write books and bear witness. The people
of Vietnam had much more freedom under the good old corrupt dictatorship.

Doves fearful of confronting the Russians are zealous in confronting, even
destabilizing, imperfect allies. By lionizing Timerman (martyrs are frequently
lionized), these doublestandardbearers hope to estrange us from the unpopular
regimes we need to resist communist expansion. However, just when the dovish
canonization of Timerman was well under way, the editor crossed up his advocates
by endorsing Entebbe II. Timerman 's consistency in fighting for Jewish survival
must have caused much fluttering in the dovecote.

The central question is not whether old liberals and neoconservatives will turn
Mr. Timerman into this year's Lilian Hellman, but whether the Reagan policy will
work better than the Carter policy of permitting laissez faire on the left and
demanding rectitude on the right.

There sits Argentina, less repressive now because it murdered its terrorists
along with many innocents. Of late, it has been doing business on a large scale
with the Soviets; if we stand aloof, the Soviet Union will penetrate this
hemisphere as it never could through Cuba. If we engage, we might be able to
regain an ally in the economic warfare sure to follow an invasion of Poland.

South Africa is another nation that will not improve with ostracism. Our
diplomats wonder why South Africans want to rig the Namibian elections to block
complete takeover by leftists; the answer is that geologists at Gulf and Texaco
suspect an ocean of oil under the western part of that country, and every SWAPO
leader would become an instant Stuart Mott. South Africa may be racist, but it's
not crazy; the OPEC nations are worried about a big find in that area, extending
into Angola, which is why the Cubans will not leave.

Pakistan is no human-rights bargain either, but it stands between
Soviet-occupied Afghanistan and the Soviet strategic goal of dominating the
Persian Gulf and Indian Ocean. The Reaganauts are shoveling in $3 billion with -
we hope - some strings attached.

Regimes like these, which deny much freedom, can help us stop the march of
communist regimes, which deny all freedom. We should help our allies so long as
they give us some evidence of progress toward more internal freedom.

Either ''quiet diplomacy'' will work or it will not. If it works, real gains
will be made in total human freedom; if it fails, we should stand ready to
withdraw our support before we forget what makes us different from the
communists.

It's worth a try. The alternative is self-righteousness in a sea of
totalitarianism. Because no injustice is tolerable, the cries of the individual
Timerman's must be heard and amplified; this Administration must be held
accountable for results in extending freedom among our friends as it protects
freedom from our enemies.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              309 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 23, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW ZEALAND QUESTIONS THE U.S. GOAL OF ISOLATING AND PUNISHING VIETNAM the
Foreign Minister of New Zealand

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1174 words

DATELINE: WELLINGTON, New Zealand, Tuesday, June 23


One of America's closest allies in the Pacific questioned at a two-day
conference that ended today whether the Reagan Administration's policy of
seeking to isolate and punish Vietnam for its ties to the Soviet Union might be
too harsh and result in pushing Hanoi even closer to Moscow.

According to participants at the 30th annual meeting of the Anzus Council,
Foreign Minister Brian E. Talboys of New Zealand told Secretary of State
Alexander M. Haig Jr. that he was concerned that if the current diplomatic
effort to persuade Vietnam to withdraw from Cambodia failed, the American
approach of stepping up pressure on Vietnam might prove counterproductive.

Throughout his Asian trip, Mr. Haig has been attacking Vietnam at every
opportunity. In Manila Saturday, he said that the United States would not
normalize relations with Vietnam so long as its soldiers remained in Cambodia
and was ''a source of trouble to the entire region.''

American officials said later that Mr. Talboys was more philosophical than
aggressive in expressing skepticism about the long-term effects of taking a
hard-line approach toward Hanoi.

Support for Asean Effort

They said Mr. Talboys agreed with Mr. Haig and Foreign Minister Anthony A.
Street of Australia that for the moment the best approach was to back the
efforts of the five-member Association of Southeast Asian Nations to persuade
Vietnam to withdraw from Cambodia and to participate eventually in a United
Nations conference on Cambodia opening in New York July 13.

In a communique issued at the end of the meeting today, the section on Cambodia
was very mild, omitting any mention of Vietnam's military intervention in that
country. This was explained by Mr. Haig and Mr. Talboys as demonstrating support
for the political effort of Asean countries to bring about a settlement in
Cambodia and to avoid insulting Vietnam in advance of the conference.

Mr. Talboys, seeking to avoid a public dispute with Mr. Haig, stressed at the
press conference those aspects that he said had been ''agreed upon.''

''What we have agreed upon is the need to find an early political solution to
the conflict,'' he said.  ''The continuation of the conflict has inherent in it
the danger that the conflict could overflow into Thailand and the continuation
of the conflict necessarilly means that Vietnam's dependence on the Soviet Union
is likely to increase.''

The Anzus Council is the consultative organ under the Anzus Treaty signed in
1951, and it brings together three close allies. It has rarely produced
controversy.  The three officials agreed on the growing Soviet military presence
in the South Pacific area and on the need for a stronger American military
response.

Mr. Talboys, for instance, said last night at an Anzus dinner: ''We have
welcomed the reassertion of American leadership in the councils of the world. We
have welcomed the strengthening of the United States resolve and capacity once
again to play a positive global role.''

Avoiding Confrontation

Mr. Talboys said that ''Soviet adventurism is manifest'' throughout Asia.  The
discussion about Vietnam and its ties with Moscow touched on one of the more
pronounced differences that has arisen on this trip.  In his strongly worded
attacks on Hanoi, Mr. Haig has seemed at times to be in harmony only with China.
Japan and the members of the Asean group, as well as New Zealand, seem more
comfortable publicly with a less confrontational approach.

Mr. Haig's aides have insisted privately that many of the Asian countries have
told them in confidence that they were heartened by Mr. Haig's tougher approach
and that they supported him even if, for various reasons, they could not do so
in public.

The United States, New Zealand, and Australia were reported to have agreed in
private that the chances of success for the Asean initiative on Cambodia were
slim. Mr. Talboys then said that he was concerned that if the diplomatic moves
failed there had to be some other alternative than just trying to isolate
Vietnam. He said this could have the effect of strengthening the Hanoi-Moscow
alliance.

Making Vietnam a 'Pariah'

Reporters traveling with Mr. Haig were told that Mr. Haig's policy was based on
the premise that the chances for changing Hanoi's policies depended on making it
realize that it had become ''a pariah'' in the region and ''that they are
presiding over an economic and domestic shambles.''

Hanoi would be welcomed ''with open arms'' if it altered its policies, reporters
were told, but it would be a mistake to offer Hanoi incentives in terms of aid
or trade in advance because then they ''could have their cake and eat it too.''

At yesterday's session, Mr. Haig discussed with the New Zealand and Australian
ministers the possibility of their participation in the Sinai peacekeeping force
being organized by the United States to patrol the area being returned to Egypt
by Israel in April.

The United States has said it would be willing to provide about half of the
2,500-member force, and it is seeking to broaden international participation as
much as possible.

U.N. Sanction Is Preferred

Both New Zealand and Australia have already received preliminary inquiries about
taking part and they replied with a lack of enthusiasm, according to officials
from both countries. They have said that they would have difficulty sending
forces to take part in an operation not sanctioned by the United Nations and
have worried about possible Arab boycotts of their products.

American officials said that Mr. Haig did not formally request their
participation but told them that the United States was continuing, along with
Israel and Egypt, to discuss participation by other nations. They were told that
they might be asked to send special units to undertake tasks for which they were
particularly qualified. This might include providing helicopter pilots and
maintenance.

Both Mr. Talboys and Mr. Street said today that they were pleased to have
received additional information from Mr. Haig on the attitude of Arab countries
toward their possible participation in the Sinai force. Their comments seemed to
suggest that they were now more favorably inclined to recommend their countries'
taking part in the international force.

Mr. Haig, at the press conference, declined to provide additional details,
except to say that he expected the negotiations with Egypt and Israel on the
composition of the force to be concluded by the end of next month. The Secretary
said, in answer to a question, that the United States did not want an American
to command the peacekeeping force, even though it would provide the bulk of the
troops

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. with
Brian E. Talboys

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              310 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 23, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM ROSTOW'S STATEMENT TO SENATE PANEL ON ARMS TALKS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1094 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 22


Following are excerpts from the statement of Eugene V. Rostow before the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee on his nomination to be director of the Arms Control
and Disarmament Agency:

Many look to arms control agreements as magical guarantees of peace. The history
of the subject should persuade us to accept more modest expectations. Fair,
balanced and verifiable arms control agreements can play a significant role both
in achieving and in maintaining peace. They cannot do so of themselves.

But despite the disappointments and the setbacks, our foreign policy since
President Truman's time has never stopped trying for effective international
controls to minimize the risk of nuclear war and encourage the peaceful use of
nuclear energy. Under President Reagan, this will emphatically remain the case.

If the United States and its allies should fail to carry through the programs of
rearmament on which they are now embarked, the Soviet Union would soon reinforce
its widespread conventional force superiority with a position of ominous
strategic strength. The Soviet Union is now close to acquiring a posture from
which it could gain an important strategic advantage by striking first or
threatening to strike first in a crisis. Even if we allow our strategic forces
to remain vulnerable to that threat, the paralyzing specter of Soviet military
superiority could prevent us from defending our national interests with force if
diplomacy and deterrence fail. In short, we could be exposed to nuclear
blackmail.

Stability and Order

Thus wherever one starts, analysis returns to the fundamental problem of
stability and order. Secretary of State Haig addressed the issue in his
important speech of April 24, 1981. The lesson we should draw from the
experience of the last 10 years is that the United States, its Allies, and all
the other nations which cherish peace should return to the containment policy
pursued between Truman's time and the American withdrawal from Vietnam.

Unless effective containment is restored, we cannot expect to pursue detente and
arms control fruitfully. The restoration of containment should be the predicate
for useful arms control agreements with the Soviet Union, which could then
reinforce the policy and help to sustain it during periods of stress. Even
competing nations have common interests in peace, if they can be brought to
accept them. It should be possible, whatever the difficulties, to translate
those interests into agreements to limit and control armaments. And such
agreements, in turn, could reduce the risk of war by inadvertence, moderate arms
competition and promote political cooperation.

What's to Be Done?

I come now to the final question: What's to be done, and, more particularly,
what's to be done about arms control?  The first step has been taken. With its
historic votes on the future of the military budget, the Congress has joined
President Reagan in launching a program to rebuild America's defenses. Without
that decision, nothing else could be accomplished.

I believe it is now possible and desirable for us to resume the search for
balanced and verifiable arms control agreements.  The first item on the agenda,
obviously, is the SALT II treaty still technically before the Senate. Should it
be renegotiated or should we proceed on what is loosely called the agenda for
SALT III?  Before we act, all aspects of this important subject should be
studied with care by all concerned in the Executive Branch and the Senate and
discussed with our allies.

The Administration has reached no conclusions on this subject, beyond the
conviction that the SALT II Treaty is deeply flawed and should not be ratified.
We should make a fresh start in seeking both arms control and arms reduction;
and we should choose the course that will contribute most positively to the
goals I have identified in the earlier parts of this statement: Allied
solidarity behind regional programs of containment in the Atlantic area, the
Middle East, the Far East or elsewhere, as circumstances may require. From now
on, I suggest, we should have a new acronym - not SALT but START, or Strategic
Arms Reduction Talks.

Issue of Verification

Secondly, I shall recommend a fundamental review of the whole problem of
verification, monitoring and Soviet compliance with arms control agreements and
of our policies concerning them, perhaps including talks on the subject with the
Soviet Union when our internal review has been completed. But the discussion of
the issue during the active debate on SALT II during the last three years has
left me, for one, deeply concerned about our capacity to verify Sovit compliance
and to monitor developments in Soviet nuclear capabilities. Obviously, if
nuclear arms limitation agreements do not reduce uncertainty about each side's
arsenal, they can do little to improve security.

Similarly, I believe that we must examine once again the perennial problem of
the data used in arms control negotiations with the Soviet Union. Until now, the
data have been supplied almost entirely by the United States.

Fourth, we must consider the nature of the arms control agreement we want.
Should we seek a comprehensive agreement or a relatively simple one? One for a
period of years or one of indefinite duration, like the ABM treaty? What should
we be trying to limit or reduce?  The number of deployed launchers? There is now
serious concern that this approach is no longer adequate. Should we try to limit
or reduce the number and types of missiles? The number and power of warheads on
missiles? Their throw weight?

Will it be possible to negotiate and verify a dramatic and equitable cut in each
side's arsenal - to achieve a real breakthrough in the mad spiral of arms
accumulation? Such proposals have been made from time to time - notably by Paul
H. Nitze in 1971 and by George Kennan a few weeks ago. Under present
circumstances, such an approach might be feasible, perhaps by starting with the
largest missiles. No American Administration could reject such a possibility out
of hand, despite the fact that President Carter's arms reduction proposals in
1977 were abruptly dismissed by the Soviet Union.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              311 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 23, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

9,700 GRANTED U.S. CITIZENSHIP IN LOS ANGELES naturalization ceremony in nation

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 396 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, June 22


Almost 10,000 immigrants, more than half of them from Asia and the Pacific,
became American citizens today in the largest naturalization ceremony in the
nation's history.

They took the oath of citizenship in the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum in
ceremonies that provided vivid evidence of a surge of immigration that began in
the early 1970's and that immigration researchers say is continuing to bringing
more and more new residents each year.

Last year, according to the researchers, about 808,000 legal immigrants came to
this country - more than in any year in the nation's history. Immigration
specialists say the new wave of migration is primarily from Latin America and
Asia.

''It is great to be an American,'' said Hung Nguyen, who emigrated from Vietnam
in 1975 and now works as a data processing specialist for the General Telephone
and Electronics Corporation in a Los Angeles suburb. ''There is so much
opportunity here,'' he said.

His Country 'Too Crowded'

William Luk, who came from Hong Kong, said he, too, had come to America in
search of opportunity. ''The country I came from,'' he said, ''is too crowded.''

The Census Bureau reported recently that the number of Asians and Pacific
islanders in this country grew faster than any other ethnic category in the
1970's, to 3.5 million from 1.5 million. The number of Hispanic residents in the
United States grew by 61 percent, to about 14.6 million, the Bureau said.

The tide of Asian and Latin immigrants has been especially strong in California.
According to some estimates, for example, as many as 90,000 of the approximately
260,000 Vietnamese refugees in the country have settled in California.

Immigration officials attribute the influx to the state's location and climate.
One immigration official here said recently: ''They've been placed in other
states, Michigan, Illinois, Missouri, other places, but they come back to the
Coast because they like the weather or they have relatives here.''

Bicentennial Celebration

Immigration officials said they decided to naturalize more than 9,700 new
citizens at once in part to commemorate observance of the Los Angeles
Bicentennial, one of whose themes is celebration of the city's increasingly
ethnic diversity.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Jane Feldmeier ,in Los Angeles during the
largest

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 23, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

HUNGER STRIKERS MOVE NEAR WHITE HOUSE

BYLINE: Associated Press

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 46 words


Vietnam veterans resting yesterday by their symbolic pup tent, which they
pitched across from the White House in a campaign to win attention for their
demands from President Reagan. The veterans are protesting what they say is
inadequate care by the Veterans Administration.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              313 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 23, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1106 words


U.S. accused of undermining U.N.  peace efforts for Namibia A3
South Africa cracking down on trade unionists and activists A3
Around the World A6
France's Socialists discuss possible Communist role in Cabinet A6
U.S. ally raises questions about policy on Vietnam A8
On 40th anniversry of German invasion, Soviet assails U.S.  A8
Excerpts from Eugene V. Rostow's statement to Senators A10
Sadat says his opponents are responsible for riots A11
Tale of intrigue ties Brazil to Iraq's nuclear reactor A12
Israeli envoy predicts a resumption soon of F-16 shipments A12
Kennedy criticizes Reagan policy on Israel A12

Government/Politics
Supreme Court says states can limit religious soliciting A15
Administration ''new outlook on aging'' stirs controversy A16
Postal Service makes third request for 20-cent rate A18
Specialist assesses basing MX missiles on submarines A19
Doctors' insurer agrees to a delay on malpractice rates B2
Airport pact to be delayed over $5 million payment B3
Barbaro, in bid to defeat Koch, promises to hire more officers B3
Jersey Senate approves $5.7 billion budget B4

General
Around the Nation A14
Changes at Chicago Tribune make employees anxious A14
Man who ran moon landings tries to revitalize upstate area B2

Style
Notes on Fashion A20
Adolfo's fan club gathers A20
Campus couples and violence A20

Science Times
From fertility to mood, sunlight found to affect human biology C1
''Paranoia'' in the elderly linked to hearing loss C1
Ritual suggested in prehistoric killing of 90 giant baboons C1
Education: business more receptive to the liberal arts C1
June will last a second longer this year C2
Tomb yields evidence of culture and cruelty C2
Science Q&A C2
Science Watch C3
About Education: the ways of modern college students C4

Arts/Entertainment
Authors are agreeing to accept smaller royalties C7
A Russian version of ''Gin Game'' playing in Soviet Union C7
Eight playwrights are awarded Rockefeller fellowships C7
Benton's art from Martha's Vineyard depicts an intimate side C11
Thomas Whiteside's ''The Block-buster Complex'' is reviewed C12
Barbara Dilley dance troupe interprets myths C12
''Walking Back,'' choreographed by Douglas Dunn C12

Obituaries
G. Lauder Greenway, Metropolitan Opera Association leader A18

Sports
Maree, amid achievements, misses one goal A22
Edwin Rosario, at 18, seems headed for a boxing title A22
Overstreet, Dolphins' No. 1 pick, signs with Alouettes A22
Golf official describes incident at Open with Burns A23
Baseball talks expected to resume this week A23
Summer league at Xavier High is showcase for pro basketball A23
Dave Anderson on an ailing golf- er's triumph in the Open A24
Umpires fretting over their idle- ness A25
Fromm, from Long Island, casual about Wimbledon upset A25

Features/Notes
Man in the News: Kenneth Mof- fett, versatile mediator A19
Notes on People B4

News Analysis
Alan Riding on the U.S. aid plan for the Caribbean A2

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A26

Innocents abroad Extending voting rights?  Keeping books Seize the time for
Times Square Letters A26
Sydney H. Schanberg: let the unknowns be heard A27
Tom Wicker: California v. Watt and oil A27
Linley Stafford: bankrupt and wiser A27
Barry Rubin: Iran after Bani-Sadr A27

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              314 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 24, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Gen. Edwin B. Owen, 60, Ex-Chief Of Eastern Area Terminal Service

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 146 words


Brig. Gen. Edwin B. Owen, former commanding general of the Eastern Area Military
Traffic Management and Terminal Service at the Brooklyn Army Terminal, died of a
heart attack June 15 at his home in Carlisle, Pa. He was 60 years old.

General Owen was first commissioned in the cavalry in May 1942. He served in the
Mediterranean theater in World War II and was later appointed senior adviser to
the National Port Authority in Vietnam.  He also served in the 1950's as a staff
officer of the NATO standing group in the office of the Secretary of Defense. He
retired in 1973.

He is survived by his wife, the former Irene Queroix; three daughters, Elizabeth
of Washington, Anna of Dallas and Myra of Brooklyn; two sisters, Josephine Neveu
of San Diego and Joanne Bing of Greenwich, Conn., and a brother, Harold of
Syracuse.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              315 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 24, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Economic Scene;
Third World Instability

BYLINE: By Leonard Silk

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 876 words


AT the Ottawa conference of the leaders of the major Western industrial nations
next month, President Reagan is likely to face heavy criticism for the impact of
high United States interest rates on other countries. Chancellor Helmut Schmidt
of West Germany, President Francois Mitterrand of France and other leaders have
already voiced their fears that the Reagan Administration's stringent monetarist
strategy could worsen unemployment and cause a breakdown of economic cooperation
in the West.

Only Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain, pursuing her own monetarist
attack on inflation, is likely to provide strong support for Mr. Reagan's
position. But with British joblessness above 10 percent, highest since the
Depression, Mrs. Thatcher's praise may do Mr. Reagan more harm than good.

Mr. Reagan almost certainly will argue that tight money and a stronger dollar
serve not just this country's best interests but that of all, by bringing down
inflation and by strengthening the world monetary system. Strict control of the
money supply, his advisers insist, is not the cause of high interest rates but
the cure. For in stopping inflation, they argue, tight money will bring down
interest rates.

Administration spokesmen have been asking what the United States must do to
satisfy foreign critics, who complained bitterly when American inflation was
climbing and the dollar falling, and now complain even more bitterly when the
dollar is climbing. As the old political line had it, they are against
inflation; they are against deflation; they are in favor of flation.

But the real issue raised by Mr. Reagan's critics (at home as well as abroad; on
Wall Street as well as in the building industry) is not whether the
Administration should fight inflation, but how.

That was also the issue stressed by Robert S. McNamara, who leaves as president
of the World Bank at the end of this month, in an interview last week. Mr.
McNamara argues that American economic policy has been distorted by three basic
misconceptions: (1) a failure to distinguish between activities appropriate for
the private sector vis-a-vis the public sector; (2) a failure to recognize that
a major aim ought to be how to increase the effectiveness of government, and (3)
a tendency to believe that all expenditure reductions (other than defense
expenditures) are good.

Those three errors, he said, have led ''to an excessive reliance on monetarism,
inadequate attention to fiscal constraints, inadequaate attention to an incomes
policy, and inadequate attention to the structural rigidities of our society -
subsidies for the middle class, agricultural subsidies, excessive rigidities in
linkages between Social Security and inflation, wage contracts and price levels,
and a host of other matters.''

All this, he maintained, goes to an even deeper problem - a failure of the
American people to recognize the tremendous change that has taken place: the
growing interdependence of the United States and other nations, including the
poor countries of the third world with their heavy dependence on imported food
and fuel.

The failure to understand and manage that interdependence, Mr.  McNamara warned,
could lead to a global economic disaster. ''We've got this tremendous financial
disequilibrium,'' he said, ''that has come about because of the increases in oil
prices.'' In his view, the present oil glut and small price decline is likely to
be short-lived. For the rest of the century, he expects the rise in oil prices
to outrun the rate of inflation by an average of 3 percent a year.

That forecast leads him to expect a continuing financial disequilibrium between
the poor countries, the oil exporting countries and the industrial countries,
endangering both rich and poor.

While he does not regard economic advance as assuring political stability, Mr.
McNamara believes that a lack of economic and social advance in the third world
is contributing to political instability, which is imposing increasingly heavy
strategic costs on the United States. ''Surely,'' he says, ''we must realize
that in relation to the problems we are facing in the Middle East, the Persian
Gulf and Africa.''

Americans traditionally regard national security as a function of military
armaments and manpower. Thirteen years after his service as Secretary of Defense
during the Vietnam War, Mr. McNamara sees national security as the function of a
broader set of economic, social and political as well as military factors. ''At
the margin,'' he says, ''the United States gains more security through a dollar
applied to development assistance than it does to apply that same dollar to
military expenditures.''

Mr. Reagan may well encounter similar arguments at the Ottawa summit meeting.
However, while the Europeans and the Japanese are loath to respond to American
pressures to increase their defense spending, they appear more disposed to
invest marginal financial resources in their own economic development than in
aid to the oilpoor developing countries.

But, if Mr. McNamara is right, the economic and political instability issuing
from the poor countries of the third world is likely to be a major threat to the
world economy and to world peace for the rest of the century.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              316 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 26, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

z;
AWACS FOR SAUDIS: CURB ON SOVIET OR PERIL TO ISRAEL?

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1565 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 25


The proposed United States sale to Saudi Arabia of electronic surveillance
planes, aerial tankers, and extra fuel tanks, advanced air-to-air missiles and
possibly bomb racks for F-15 fighters has provoked controversy about a perceived
military threat to Israel.

The most recent outburst came yesterday, when bipartisan forces led by Senator
Bob Packwood, Republican of Oregon, Representative Norman F. Lent, Republican of
New York, and Representative Clarence D. Long, Democrat of Maryland, urged
President Reagan to cancel the sale and asserted they had enough votes in
Congress to thwart it.

Supporters of Israel in the United States and Israeli leaders have contended
vigorously that the sale would tip the military balance against Israel. They
have said that the radar planes, known as Awacs, were especially dangerous to
Israel because of their advanced warning and air combat control functions.

The Reagan Administration, in briefings at the White House and the Pentagon
during the spring, asserted with equal vigor that the threat to Israel would be
minimal and that the United States would have enough control to preclude the use
of the planes against Israel. A spokesman for the State Department said publicly
that the Awacs in particular ''would not constitute a realistic threat to
Israel.''

Little attention has been paid to the aerial tankers, which may lack the glamour
of the F-15 Eagle or the Awacs, an acronym for airborne warnings and control
system. But Air Force officials said the tankers would be ''a tremendous force
multiplier'' because they would enable F-15's purchased by the Saudis to extend
their range and combat time greatly and would let the Awacs double their duty
hours without landing.

The package would cost more than $5 billion and would include 62 F-15's, 5
Awacs, 6 or possibly 8 KC-135 tankers, an undecided number of advanced
Sidewinder air-to-air missiles, fuel tanks to extend the F-15 range, and also
communications, training and ground-support equipment.

The Background

The Awacs, at the heart of this issue, is a modified four-engine Boeing 707 with
an antenna dome on its back. The plane carries radar that can ''see'' low-flying
aircraft 250 miles away and higher-flying planes 350 or more miles when the
Awacs is at 30,000 feet. The radar information is fed to computers that can
track more than 400 planes simultaneously.

The Awacs, which cost $131 million each, can pick out ships at sea but not tanks
on the ground. They have advanced communications that are secure and resistant
to jamming but do not have equipment for electronic intelligence gathering.
Carrying a crew of 17, the Awacs can fly for about 12 hours without refueling.

In a surveillance mission, an Awacs flying near the northern border of Saudi
Arabia could look across Jordan and detect nearly every fighter or bomber in
Israel as it became airborne.

The Awacs, as it withdrew to evade the Israeli attack force, could give
interceptors valuable warning time to get into the air and then guide them
precisely toward the approaching planes. Moreover, the Awacs would give the
Saudi defenders vital information throughout the air battle.

The flying tankers would give the Saudis an ability to strike deep into Israel
with F-15's. An F-15 could be loaded with 15,000 pounds of ordnance, including
bombs if racks were included in the sale, at bases well south of Jordan, which
would be a buffer between Saudi Arabia and Israel. The tankers would then be
used to refuel the F-15's for their flight to the targets and wait to refuel
them again on their way back if needed.

Such tactics were used by United States planes in attacking North Vietnam from
bases in Thailand. Phantom jets were usually fueled over northern Thailand on
the way in, and again on the way back if they had lingered over their targets
for extra runs.

For the Sale

The Administration has sought to justify the sale by asserting that the biggest
threat to the Middle East is from the Soviet Union and that the United States
must do everything possible to deter Moscow from encroaching on the oilfields of
the Persian Gulf.

In background briefings, Administration officials and military officers have
given considerable detail about how the Awacs and other planes would help defend
Saudi Arabia but have skimmed over the potential of the aircraft in any conflict
with Israel.

By selling the aerial package to the Saudis, Administration officials have
contended, the United States would add to the total military force confronting
the Soviet Union in that region. The United States has two aircraft carriers and
about 20 other ships in the Arabian Sea south of the Strait of Hormuz.

The officials have implied that making the deal with the Saudis, who have turned
it into a test of their relationship with the United States, would improve
United States ties with Saudi Arabia.

Military officers hope to persuade Saudi Arabia to permit the United States to
station forces there, at least temporarily. Short of that, they hope the sale
and other military assistance to the Saudis would create stockpiles of weapons,
equipment and supplies that the United States could use in an emergency.

The United States would control the supply of spare parts, maintenance and
support of the advanced systems, the officials stress. In the beginning, the
United States would train the Saudis and later assist them in operating the
equipment. That, the officials insisted, would give the United States leverage
to prevent the Saudis from using the planes against the Israelis or to cut off
assistance if they did.

Against the Sale

Israeli leaders have expressed total opposition to the deal and have vowed to
lobby hard in Congress against it. They point not only to the military threat
but also to the political and economic implications.

The Israelis and their supporters have contended that the sale would stimulate
an arms race in the region as Israel would feel obliged to match the Saudis.
They say Israel would be hard pressed to do that since its debt service on
previous arms purchases is already $700 million a year. The $600 million in
additional credits offered by the United States, they maintain, would only add
to that problem.

In the United States, backers of Israel have been outspoken in protest. The
Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations issued a
statement saying the United States itself might be endangered by the possibility
that ''American secrets could fall into Soviet hands.''

''Saudi Arabia is unstable and unreliable,'' the statement contended.
''Corruption is rampant, discontent growing, religious fanaticism mounting. The
danger of revolution is underscored by the takeover of the Grand Mosque in Mecca
that nearly brought down the royal family in 1979.''

In Congress, Representative Les AuCoin, Democrat of Oregon, said during debate
on the floor that ''Saudi Arabia has continued its support for the terrorist
Palestine Liberation Organization, the kingdom's leaders have called for jihad
against Israel, and it has condemned the Egypt-Israel Peace Treaty.''

On the Republican side, Representative Edwin B. Forsythe of New Jersey said:
''The sale of this military hardware seriously threatens the security of
Israel.'' He contended that with the missiles and fuel tanks, ''Saudi Arabia
would be capable of hitting Israeli defenses and targets with greater force from
more secure bases within Saudi Arabia.''

The Outlook

It is almost impossible to predict what will happen to this proposal, despite
the strong opposition to it from the Congress yesterday, not only because it is
so charged with emotion but also because it is so important to the Reagan
Administration's policy in the Middle East.

A White House spokesman, Larry Speakes, asserted yesterday: ''We are confident
that once the full package is presented to Congress they will share the
President's view that this is in the long-term security interests of the Middle
East.''

Senior officials in the White House who handle the issue called reporters to
underline Mr. Speakes's statement. ''We're going to push ahead,'' one said.

The Administration and Republican leaders in Congress had hoped that a lapse of
time between the announcement in March and the submission of the package to
Congress, probably in July, would allow the opposition to cool.

With that evidently not happening, the success of the project would appear to
depend on how hard and well the Administration lobbies the Congress in coming
weeks and on how much political capital the Administration is willing to spend
to have its way.

Clearly, the Administration has a dilemma on its hands. President Reagan and
many of his senior advisers are sympathetic to Israel and want to retain the
political backing of Israel's supporters in the United States. But they want
just as much to build whatever bastions they can in the Middle East to deter the
Soviet Union from threatening the oil vital to industrial nations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of airborne electronic surveillance plane

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              317 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 26, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

EXODUS OF VIETNAM 'BOAT PEOPLE' CLIMBING BACK TO THE 1979 LEVELS

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 626 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 25


The number of refugees leaving Vietnam on small boats rose in April and May to
the highest level in two years, and partial statistics obtained from the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees indicate that the rate of departure
remains high this month despite heavy monsoon weather in the South China Sea.

The April and May totals of 11,155 and 14,792 of Vietnamese men, women and
children who survived the hazardous crossings to Malaysia, Thailand, the
Philippines and Hong Kong were the highest since July 1979, when Vietnam, in the
face of worldwide protests, halted the forced mass departures of citizens of
Chinese origin.

The refugees who have been reaching Southeast Asian shores since then have for
the most part been ethnic Vietnamese.  Last month's figures showed Malaysia
receiving 5,320 refugees, Thailand 3,273 and Hong Kong 1,777. By the 15th of
this month Hong Kong had already received 2,205, Malaysia 1,868 and Thailand
1,537.

New Concern in Southeast Asia

The rising rate of escapes has revived concern among the firstasylum nations of
Southeast Asian and was a principal subject of discussion when the foreign
ministers of the Philippines, Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia and Indonesia met at
their annual conference last week in Manila. They called on the Western
countries that have been the ultimate destination of Indochinese refugees to
increase the rate of resettlement. The officials expressed their concern to
Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr., who attended the conference.

A senior official in Mr. Haig's party said that the United States had assured
the first-asylum nations that it intended to maintain its intake even after the
present quota of 14,000 Indochinese a month expires on Sept. 30. But the
official added that he expected that the quota would be lowered to 12,000 in
consultation with Congress.

Despite the steady demand for resettlement in the United States and the total of
166,457 refugees now in Southeast Asian transit camps, as well as 135,562
Cambodians to whom Thailand denies refugee status, the United States is not
filling its quota.

The reasons are difficulties of access to the Cambodians in Thai holding
centers, the unwillingness of many refugees from Laos to leave this region and
the application until recently by regional officials of the Immigration and
Naturalization Service of rigid new criteria to deny refugees entry into the
United States.

One Obstacle Put Aside

The latter obstacle has been put aside as a result of State Department appeals
to the Justice Department, including a letter from Mr. Haig to Attorney General
William French Smith. But refugee officials who favor a liberal admission policy
for the Indochinese as a duty imposed by the American military involvement in
Indochina fear that such a policy remains contested.

They point to mounting sentiment in some Washington quarters against a more
generous policy for Indochinese than for other immigrants from developing
countries. An argument increasingly voiced is that more than six years after the
Communist victory in Indochina the genuine political refugees have already left
and those who now are risking their own lives and those of their families to
escape are doing so for economic gain.

A high-level official panel, to be headed by former Assistant Secretary of State
Marshall Green, will tour Southeast Asia next month and report its findings on
these and related issues to the Reagan Administration. Mr. Green was chosen to
replace Philip C.  Habib, who is continuing his mediation mission in the Middle
East.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              318 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 26, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1079 words


Begin and Peres do battle on TV A3
U.S. summons Habib from Middle East for consultations A3
Reporter's Notebook: On Haig trip, a fuse is lit A4
Haig meets Reagan and voices re- gret over U.N. dispute A5
Hungarian troop moves said to worry Poles A6
Nationwide hunt under way for ousted Iranian President A6
Vietnam exodus on rise again A6
Around the World A7

Government/Politics
Legislation to loosen food safety laws is introduced A10
3 Reagan officials affirm Federal aid for basic science research A15
Budget plans differ mainly on cuts in entitlement programs A15
Civil Aeronautics Board modifies rule for smokers on planes A17
Supreme Court ruling terminates clam fishermen's pollution suit B3
3,000 apply for 236 subsidized apartments in South Bronx B3

General
Around the Nation A10
Jersey commuters grumble as fare rises continue B1
46 Toms River commuters find a way to ''beat'' company B2
New boss reportedly named for Bruno crime ''family'' B4

Industry/Labor
TV advertisers meet with conser- vative group to avert boycott A10
Tentative air controllers' pact is termed top U.S. offer A17
Car-rental agencies in New York City gird for summer demand B2

Obituaries
William Bliss Harris, former sen- ior editor of Fortune A17

Features/Notes
Issue and Debate: Should U.S. sell radar planes to Saudis?  A2

Weekend
Weekender Guide C1
Walt Disney exhibition at the Whitney Museum C14
Antique fire engines at Valhalla C28
Theater: Broadway C2

''Scenes and Revelations'' at Circle in the Square C3
Dance: Frederick Ashton talks about his long career C16
Screen: All of Satyajit Ray's films at the Modern C1

''The Great Muppet Caper'' opens C8

''For Your Eyes Only,'' new Bond film C8

''Dandy'' and ''High Heels'' at the Thalia C8

''Dragonslayer'' opens C10

At the Movies C12

''Stripes,'' with Bill Murray C16

Rock films at Harold Clurman Theater C18
Music: Kool Jazz Festival opens 10-day stand C1

Art Blakey tribute at festival C6
Art: Gallatin collection at Wash- burn Gallery C21

Rodin works at National Gal- lery in Washington C23

Auctions C24

''Episodes,'' group show at Borgenicht Gallery C26
Books: ''Riddley Walker'' by Rus- sell Hoban reviewed C25
Restaurants C20
TV Weekend C27

Style
The Evening Hours A16
As the royal wedding nears, the social whirl intensifies A16

Sports
Dolphins' Griese retires A18
Six hours of talks yield no progress in baseball strike A19
Kuhn calls compensation issue vital to game A19
Hearns knocks out Baez in fourth to retain title A19
Vasquez linked to 1974 bribe offer to another jockey A19
Kite leads Memphis golf by shot A20
McEnroe, Connors advance to third round at Wimbledon A21
Red Smith on the boxing jungle, Houston version A22
Rosario wins by knockout in 2d A22

News Analysis
Hedrick Smith on crucial win for Reagan economic plan A15
Gene I. Maeroff on Koch plan to expand Board of Education B1

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A26

The time for a transit tax is now Yet another casino caper Justice on the run
Peter Passell: heavy oil Letters A26
Tom Wicker: busing after a dec- ade A27
Flora Lewis: Franco-American blinkers A27
Stephen F. Cohen: the parity prin- ciple in U.S.-Soviet relations A27
Henry S. Reuss: how to bring in- terest rates down A27

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              319 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 26, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM WAR BOOK BANNED IN MAINE

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 439 words


The latest book to be banned by a school board - this one in a high school in
eastern Maine - is ''365 Days'' by Ronald J. Glasser, a graphic report written
by a physician who worked in a burn ward treating wounded soldiers and in a
pediatrics ward treating children for a year in Vietnam. (The title's 365 days
refer to a single tour of duty.)

Now reissued in a paperback edition by George Braziller, an independent New York
publisher who brought out the original hardcover edition, the book has been on
the shelves of libraries all over the country for the last 10 years without
censorship.

A month ago ''365 Days'' was pulled off the open shelves of the high school in
Baileyville after a parent's complaint because its language was considered
''offensive and abusive'' by three of the five members of the school board.
According to Thomas Golden, chairman, the fundamental reason for the banning was
not the book's theme of death and dying in Vietnam or its antiwar tone but only
the excessive use of four-letter words and their harmful influence upon
students.

'Better Books on War'

Asked if the language was not an accurate reflection of the way soldiers
actually talked, Mr. Golden, traffic manager for a paper company, replied: ''I
think there's a lot better books on the subject of war. Books like 'The Red
Badge of Courage' or 'All Quiet on the Western Front.'' The Stephen Crane novel
is about the Civil War, the Erich Maria Remarque novel about World War I.

Mr. Golden continued: ''Maybe I've heard of some of these offensive words but I
sure don't use them as part of my vocabulary, and I don't like to be around
people who use them. I guess that most of John Steinbeck's books also have such
words in them but not that many, and we haven't removed his books. It's just
that '365 Days' had too much gross language.''

The Baileyville school board has met several times to discuss the issue and to
hear protests about censorship by some parents and students. In a compromise
last week, the board decided to put ''365 Days'' on the reserved shelves where
it can be read only with the approval of a librarian. The board will next
attempt to develop a policy for handling books that are challenged by parents as
unfit reading for their children.

The Maine case is one of hundreds faced by school and public librarians. At the
American Library Association meeting next week in San Francisco, the subject of
how to combat book banning is scheduled to be high on the agenda.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              320 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 27, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

PEACE RETURNS TO THE HOME OF SHRIMP FISHERMEN AND ASTRONAUTS;
The Talk of Seabrook

BYLINE: By WILLIAM K. STEVENS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1234 words

DATELINE: SEABROOK, Tex., June 24


''Funny how things change,'' Jim Craig was saying. Mr. Craig operates the docks
of ''Saigon Harbor,'' the main base of operations for the Vietnamese shrimp
fishermen whose competitive presence not long ago invited the wrath of native
white fishermen and the Ku Klux Klan. Burning crosses, holding rallies and
brandishing automatic weapons, the Klan and the white shrimpers threatened to
drive the newcomers out by violence. Most of the Vietnamese said they were ready
to go.

But Federal District Judge Gabrielle K. McDonald ordered the Klan and the native
shrimpers to halt their activities five weeks ago, and since then there has been
peace along the sun-kissed waters of Galveston Bay.

Cabin cruisers, big tugs, stylish sailboats and vessels tending the offshore oil
rigs that loom hazily in the distance under huge piles of thunderheads - all
glide easily in and out of the narrow harbor channel that separates the twin
bayfront towns of Seabrook and Kemah. So do the squat, homely shrimp boats,
their outriggers pointing to the sky and their green nets drooping, trailing
clouds of seagulls as they head in to tie up among the sickly sweet smells of
waterfront decay and the somewhat ramshackle seafood warehouses and restaurants
huddled along the waterfront.

Everybody is too busy to fight now that shrimping season is on, and now that the
Texas Legislature has passed laws designed to preserve everyone's opportunity to
catch shrimp. The Vietnamese now intend to stay, Mr. Craig and others say.

Things have changed so dramatically that James Stanfield, a grand titan of the
Klan who runs a marine repair business and was a target of Judge McDonald's
order, accepted an invitation from some of the Vietnamese to repair their boats.
''There he was on the dock, working on the boat like nothing had ever
happened,'' said Jim Craig.

''Wild,'' said a visitor. ''This waterfront's like that,'' replied Mr. Craig.

Seabrook may be one of the most unusually constituted communities in the United
States. The waterfront is just one aspect of its existence, and the conflict
between the native Texans and the political refugees from Vietnam is just one
reflection of the village's variable, even exotic, nature. This community of
about 5,000 people, 25 miles southeast of downtown Houston, displays in
miniature an especially tangy variant of the developing cosmopolitan flavor that
has come to characterize much of present-day Texas.

It is a long leap from the kind of territorial dispute between the shrimp
fishermen, a primordial type of conflict as old as the species, to man's attempt
to explore the heavens. But Seabrook makes the leap and serves as a showcase for
both.

Almost within jogging distance of the Seabrook waterfront is the Johnson Space
Center, where the National Aeronautics and Space Administration plans and
directs the nation's manned space operations. At least four astronauts live in
Seabrook, and it is full of space center engineers. They have elected one of
their own as Mayor and they control the city government. And the community they
govern includes white-collar executives from nearby petrochemical plants,
blue-collar workers at those same plants, and migrants from the Middle West,
economic refugees who, like the Vietnamese, have begun a new life here.

So new is the mixture, in some respects, that paths of the varying groups often
fail to cross. If Dick and Fran Jones are representative, the Middle Westerners
so far have kept a low profile. The Joneses, who moved here from Michigan last
year so that Mr. Jones could find work as a millwright, pretty much stay around
the waterside apartment complex where they live, fishing and sailing on Clear
Lake, which is not a lake at all but a shallow estuary that empties into the
Seabrook-Kemah boat channel, or spending long hours at the swimming pool. The
coconut-oiled Mrs. Jones has acquired a decidedly un-Michigan tan.

Although the Joneses are less than a five-minute drive from Saigon Harbor, they
do not have much contact with the Vietnamese. But they tend to identify with
them. ''We're both kind of like outsiders coming into somebody else's area,''
Mr. Jones said. ''I came here for the work. They came here to make a living,
too.''

Mr. Jones, who had just put in a 16-hour day repairing refinery machinery, said
the Vietnamese ''just naturally work hard,'' and added, ''They got a hard time
over there, and they were giving them a hard time here, too. I kind of
sympathize with them.''

One traffic light away, on the same side of NASA Road 1 as the Jones apartment
and an easy bicycle ride from the house where Neil A. Armstrong lived when he
became the first man to set foot on the moon, a sweating, grease-stained James
Stanfield, grand titan of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan in Texas by night and
operator of a boat-repair shop by day, paused to talk about the recent troubles.

He blamed the Alabama-based Klanwatch organization, which brought the successful
Federal lawsuit against the Klan and the white fishermen, for the heightened
tensions.

Mr. Stanfield said that, in his opinion, a major purpose of the suit was to put
economic pressure on the white fishermen by forcing them to spend money, and
time away from their business, to defend themselves in court.

The conflict between the whites and Vietnamese was never racial, he insisted,
but economic. And now that the state has put a moratorium on the issuing of
shrimping licenses and has restricted the amount of shrimp allowed per boat, he
said, all is well. ''The fishermen tell me they can live with that,'' he said.

Like others, including Mr. Craig, who has been a de facto ally of the
Vietnamese, Mr. Stanfield believes that the Vietnamese had no intention of
leaving. Nguyen Van Nam, the leader of the Vietnamese faction, was out of town,
and no other English-speaking Vietnamese could be found to comment. Most of them
were out fishing.

Just around a bend in NASA Road 1 from Mr. Stanfield's shop, relaxing with some
out-of-town engineers around an end-of-the-day keg of beer in an oak grove on a
back lot of the space center, Jimmy White, a control-room engineer at the space
center and Mayor of Seabrook, discussed his many-sided constituency.

Mr. White described it as predominantly ''middle-middle-class,'' with a mixture
of backgrounds and attitudes. ''There is less of a class hang-up here,'' he
said. ''We don't really have a class structure.''

Most Seabrookers do not work on the waterfront and were not threatened by the
influx of Vietnamese fishermen. The result was that when the Klan agitation was
at its height, it could not win widespread sympathy in the town.

In such a climate, the seven-member City Council, including four space center
employees, had no trouble at the peak of the confrontation in unanimously
declaring that it would not tolerate ''merchants of hate.'' It was aimed, Mr.
White said, at Klan outsiders.

''We felt like those guys didn't have a place down here,'' the Mayor said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of Texas showing Seabrook area photo of the Seabrook
harbor

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              321 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 27, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

GENERAL CHOSEN FOR MOBILE FORCE

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 359 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 26


President Reagan has nominated Maj. Gen. Robert Kingston of the Army to take
over the Rapid Deployment Force, which is designed to send American troops to
world trouble spots in the event of an emergency.

General Kingston, whose selection was announced today by the Pentagon, is
expected to win approval easily from the Republicandominated Senate. The
53-year-old general, who has been the commander of the Second Infantry Division
in South Korea since May 1979, is to be promoted to lieutenant general.

The decision to put an Army general in charge of the force, with the authority
to call up troops from all branches of the armed services, culminated months of
interservice rivalry. It was two months ago that the Pentagon announced that it
would create a separate command structure for the mobile force.

General Kingston will replace Lieut. Gen. P.X. Kelley of the Marine Corps. who
has commanded the force since its inception in March 1980. General Kelley will
be promoted to full general Tuesday and will become Assistant Commandant of the
Marine Corps, the No. 2 position.

Ex-Green Beret Commander

The nominee, who is originally from Brookline, Mass., is known as a no-nonsense
officer. He was a Green Beret commander in the Vietnam War, a position that is
expected to be of help in the kind of unconventional warfare that could confront
the mobile force in the Persian Gulf, its primary area of responsibility.

The force has been beset with rivalry and interservice politics since it was
established.  With a small headquarters at MacDill Air Force Base, Fla., the
mobile force functions under the overall supervision of the Army's Readiness
Command, headed by Gen. Volney Warner. It will continue as part of that command
until it becomes a separate unified command, possibly in 18 months.

General Warner, 55, is retiring July 31, in large part because of his opposition
to making the mobile force a separate command, which he says is unnecessary.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              322 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

           June 27, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition EGIN> , ,
                            Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM'S APPETITE FRIGHTENS NEIGHBORING LANDS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 966 words


raiders

By HENRY KAMM

BANGKOK - In Southeast Asia, where for more than a century the only dynamic
forces were alien - Europe first, America, Japan and China later - a new power
has come into being since 1975. Its actions and, perhaps even more, its assumed
intentions are sending shivers down the spines of statesmen and politicians, as
well as ordinary citizens.

Even neighbors who do not subscribe to a simplistic ''domino theory'' see in
Vietnam a cause for worry. Hanoi has gobbled up Laos and Cambodia, the two
neutralist states that served as buffers between the Communist world and
pro-Western nations in the region and its armed might encircles the large
northeastern bulge of Thailand.

Last week, Secretary General Kurt Waldheim of the United Nations concluded a
four-day visit to Hanoi and Bangkok persuaded that both Governments were willing
to talk but that neither was ready to make the concessions that would give
negotiations a chance of success.

If that were not enough to frighten Southeast Asians, Vietnam has also teetered
from its neutrality between the two principal Communist powers and fallen
entirely into the Soviet camp, grievously offending China. Soviet warships come
and go in Vietnam's ports, and military transport planes regularly overfly
anti-Soviet countries to deliver tools of war to Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos.

From these realities, differing conclusions have been drawn, but even those who
believe that Hanoi's goals of dominance do not reach beyond the borders of
former French Indochina have been shocked by Hanoi's bald aggression in
Cambodia. Few in Asia set stock by Hanoi's pretensions to humanitarian concern
when it overthrew the brutal regime of Prime Minister Pol Pot; until Phnom Penh
broke relations, Hanoi ritually praised Cambodia as a brotherly nation.
Vietnam's easy resort to military force has convinced many that a power of such
bellicosity constitutes a menace to the non-Communist countries, whose small
armies tend more to be bases of political power than military bastions. Whether
Malaysia, Indonesia, the Philippines and Burma, which deeply distrust China,
share the belief of Thailand and Singapore that Vietnam is, by its own design
and with Soviet complicity, out for regional conquest has not been the issue
since the invasion of Cambodia. A consensus exists that all in the region must
be on guard.

In this context, Vietnam's brief incursion into Thai border villages in June
provoked a demonstration of unity in support of Thailand. Even countries that
feel uneasy in finding themselves on the same side as China were impressed by
clear signals that Vietnam, for the first time using military might against a
non-Communist nation, wanted its readiness to do so understood. What frightened
many political leaders was that Hanoi made no attempt to describe the incursion
as an act of hot pursuit or a local action by a unit commander. Vietnam made
clear that it felt its anger over Bangkok's cooperation with the Pol Pot
remnants entitled it to use armed force to teach Thailand a lesson on Thai soil.

Bangkok's fear of Vietnam's bellicosity is real, even if the premise that Hanoi
desires to annex Thai territory may not be. The Government's hard line is
matched by a popular perception of Vietnam as menacing and the continued
disgorging of tens of thousands of refugees from the Vietnamese domain hardens
this belief. Premier Pham Van Dong's olive branch visit to Thailand and other
Southeast Asian countries three months before the full-scale attack on Cambodia
in January 1979 is viewed as characteristic of Vietnamese duplicity.  Thailand
has aligned itself closely with China in adamant opposition to recognition of
the Vietnamese puppet government in Cambodia, in strong support for the Pol Pot
regime and in a border policy that favors the Pol Pot remnants in their
enclaves. Its insistence that international food aid must be channeled to Pol
Pot forces as well as to bona fide refugees has engaged Bangkok in angry
controversy with international organizations.

Thailand finds encouragement in this policy, whether intended or not, from the
United States. Although Washington never recognized the Pol Pot regime in power,
American policy shifted, after Vietnam dislodged it, to backing its right to
hold Cambodia's seat in the United Nations. The United States made clear that,
between two governments it does not recognize, it prefers the one that has
China's support, no matter how atrocious its human rights record, over the one
backed by Moscow. Whatever chances may have existed for a reversal of the
American policy - a shift might help the survival of Cambodians by encouraging
Vietnam to adopt a more humanitarian attitude toward distribution of
international food aid - have been vitiated by the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan. In the present mood toward Moscow, it is unlikely that Washington
will confer even implicit recognition on the conquest of a nation by a Soviet
ally.

Non-Communist Southeast Asia, the United States and the rest of the West appear
firmly entrenched in attitudes toward Vietnam that parallel China's. But
Vietnam's position is equally firm and the balance of forces in Cambodia makes
it unlikely that Hanoi will yield in its insistence that the situation is
irreversible. The highest Vietnamese leaders emphatically made that point to Mr.
Waldheim. This leaves Thailand and the other Southeast Asian nations behind it
supporting a force whose hopes cannot go beyond resisting strongly enough to
survive and continuing indefinitely a war it cannot win without active Chinese
intervention against Vietnam. Hanoi's actions have set off reactions that seem
to assure it of lasting hostility in the region and have made Southeast Asia an
arena of Soviet-Chinese conflict.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of captured Vietnamese

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              323 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

           June 27, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition EGIN> , ,
                            Late City Final Edition

BYLINE: DAVID BURNAHMDavid Burnham, a former reporter for The New York Times, is
writing a book about information and society.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 912 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The first question is this: Has George Bush, Ronald Reagan's Vice Presidential
running mate, violated an important regulation of the Central Intelligence
Agency, the spy organization he once headed?

The words of the regulation are quite straightforward. Before an employee or
former employee of the C.I.A. ships a manuscript to a publisher or climbs onto a
podium to deliver a speech that touches on intelligence matters, or might be
based on classified information, he must submit the material to the agency for
review.

The second question is this: What happens to a country when its Government
promulgates rules that are unequally applied? Mr. Bush and the C.I.A. agree that
he has not submitted his speeches for review.  They also contend that he has not
been under an obligation to do so.  This attitude of easy tolerance toward Mr.
Bush contrasts with the C.I.A.'s approach to another former employee, Frank W.
Snepp 3d.  Under an order approved by the United States Supreme Court, Mr. Snepp
has been denied all royalties from his nonfiction book, ''Decent Interval: An
Insider's Account of Saigon's Indecent End,'' which he refused to allow the
C.I.A. to review, even though the Government concedes that the book divulged no
classified information. More recently, Mr. Snepp was required to submit his
second book, a novel about the C.I.A., for official vetting.

During his campaign for the Republican Presidential nomination, and now as Vice
Presidential candidate, Mr. Bush frequently has commented on chronic
foreign-policy problems. A few months ago, for example, he told a Cleveland
audience that ''based on my experience in foreign affairs, I am convinced that
the risks involved in a U.S. military presence in the Middle East are as
unnecessary as they are unwanted by the American people.''

Hardly a unique or unusual insight. Mr. Bush, through a spokesman, insisted that
such pronouncements are based on knowledge acquired during his travels, his
experiences as envoy to the United Nations and China, and his readings. But is
it possible that the comment on the Middle East and other observations on
foreign affairs also draw on classified information he received while Director
of Central Intelligence from January 1976 to January 1977?

The regulation in question has two parts. The first describes who and what is
covered; the second establishes the absolute principle that it is the C.I.A.,
not the individual author or speechmaker, that must make the decision about what
material is fit for public consideration.

C.I.A. Regulation HR 6-2 states: ''Agency employees and former employees under
the terms of their secrecy agreement must submit for review by the Board all
writings and scripts or outlines of oral presentations intended for nonofficial
publication, including works of fiction, which makes any mention of intelligence
data or activities or contain data which may be based on information classified
pursuant to law or Executive Order.'' Publication is neatly defined as the
communication of information to one or more persons.

Then comes the part denying the individual any discretion in making the judgment
about the material. ''Submission to the Board will be made prior to disclosing
such information to anyone who is not authorized by the agency to have access to
it. The responsibility is upon the employee or former employee to learn from the
agency whether the material intended for publication fits the description set
forth in this paragraph. No steps will be taken toward publication until written
permission to do so is received from the Board.''

Asked why Mr. Bush had not sought review of comments that might have been partly
based on classified information, a spokesman for the candidate said the remarks
were ''so innocuous that Mr. Bush sees no reason to send them to the C.I.A.''
The spokesman confirmed that Mr.  Bush once asked the Review Board to clear a
chapter of an unpublished book.

Herbert E. Hetu, chairman of the C.I.A.'s Review Board, said he was sure there
was no reason to be worried by Mr. Bush's failure to send his speeches to the
agency before he delivered them. ''We have no reason to believe Mr. Bush will
not submit for review any material that falls into the category of concern,''
the official said.

Yet the regulation requires the C.I.A., not the former employee, to decide
whether material to be made public might be based on classified information.
Reminded of this, Mr. Hetu replied: ''That is a regulation, not a law. We have
no punitive hold over former employees.''

Maybe that is a problem, even though Mr. Snepp might not agree about the
punitive hold. Perhaps Congress ought to pass a law on this subject. How about
one authorizing the C.I.A. to assign a team of unbiased experts directly to Mr.
Bush's staff to make sure no classified material sneaks into his speeches? But,
in the name of fairness, why should C.I.A. experts limit their services to Mr.
Bush? Why not a broad new Government program under which the C.I.A. could advise
all national candidates, even those who never worked for the C.I.A.? Or,
following the logic of the Supreme Court decision concerning Mr. Snepp, perhaps
the Government should bring a civil suit to impound the campaign contributions
raised by Mr. Bush when he gave those speeches, which just may be tainted by
that terrible stain -data based on classified information.
---------------------------------------------------------------------

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              324 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

           June 27, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition EGIN> , ,
                            Late City Final Edition

JOIN THE GOVERNMENT AND SEE THE WORLD

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 6, Column 5; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 854 words


WASHINGTON NEW JERSEY'S two Senators and 10 of its 15 Representatives took a
total of 18 overseas trips at Government expense in 1979, visiting 25 countries,
including China, Cuba, Mexico and the Soviet Union.

Those figures are from the annual survey on Congressional foreign travel
compiled by Congressional Quarterly's Weekly Report, the private publication
that closely monitors activities of Congress.

Outside of reporting that Representative Frank J. Guarini, Democrat of Jersey
City, was the only New Jerseyan not to respond to its queries on trips, the
publication did not analyze the Jersey record.  However, a study of the figures
shows that the percentage of New Jersey's House members taking overseas trips
matched the percentage of the entire House - about two-thirds of the membership
in each case.

Of those, the New Jersey Representatives averaged 1.5 trips each, while the 298
members of the entire House who went abroad made a total of 536 trips, nearly
two per member.

According to the publication's tally, Senator Bill Bradley took two trips at
Government expense - to France in July to attend meetings of the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development as part of a Congressional delegation,
and to Belgium, the Soviet Union and Britain in late August to participate in
strategic arms limitation meetings, again as part of an official delegation.

Senator Harrison A. Williams Jr. went to Sweden and Denmark in August, looking
into occupational safety and health programs.  The Senator who took more trips
at Government expense than any of his colleagues was Jacob K. Javits, Republican
of New York. Senator Javits roamed from Mexico and Canada to Western Europe, the
Sudan, Japan and China.

Five New Jersey representatives reported taking no trips - James Courter, a
freshman Republican, and four Democrats, James J. Florio, William J. Hughes,
Andrew Maguire and Peter W. Rodino Jr.

For the 10 representatives who did travel, Britain, Belgium and China were the
most popular destinations. Five went to Britain and four each to Belgium and
China.

James J. Howard of Wall Township and Robert A. Roe of Wayne, both Democrats,
traveled farthest.  In answering the questionnaire, Mr. Howard reported two
trips - in April 1979 to Japan, mainland China and Hong Kong as a member of a
bipartisan Congressional delegation to discuss American-Chinese relations with
''high-level Chinese officials'' and to look into foreign policy issues, and in
late June and early July to Norway, West Germany and Britain to study synthetic
oil and gas facilities and to survey North Atlantic Treaty Organization defense
capabilities.

Mr. Roe was with Mr. Howard on both trips.  Less than two weeks before the
departures of Mr. Roe and Mr. Howard for China, Representative Guarini returned
from a weeklong trip to the same destinations - China, Japan and Hong Kong.

Millicent H. Fenwick, Republican of Bernardsville, reported two trips. She went
to Belgium and Italy, attending a conference on NATO sponsored by the Center for
Strategic and International Studies, with the Government and the center picking
up the tab; and to Thailand in November with a delegation examining the plight
of Cambodian refugees.

Representative Joseph G. Minish, Democrat of West Orange, said he traveled to
Ireland, Hungary, Italy and Belgium in April and to Greece and Yugoslavia in
September and October, on ''official business'' at Government expense.

Representative Edward J. Patten, Democrat of Perth Amboy, who has been in
Congress since 1963 and is not running for re-election, took two trips. He went
to Jamaica, Cuba, the Dominican Republic and Haiti with a House International
Relations committee delegation, and later to Britain, Ireland, Belgium and
Hungary with a delegation headed by House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr.

Another Jerseyan visiting China was Representative Matthew J.  Rinaldo,
Republican of Union, who went in August as part of a Commerce Committee
delegation.

The other Government-paid trips by New Jersey Representatives were taken by:
Edwin B. Forsythe, Republican of Moorestown, to Costa Rica; Harold C.
Hollenbeck, Republican of East Rutherford, to Austria and West Germany as a
delegate to the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for
Development, and Frank Thompson Jr., Democrat of Trenton, to Switzerland, France
and Britain to take part in discussion of labor-management relations and to
attend the meeting of the International Labor Organization.

The record of Congressional travel by New Jersey representatives pales in
comparison with the list of trips compiled by two nearby Long Island
Congressmen. Lester L. Wolff, Democrat of Great Neck, took five trips at
Government expense in 1979, visiting the Philippines, South Korea, Thailand,
Burma, Malaysia, Taiwan, Colombia, Switzerland, Hong Kong, Vietnam, Sri Lanka,
Pakistan and the Soviet Union. John W. Wydler, Republican of Garden City, also
took five Government-paid trips, visiting the Dominican Republic, Cuba, Hong
Kong, Japan, China, Mexico, Britain, France, New Zealand and Antarctica.  EDWARD
C. BURKS

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: 3 photos

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              325 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

           June 27, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition EGIN> , ,
                            Late City Final Edition

THE LIVELY ARTS THE HOUSE THAT 'VANITIES' BUILT

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 13, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 829 words


SAGAPONACK SURROUNDED by overflowing baskets of white wildflowers that filled
the vast expanse of a sparsely furnished living room, Jack Heifner, the
playwright, and Milton Justice, the producer, two of the men who gave us
''Vanities,'' talked about how the play had changed their lives.

''Vanities,'' which is playing at the John Drew Theater in East Hampton through
Saturday, closed off Broadway two weeks ago, setting the record as its
longest-running nonmusical. In one year, there were 280 productions of the play
all over the world.

''It gave us a career, and this is the house that 'Vanities' bought,'' said Mr.
Heifner, referring to the two-story Victorian farmhouse that is to become their
year-round retreat.

''I've been looking for a place away from the pressure and paranoia of New York
City where I can work, and this is it,'' the playwright added.

And Mr. Justice, who made his onstage debut in ''The Boys in the Band'' at the
Maidstone Regional Theater last month, said, ''I've been looking for a place
where I can try acting, and this is it.'' (The run of ''The Boys in the Band,''
twice extended, ends on Aug.  31.)

Garland Wright, director of ''Vanities,'' also commenting on the venture,
recalled, ''Jack and Milton called me last April and said, 'We've found a house
and you're buying it with us,' and this is where I'll keep coming back.'' Mr.
Wright was hurrying off to Minneapolis, where he was recently appointed
associate artistic director of the Guthrie Theater.

The ''Vanities'' triumvirate, Texans all, met as freshmen at Southern Methodist
University in Dallas. Mr. Wright started out as a director and has remained one,
having staged plays ranging from classical to avant-garde in regional and Off
Broadway theaters. ''But Garland acts if he fires an actor and has to go on,''
Mr. Heifner said.

For Mr. Justice and Mr. Heifner, theatrical destiny was not so instantly or
specifically defined. Mr. Justice began as a ''gofer'' for Bob Hope (''My career
took off,'' he said, ''when they took me to Vietnam because they realized I was
the only one strong enough to carry a typewriter from the plane to the pits'')
and then was promoted to associate producer until ''the whole staff was fired
when they changed sponsors.'' After a brief stint in Los Angeles - ''When you're
with Universal Studios, you feel you've already retired,'' he said - he came to
New York to become a producer.

''Two and a half years ago,'' Mr. Justice said, ''I decided to study with Stella
Adler because as a producer I thought I needed to know more about acting. When I
heard they were auditioning for 'Boys in the Band' in East Hampton, I thought
I'd get a small part, but I wound up with the lead.''

Mr. Heifner's emergence as a playwright was something of a ''last resort,'' he
said.  ''I'd done every kind of work in the theater,'' he said. ''I didn't like
stage managing and I wasn't particularly good as an actor'' - he appeared with
the American Shakespeare Festival -''and I figured they would always need
someone to hang a light or sew a hem'' - his first jobs, for Joseph Papp - ''so
I sat down and wrote a play. There wasn't anything left to do.''

''Vanities,'' the second play he wrote, evolved from two Off Broadway workshop
productions and went to Off Broadway via Huntington's PAF Playhouse. ''It was a
luxury working at PAF,'' he said. ''I rewrote the play 10 times there. It was
representative of the real audiences you find in New York, not the specialized
ones Off Off Broadway, and then we knew we were ready.''

Mr. Heifner wrote the play as an ''acting experiment,'' and in a sense that is
what ''Vanities'' has remained. Kathy Bates, who created the part of Joanne and
for whom it was tailored, is playing the part of Kathy in the John Drew
production. Many actresses have moved from one role to another, from company to
company.

''At first I was told it wasn't about anthing,'' Mr. Heifner continued, ''and I
said, That's it, exactly, what this play is about is three little golden girls
who are talking about nothing.'' In ''Vanities,'' three high school cheerleaders
progress from emptyheadedness to adult simple-mindedness 11 years later.

Mr. Heifner is currently reworking three plays: ''Casserole,'' written before
''Vanities,'' which he describes as a ''dark, funny play about death''; ''Star
Treatments,'' which, he says, suffered the consequences of premature Off Off
Broadway exposure last season, and ''America, Now,'' his latest work, which he
describes as ''a futuristic drawing room.''

''My playwriting experience,'' Mr. Heifner said, ''comes out of Off Off
Broadway, but it is no longer a place to try out new plays, not like when
'Vanities' opened. Now anything in a workshop production will be reviewed - in
the city, everyone has an opinion - and it's not an experiment any more. It's
hard after that. I write for actors and I have to hear actors do it and for my
own sake as a playwright, I had to come out here.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Jack Heifner and Milton Justice

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              326 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 28, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MOSCOW CALLS U.S. DECISION TO SELL ARMS TO CHINA 'HIGHLY DANGEROUS'

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 905 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, June 27


In its most authoritative comment yet on the United States decision to sell arms
to China, the Soviet Communist Party newspaper Pravda described the move today
as ''an escalation of reckless policy'' that was ''highly dangerous for the
cause of peace.''

''The Soviet Union cannot remain indifferent to the new dangerous turn in the
Chinese-American relations, especially to the plans of supplying China with
modern American weapons, military equipment and technology,'' the Pravda article
said. ''These actions by Washington and Peking can only be assessed as hostile
towards our country.''

The article continued: ''The Soviet Union will take such measures that will be
dictated by the emerging situation. Nobody should doubt that the Soviet people,
who have good nerves and powerful means of curbing aggression, will not yield to
provocations and will be able to stand up for themselves, to defend the
interests of their friends and allies.''

An Authoritative Commentary

The article appeared at length on an inside page of Pravda devoted to foreign
affairs. Its significance arose from the fact that it was attributed to ''I.
Aleksandrov,'' a pseudonym that generally authenticates a commentary as
reflecting authoritative Kremlin views.

Previous Soviet reaction to Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.'s visit to
Peking this month had been partial and mostly in the form of commentaries by
Tass, the official press agency. The United States decision to sell modern arms
to China was announced during Mr. Haig's visit.

The article dismissed the reservations expressed by American officials, who have
said that any actual arms sales to Peking will be decided on a case-by-case
basis and within statutory restraints, such as the one forbidding the use of
such American weapons for offensive purposes.

Cites Wide Range of Arms

Pravda, saying that ''the State Department avoids calling things by their
names,'' said Mr. Haig's announcement opened the way for Peking to buy guidance
systems for strategic missiles, military communications equipment and ''all
types of combat equipment, from antitank missiles to fighter-bombers.''

It said the hallmark of Mr. Haig's talks with the Chinese leader, Deng Xiaoping,
and others was hostility to the Soviet Union, with the emphasis on broadening
the military aspects of the relationship between the two nations. ''It can be
said that Haig was on a mission in Peking as a general in civilian uniform,'' it
said.

The article went on to give Soviet readers the first full account of the
hitherto-secret arrangement by which the United States and China maintain a
joint electronic intelligence-gathering station in western China near the Soviet
border.

Officials in Washington, disclosing the station's existence while Mr. Haig was
in Peking, said it opened last year to monitor Soviet missile tests from two
sites from which rockets are launched across Siberia. The station replaced two
in Iran that were lost after the Shah's overthrow.

The Pravda article, however, offered no comment on the missilemonitoring
agreement. Western diplomats here have suggested that the Soviet leaders may
have decided not to make a major issue out of the missile surveillance because
they have similar monitoring facilities in Cuba and aboard Soviet vessels off
United States coasts. The diplomats also suggested that Moscow realizes that
effective monitoring will be crucial to both sides in any new strategic arms
treaty of the kind that the Soviet leader, Leonid I.  Brezhnev, again urged this
week.

By contrast, the article used unusually strong language in assessing the
prospective arms sales to China. It said the Reagan Administration hoped to
channel China's ''expansionism'' against the Soviet Union, but it predicted that
the arms would be used against Peking's neighbors, including Vietnam, Cambodia
and Afghanistan, as well as against United States allies in the region.

Goals Seen as Diverging

While Washington and Peking have a joint goal in isolating Vietnam and Cambodia,
which is occupied by Vietnamese troops, their longrange goals diverged, the
article said. While the United States sees the ''anti-Sovietism'' of the Chinese
leadership as useful to its overall effort to counter Moscow, China is
interested in setting up a nuclear confrontation between the two superpowers
from which China would emerge dominant.

''Peking has its own interest to pursue,'' the article said, ''namely, to set
the United States and the Soviet Union against each other so as to be able to
dominate the world after a nuclear conflict which, according to Peking's plans,
will annihilate America and Europe but possibly spare some dozen millions or a
couple of hundred million of the Chinese. After all, China's population is
double that of the United States and Western Europe taken together.''

But the article implied that China was courting Soviet military annihilation by
accepting ''the disgraceful role of a junior partner'' to the United States.

''There is an impression that Peking does not seriously think over the dangerous
consequences of the risky game with the destiny of its own people,'' it said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              327 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 28, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

C. KILMER MYERS DIES AT AGE OF 65; EX-EPISCOPAL BISHOP IN CALIFORNIA

BYLINE: By DOROTHY J. GAITER

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 36, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 455 words


C. Kilmer Myers, the retired Episcopal Bishop of California whose radical social
and political views and conservative theological positions earned him influence
beyond his church, died yesterday at the University of California Hospital in
San Francisco. He was 65 years old and had been hospitalized for more than a
week. He lived in Healdsburg, Calif.

He was an early and steadfast critic of the Vietnam War and was vocal and
tenacious in his attacks on racism and official corruption. On the other hand,
he opposed the ordination of women as priests.

In 1967, Bishop Myers suggested that Christian unity could be futhered if all
Christians recognized the Pope as their pastoral leader. The suggestion drew
''very, very violent'' opposition from some quarters, an aide later reported.

Two years later, he said that the Pope was wrong in his stand against artificial
birth control and accused Roman Catholic bishops in the United States of
cowardice for not breaking with him over the issue.

Aid to Draft Resisters

In 1967, he joined 18 Protestant, Roman Catholic and Jewish leaders in pledging
to risk fine or imprisonment to assist those who resisted the military draft.
But a month later, he refused to allow the use of Grace Cathedral for a
religious service in which draft cards would be burned because, he said, it
''would symbolically place the church in the position of espousing the breaking
of the law concerning the draft as the only possible or legitimate Christian
response to the moral dilemma of the war in Vietnam.''

In 1967, an antiwar demonstration in Oakland was broken up by policemen who
clubbed demonstrators and journalists, and some of the demonstrators threatened
that in the future they would use force against the police. Bishop Myers
criticized Ronald Reagan, then the Governor of California, and Jeff Segal, a
leader in the demonstrations.

Both men, he said, followed the type of thinking that ''ends only with a police
state in which our democratic institutions are destroyed.''

Bishop Myers was born in Schuylerville, N.Y. He was ordained a priest in 1940.
From 1946 to 1963, he worked in Jersey City and New York, where he was assigned
to the staff of Trinity Parish.

He succeeded the Rt. Rev. James A. Pike as Bishop of California, an Episcopal
diocese that covers only the San Francisco Bay area, in 1966. He retired in
1979.

He and his late wife, Katie Lea Stewart, adopted three children, two Korean and
one black. Laura and Jonathan now live in San Francisco, and Albert lives in New
York.

A requiem mass will be offered on Wednesday in Grace Cathedral.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Bishop C. Kilmer Myers

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              328 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 28, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DIRECTOR OF INVESTOR RELATIONS: LAWRENCE C. BAKER;
ONE MAN'S WATCH OVER COLT INDUSTRIES' STOCK

BYLINE: By JULIE KENNEDY

SECTION: Section 3; Page 7, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1941 words


W HEN Colt Industries reported a 14 percent drop in 1980 earnings last January,
a sharp drop in its stock might have been expected. Colt shares did lose 1 1/2
points the following week, but bounced right back and began to move up. The
recovery was in part a result of 1980 being Colt's second most profitable year.
But another important, albeit less quantifiable, factor was the company's
aggressive investor relations program.

Colt's liaison with Wall Street, who had warned investors to expect a bump, was
the company's director of investor relations, Laurence C. Baker, a 34-year-old
Vietnam veteran and former securities analyst.  ''There was no big selloff of
the stock because people did not have expectations that were not met,'' Mr.
Baker said. ''Investor relations is strictly a credibility job. We try to be
straight regardless of the outlook.''

Mr. Baker is part of a booming profession that hardly existed a decade ago. As
recently as the mid-70's, perhaps only one in five major industrial companies
had full-time investor relations managers, according to James R. Uffelman,
president of Technimetrics Inc., a management research firm. But today, he
estimates that 60 percent employ such managers and that the number is growing.

Not surprisingly, a trade group has sprung up, the National Investor Relations
Institute, based in Washington. Founded in 1973, its membership now stands at
nearly 1,400.

According to Mr. Baker of Colt, successful investor relations requires a lot
more than merely cushioning the blow of lower earnings. It entails an aggressive
marketing campaign to ''sell'' the company by explaining its businesses, showing
off its management and pointing up its prospects.

In Colt's case, a $2.2 billion New York-based industrial conglomerate, that
selling job takes some doing. The company's products range from firearms and
compressors to steel tubing and aircraft landing gear, and its business is
complicated and cyclical.  Currently, sluggish markets for many industrial
products are hurting the company. But Mr. Baker says he reports even the bearish
trends.

His pitch about Colt is that it is structured so that when a down cycle hits its
specialty steel and automotive products - as it did last year - the company's
three other businesses are likely to be doing well, and vice versa. It seems
that Mr. Baker's work is having a beneficial effect, because again in the face
of lower earnings, this time for this year's first quarter, Colt's stock has
risen from around $47 in January to more than $60 currently.

Less than a decade ago, investor relations was viewed as merely an extension of
public relations, and frequently the job consisted of spouting the company line,
arranging the annual meeting and trotting out senior managers for an occasional
meeting with securities analysts.

But with the advent of negotiated brokerage rates in 1975, the job became more
important. Unfixing the rates pushed dozens of Wall Street firms out of business
and left many securities analysts looking for work. Their ranks were
dramatically thinned, and hundreds of companies were left with little following
or none among financial analysts. To get attention, companies found they had to
provide highly detailed information, and they began to hire former analysts and
others with numbers-oriented backgrounds to keep their visibility high.

''Investor relations is not strictly a communications function anymore,'' said
Robert D. Ferris, a principal in Georgeson & Company, which specializes in proxy
solicitation and investor relations consulting. ''It is becoming more and more
the rule that an investor relations manager almost provides the economic model
of the company.''

''If you can get your stock price up, ownership in broad hands and make
shareholders aware of your good prospects, they'll be less likely to sell and
the company will be harder to take over,'' Mr.  Uffelman said. ''I've had
analysts tell me that an effective investor relations person is worth one to two
points on the (price-earnings) multiple. That's a lot of money.''

F OR whatever reason, a great many companies are willing to pay high salaries to
investor relations people and give them corporate titles. The institute
estimates that the mean salary of its members is more than $60,000 and notes
that some of them make more than $200,000 a year. And more and more, investor
relations professionals are vice presidents, and their job can include
responsibility for corporate planning or acquisitions.

Some people dismiss investor relations as a way to hype a stock, but analysts
disagree, saying the true benefits come from developing a reputation for
credibility and honesty when the outlook is dim.  ''Once the word gets around
that you are not leveling, you can lose your credibility in one day,'' James A.
Powers, president of the New York chapter of the National Investor Relations
Institute, said.

Mr. Baker of Colt admits that getting analysts interested in his company is a
task because it does not fit neatly into any particular industry. Few analysts
follow conglomerates because to do so requires expertise in so many fields. And
among the conglomerates, Colt is not nearly as well known as some others.
''Because of the nature of the company, we fall into the cracks,'' Mr. Baker
said.

Thus, he deals with an array of analysts from those specializing in metals,
machinery, and steel industrial equipment to conglomerates and what are called
''special situations.''

W ITH no single business to drive the company and since 34 percent of sales
comes from specialty steels, the performance of Colt's stock has been lackluster
recently, analysts say. In addition, some investors have a hard time identifying
with a company that makes industrial components rather than finished products,
they added.

Before joining Colt in January of last year, Mr. Baker, a lanky Georgian, spent
five years at E.F. Hutton & Company as an analyst himself. One of the companies
he followed was Colt. Mr. Baker is a West Point graduate, and served in Vietnam
and later got an M.B.A.  degree at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's
Sloan School of Management.

He lives in New Jersey with his wife and one child, and says he took the job at
Colt because he wanted to try working in a corporation. Having dealt with Colt
as an analyst, he said he believed that its management ''would not withdraw
information at a critical time, but would be straight with me.'' As to his
salary, he would not say, except that it was on the low end of the institute's
scale.

The carrot that finally drew Mr. Baker to Colt over other companies was its
offer to give him the responsibility of scouting for possible acquisitions. Colt
has not been particularly acquisitive of late, however, buying only three
companies in the past 10 years. Yet Mr. Baker said it currently has about $160
million in cash with which it could make an acquisition in the near future.

While his acquisition hunting has not borne fruit thus far, the results of Mr.
Baker's investor relations work are more measurable.  Colt has some 4,000
securities analysts and portfolio managers on its mailing list, and Mr. Baker
deals with about 200 of them personally.  He rates analysts in terms of their
attitude about the company on a scale of one to four - ''from interested to drop
dead,'' he says. He tries to move those who are mildly interested in the company
to become close followers and, naturally, gives special attention to those that
are more attentive.

Mr. Baker says he sees about 50 percent of the analysts' reports before they are
published and checks them for factual accuracy but does not comment on financial
projections. Usually he is not privy to the analysts' purchase recommendations
and he conceded that there is very little he can do if an analyst removes or
downgrades a purchase recommendation for Colt stock, as some did last year.

Besides mailing out the usual annual reports, quarterly earnings statements and
proxy materials, Colt also publishes a 72-page investor fact book every year,
which details each of Colt's 28 divisions' operations, prospects and
competitors. Mr. Baker said he devotes ''24 hours a day for a couple of months
each year'' to writing the book.

Perhaps the best judges of Mr. Baker are the analysts on Wall Street. Several
said they were impressed by Mr. Baker's one-on-one contact, that he is available
by telephone or in person to answer questions. ''He was more than willing to
spend the time to educate me, which is not always the case with other
companies,'' Carol Grossman, analyst with Oppenheimer & Company, said when she
began following the company.

What is obviously a help to him in his dealings with analysts is the frequency
with which Colt's top management is willing to appear before analyst groups,
even when times are bad. ''We're in a lot of tough businesses that are kicked
around by the various pressures of the day, and we need to explain ourselves,''
David I. Margolis, Colt's president, said.

''People have memories when you just talk in good times and shut up in bad
times,'' Mr. Baker added.  Wining and dining Wall Street analysts and
institutional investors is often part of an investor relations manager's duty,
but Mr. Baker said he does ''surprisingly little entertaining.'' He frequently
takes his contacts to lunch at French bistro-like restaurants, but he said Colt
draws the line at giving them theater tickets. ''We'll spring for some
basketball tickets or an occasional tennis match, but we probably do less of
this than others,'' he said. He added that no one had ever requested special
favors of him.

There are always limits as to how much information a company will allow its
investor relations department to give out, of course. For example, Mr. Baker
would not divulge the size of each of Colt's divisions or break out their sales
and earnings, principally for competitive reasons, he said.

The company also steadfastly refuses to forecast earnings, a practice that Mr.
Baker would like to change. He tries to guide analysts in calculating earnings
estimates for Colt because ''we have an obligation not to acquire shareholders
because of an analyst's mistake.''

On balance, however, Colt seems to get high marks for its forthrightness. ''You
are obviously not happy if it's down or it's bad, but you don't mind if you have
sufficient information upon which to base an expectation of improvement,'' Mrs.
Grossman said.

Added the manager of a pension fund that owns a substantial chunk of Colt's
stock: ''I like to know there's someone there who's thinking of me. At Colt,
they're in it for the shareholders. If a down quarter comes, we'll ride with
them.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Julie Kennedy is a financial writer in New York.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Lawrence C. Baker graph of rising Colt shares
from 1976 to June 1981

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              329 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 28, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Letters;
MEMO TO THE FED: DISREGARD PREVIOUS MEMO

SECTION: Section 3; Page 17, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 114 words


To the Business Editor: Mr. Wright's article is a pro-inflation hustle. In a
graph, he ''proves'' that M-1B has not been excessively expanded, by adjusting
M-1B for inflation, which then naturally comes out flat. And then, when even his
inflation-adjusted graph shows a huge growth of Eurodollars, instead of
admitting that this shows that a huge amount of created dollars were spent
overseas on the Vietnam War and oil, he claims that the Eurodollar increase was
''spawned by tight money and high interest rates of the early 1970's.''

It is instructive to read his article, just as it is instructive to watch a
three-card monte game.  JESSE BRYANT

New York, N.Y., June 21, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              330 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 28, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ONCE UPON A TIME THERE WAS ONE KOREA

BYLINE: By E.J. Kahn Jr.; E. J. Kahn Jr. is a staff writer for The New Yorker.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1074 words


It was flattering, the other day, to have one of my sons ask me to play tennis
with him. It was sobering to have another say: ''You were in Korea during the
war there, weren't you? What was that all about, anyway?''

Well, now, chaps, when June rolls around each year, it is not Father's Day that
some of us old codgers reminisce about, nor even Flag Day. We remember the month
as the one in which - June 25, 1950 was the date -the trouble began. Listen
carefully, because you may find some of this hard to believe. So, apparently,
did Gen. Omar Bradley, who was chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff at the
time; he said the Korean business was ''the wrong war, at the wrong place, at
the wrong time, and with the wrong enemy.'' Actually, the Korean War wasn't ever
technically a war. Congress never declared it one. It was often called, for want
of any better term, a ''police action.'' That gave little comfort then or since
to the families of the 52,246 Americans who died in the course of whatever it
was. For another strange thing, the conflict isn't technically over yet. Up at
Panmunjom, near the 38th Parallel, which then and now divides North and South
Korea, the details of a permanent settlement are still intermittently being
thrashed out. You be sure to let your grandchildren know when the hatchet is
finally buried.

Once upon a time, then, there was a single Korea. It was often called ''The Land
of the Morning Calm.'' To put it in regional perspective for you, it's in the
general area of Vietnam. It is a hilly place - dreadful for infantrymen. The
Japanese occupied it during World War II (that was the Roosevelt-Churchill vs.
Hitler-Tojo war). After V-J Day, the Soviet Union cleaned the defeated Japs, as
it was then perfectly permissible to call them, out of the northern part of the
country, and the United States removed them from the south. A man named Dean
Rusk, who'd been an army officer in China during that war, when the Chinese were
our stalwart allies, suggested that a line be drawn at the 38th Parallel to keep
the cleanup forces from getting tangled. By June 1949, when another Dean -
Acheson - was Secretary of State for the only American President out of
Independence, Mo., all foreign troops had been withdrawn from both Koreas.
Syngman Rhee was in charge of South Korea, capital at Seoul; Kim Il Sung ran
things up north, from Pyongyang. Kim is the only important member of the
original cast still playing in this long-run show.

In the spring of 1950, fellows, the cold war was at the boiling point. Alger
Hiss, a friend of Acheson's, was in jail. McCarthyites (Sen. Jos. P., R., Wis.)
were baying at Harry Truman's heels. The President evidently felt he ought to be
more resolutely anti-Communist than his critics were. On April 25, 1950, his
National Security Council resolved that the United States would take up arms
whenever any Communist soldiers moved in on the territory of any non-Communist
nation anywhere on earth. Top secret. Had the rest of the world known about that
(maybe the Russians did; they had spies in high British circles), the North
Koreans might have thought twice before crossing the 38th Parallel on June 25
-scarcely a week after Dulles (the John Foster one) had gone to Seoul for Rhee's
reinauguration and had pledged undying support for South Korea.

Up to then, if you are still with me, no Americans had thought much about any
part of Korea. Congress had voted down an aid appropriation to South K., and had
refused to authorize the dispatch of military advisers there. Gen. Douglas
MacArthur, who was Supreme Commander in Tokyo, believed that the U.S. sphere of
interest in the Pacific embraced the Philippines, Okinawa, and, of course,
Japan, but not Korea, which abuts China. MacArthur was also concerned about the
welfare of his good friend Chiang Kai-shek, who was married to one of the Soong
girls and was living, he hoped temporarily, on Formosa, or Taiwan. So it came as
something of a surprise, except perhaps to Moscow and Peking (would you believe
that the Russkies and the Chicoms, as we familiarly called them, were
buddy-buddy!), when North Korea made its move.

General Mac sent South Korea much of what military strength he had.
Generalissimo Chiang offered to send a bunch of his troops, but they were
politely rejected; more hindrance than help, probably, the consensus seemed to
be. Meanwhile, Washington took the prickly matter to the U.N. And indeed the
non-Communist army that fought in Korea under U.S. generalship did become a more
or less authentic U.N. one, with 21 countries represented, though some only by
medical or other support personnel, and though altogether a minuscule force
compared to their American and South Korean comrades. Still, the presence of
merely a 50-man contingent from Luxembourg was symbolic of universality; and it
seemed to augur well for the future of international amity that a Greek and a
Turkish outfit could fight practically flank-to-flank without turning on one
another.

It was a strange war. Seoul was taken and retaken four or five times. MacArthur
commuted from Japan. He was 70 years old, after all, an astonishing age for a
military leader; that was before we unblinkingly elected septuagarian
Presidents. He pulled off a brilliant tactical coup with an end-run amphibious
landing at Inchon, in North Korea. Then he marched up to the Yalu River, which
separates North Korea from China. He had been warned that if he did that the
Chinese would probably intervene en masse (''hordes'' and ''human waves'' were
popular phrases), but he told Truman at Wake Island on Oct. 15, 1950, that the
Chinese would stay out. They didn't, and as a result we didn't speak to them for
20 years.

By the time I got to Korea, boys, on about April Fool's Day in 1951, the Chinese
and North Koreans had pushed the U.N. forces well below Seoul again. It was not
long after that that MacArthur got into a wrangle with Truman and got sacked. I
looked up what I wrote that day. I reported that the balmy weather in Korea had
eerily changed, within a few hours, into wind and hail and snow, and that that
demonstration of heavenly wrath had made one soldier wonder whether MacArthur
might not be God after all. In my Korean files, too, was a notation that someone
back home had just mailed me a Brooks Brothers gift certificate worth $8.24 and
exchangeable for one button-down shirt. I'll bet you don't believe that, either.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of soldiers running in Korea

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              331 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 28, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Washington;
WHAT'S GOING ON?

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 864 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 27


This is probably the most talkative capital in the world, but it still hasn't
had the semblance of a coherent debate about President Reagan's foreign policy.

The same charge cannot be made about domestic economic policy.  Speaker Tip
O'Neill is not very happy about the way the Republicans captured his troops and
won the budget fight, but at least it was debated vigorously and decided
clearly, with some sweet deals at the end.

No such searching clash of ideas between the executive and legislative branches
has taken place on foreign policy. This vacuum was not invented, though it has
been sustained, by the Reagan Administration.

For example, the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs in the Carter
Administration, David D. Newsom, has recently pointed out that although an
orderly and sustained debate took place on the socalled Eisenhower Doctrine to
contain Soviet influence in the Middle East, the Carter Doctrine to commit the
nation to much greater risks for the same purpose had no such careful advance
consultation and examination in the Congress. It was simply announced by
President Carter that the United States would oppose the expansion of Soviet
power in the Persian Gulf, by force if necessary - without the essential
established forces or bases, or Congressional or allied support to do so.

This casual approach by the executive is becoming a dangerous habit. President
Johnson increased the nation's military involvement in the Vietnam War by a
policy of stealth and President Nixon bombed the enemy in Cambodia by a policy
of deception. Without the support of the Congress and the people, these
adventures led to the defeat and even to the humiliation of the nation. It was
thought we had learned a lesson, but apparently not.

The Reagan Administration has avoided the conflicts between the State Department
and the National Security Council that plagued previous administrations. But it
has not kept its promise to make clear who was speaking for the United States,
and to make sure it spoke with the understanding of the Congress, the people and
our allies.

Recent events dramatize the problem - indeed even exaggerate it.  Secretary of
State Haig announces in Peking a new arms agreement with China. This surprises
not only the Congress but also the White House, which says that no such decision
was made but only what might lead to such a decision; and that, in any event, it
should not be discussed publicly until later, when Chinese officials will be
coming to Washington.

Then it is announced, just before the Chinese Foreign Minister is going to
India, that the Reagan Administration proposes a $3 billion arms arrangement
with Pakistan - again a surprise to the members of Congress, and to Prime
Minister Gandhi as well.

In fact, every morning's newspaper here is a wonder. Suddenly it is reported
from Secretary Haig's plane, somewhere in the Pacific, that he didn't like the
compromise between the United States and Iraq that his own ambassador, Jeane
Kirkpatrick, favored, and that he had had to intervene personally to keep her
from being too hard on the Israelis for bombing Iraq's nuclear facilities.

Even the President was surprised when Mrs. Kirkpatrick did not appear at the
White House to discuss it (where is our heroine?, he asked) and he called her at
her vacation retreat in France to tell her he thought she had done a wonderful
job in ''condemning'' Israel without making that condemnation really effective.

So it's no wonder that even the President's associates are troubled.  The
Administration lately has become a travel agency, with Secretary Haig flying
around the Pacific, Under Secretary Clark off for two weeks in Africa,
explaining to the blacks why they and Washington must be patient with the
apartheid Government in South Africa, and Vice President Bush in Paris lecturing
President Mitterrand on Washington's ''concern'' about his putting Communists in
his Cabinet.

In similar fashion, the Congress of the United States goes off on its own. The
Administration announces that it intends to sell Awac planes to Saudi Arabia, so
that that country can know when its territory is being invaded. But even after
Israeli planes violate the Saudi Arabian borders to bomb Iraq, more than half
the members of Congress warn President Reagan that he shouldn't sell Awac's to
the Saudis.

Fortunately, the busybodies of our foreign policy are now all back and Congress
has departed for the Fourth of July recess. This will give Mr. Reagan time to
celebrate his budget victory at home and try to get his foreign policy together
- even to make his first foreign policy speech, which heretofore he has thought
unnecessary. He will have to meet with the other leaders of the industrial
nations in an Ottawa ''summit'' next month, and they will want to know what, if
anything, he has in mind.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              332 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 28, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE TECHNOLOGY RACE

BYLINE: By William Stockton; William Stockton is the Director of Science News of
The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 14, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5669 words


Andrew Carnegie sold his Carnegie Steel Corporation in 1901 to the J.P. Morgan
syndicate for $480 million, believed to be one of the largest financial
transactions the world had then known. Carnegie was the epitome of the self-made
man, a daring and creative entrepreneur whose example beckoned to legions of
immigrants and promised that hard work would lead to success. Carnegie's steel
corporation was a symbol of a young nation that stood at the brink of an era of
world economic and political dominance. Everything seemed to be in America's
favor then: abundant natural resources, throngs of eager new citizens ready to
work hard and a national spirit marked by frontier brashness, inventiveness and
supreme self-confidence.

Carnegie told the city of Pittsburgh that if it would provide the land, he would
provide the funds to build a technical institute. By the beginning of World War
I, much of the construction was finished on the Carnegie Institute of
Technology, and the architectural jewel of the institute's new buildings,
Hamerschlag Hall, had taken its place on the skyline. Hamerschlag Hall housed
some of the engineering faculty and the institute's massive boiler. The grand
old building became famous for the impressive tower that rose out of its center
and cleverly concealed the boiler's smokestack. In the coming years,
architectural critics would write about the tower as the apotheosis of the
ma-chine and, by extension, the glory of the nation's technology and industry
and of the nation itself.

But the building grew old and the boiler became inefficient and expensive to
operate. So in 1975 the boiler was turned off and the salvagers came with their
blowtorches and cranes and ripped it out.  No architectural critics stepped
forward then, but if they had, they might have written about how the beautiful
old building, whose facade hid a gaping wound deep in its bowels, had become a
new metaphor of sorts for American technology - inefficient, outdated and unsure
of the next step.

American technology is faltering at a peculiarly inopportune moment in history.
These are exciting, promising times, technologically speaking. More than a
century of unprecedented scientific achievement has laid the foundation for a
coming century of astonishing technological accomplishment. The possibilities
are breathtaking, ranging from computers that will think like humans to nuclear
fusion plants that will produce electricity from ubiquitous substances taken
from seawater. Recombinant DNA, or gene-splicing, is leading to the birth of an
entirely new industry in the mass production of rare biological materials.

In addition to treating human disease and perhaps providing the most powerful
weapon yet against cancer, the recombinant DNA process - the taking of genetic
material from one organism and inserting it into another - may soon also make it
possible to isolate the genes of molds that produce nitrates in the soil and
insert them directly into plants, thereby eliminating a need for synthetic
fertilizers. It may also provide new methods of extracting metal from ores, or
cleaning up oil spills.

There is even the possibility of actually altering the human egg and sperm,
provided that society decides such tampering is desirable.

The energy shortages that increasingly will plague mankind in the coming decades
will probably be solved with technology. Wafers of silicon materials, called
photovoltaic cells, already can convert sunlight directly into electricity. When
the challenge of making the conversion more efficient and greatly lowering the
cost of the wafers is met, arrays of the cells may become commonplace, providing
a significant portion of the world's electricity. More distant is the
possibility of giant plates of the cells orbiting the earth, converting sunshine
to electricity and beaming this energy in the form of microwaves to a receiver
on earth for conversion back into electricity.

In short, a great new race has now begun toward technologicalindustrial
accomplishsment. A burst of innovation is clearly coming of a sort that has thus
far had no parallel. Yet it is now that American technology, long in the
forefront, is beginning to have serious troubles. A failure of the United States
to compete effectively at this point could have grave consequences for the
national psyche, providing the proof to a nation already doubting itself that
the American spirit of hard work, derring-do and accomplishing the impossible is
dead. There are many scientific, technological and economics experts who fear
that the United States stands on the brink of just such a decline because the
nation's ingenuity, its ability to capitalize upon scientific findings and
create new technology that leads to new products, is faltering (see box, page
52).

''What's wrong with us?'' demands Representative E. George Brown Jr., a
California Democrat who has served many years on the House's science and
technology committees and is deeply concerned about the nation's technological
future. ''I'll tell you what's wrong. We don't know how to put our act together.
We've got to take hold and pull up our socks.''

But getting America's technological act together will be difficult. The problem
cuts across virtually every segment of society and has no easy answer. A number
of legislative initiatives will be required. One that has wide support is
finding a way through tax cuts or other incentives to get industry to spend more
money on plant modernization so that productivity will be increased. Another
involves efforts to increase savings by consumers and make more capital
available for modernization of industry.

Spending on research and development throughout the economy, by both industry
and Government, must be increased, many scientists, engineers and economists
believe. Tax incentives also may be necessary to induce industry to increase
research and development in its own laboratories and make more money and
laboratory equipment available to academic researchers.

But there are few experts on American technology who believe such initiatives
will entirely solve the problem. What is needed, they say, is a new spirit of
American competitiveness, a rekindling of the desire to excel as a nation, to
roll up the national sleeves and get to work. The experts remember 1957 and the
Russian challenge in space, which galvanized the nation and led to a burst of
excellence in education, a peak in spending on research and development and the
great adventure of sending men to the moon.

What the nation needs, they say, is another sputnik.

Technological advances are at the end of a chain of intellectual pursuits that
sometimes can last decades, or even centuries. The swift advances in computers
and electronics in the last 30 years grew in part out of the emergence of modern
physics in the 1920's. That, in turn, grew out of work a century before by such
scientists as James Clerk Maxwell, the father of modern electromagnetic theory.

The computer, the most visible example of modern technology, will proliferate
beyond most people's imaginings. Computers will become smaller and faster and
appear in virtually every machine humans use.  The revolution in information
processing, already well under way, will accelerate. Computers will undoubtedly
become central to almost every form of communication; even recorded human speech
will be computerized, anaylized, cataloged, translated into foreign languages,
stored and retrieved as needed.

The United States has led the world in the development of computer technology,
but it is also a field in which foreign competitors, particularly the Japanese,
are making serious inroads. One promising branch of computer technology is the
magnetic bubble, a tiny mobile region of magnetism on which, it is hoped, vast
amounts of retrievable information can be stored. The bubbles - magnified 3,000
times and photographed for 10 billionths of a second, they look like so many
Ping-Pong balls - may form the heart of the next generation of computers.

Magnetic bubbles are a product of a research area known as applied magnetics.
The bubbles are a prime example of a promising technology that was invented in
the United States but is in danger of being relinquished to the Japanese. In
fact, the Japanese now have more than a dozen large university-based research
groups hard at work on applied magnetics. The United States has three large
groups in all, one at Bell Telephone Laboratories, one at International Business
Machines and a third, newly formed group at Carnegie-Mellon University in
Pittsburgh, the institution that grew out of the Carnegie Institute of
Technology which Andrew Carnegie founded at the turn of the century.

No one can say, of course, what role magnetic bubbles will ultimately play in
American technology or whether the Carnegie-Mellon group, for example, will make
significant contributions. But keeping American technology healthy depends upon
hundreds, even thousands, of such small academic research groups flourishing,
generating new knowledge, solving vexing technical problems and training the
scientists and engineers that industry must have to compete in the world
marketplace.

''The Japanese aren't ahead of us in applied magnetics yet, but they are
certainly even with us,'' says Dr. Floyd B. Humphrey, 56, the prime mover of
Carnegie-Mellon's applied-magnetics effort and the head of the university's
electrical-engineering department. ''We're going to have to push forward with a
lot of determination in this field in this country if we don't want to fall
behind.''

The problems Professor Humphrey faces in training electrical engineers and
leading the research team provide a succinct picture of the task facing the
United States in the scientific area alone if is to stay ahead in technology.
Magnetism is one of the fundamental forces of nature and has been a key to
mankind's technological advancement.  Magnetized slivers of metal became the
crude compasses used by early sailors. In the 19th century, magnetism made all
things electrical possible, including Bell's telephone and Edison's phonograph.
The first computers had central memories made of tiny rings of magnetic material
strung on fine wire mesh. Magnetic forces generated by electronic circuits
within the computer magnetized a ring one way or another, providing the
computer's essential zero-and-one binary coding. (Oversimplified, the coding is
a series of yeses and noes - directions that enable machines to make
computations and follow orders.)

In the late 1960's, scientists at the Bell Telephone Laboratories in Murray
Hill, N.J., working with thin films of such materials as magnetic garnet,
discovered how to create magnetic bubbles within the films and move millions of
them about at enormous speeds. The bubbles immediately suggested the possibility
of a new type of computer memory that would be significantly smaller, faster and
more dependable. The presence or absence of a bubble at a specific point in the
film would provide the zero-and-one binary coding.

The bubbles are not physical entities in the sense of an object moving about
inside the garnet. Instead, they are regions of magnetism that are different
from the magnetism of the surrounding material. By applying magnetic fields to
the thin films, these magnetic domains can be squeezed down until they are as
small as one micron (a micron is .00004 of an inch, about 100 times smaller than
the thickness of a human hair) and moved about in an orderly fashion.

Bits of the film mounted amid the necessary supporting microelectronics form
computer memory chips that can store millions of bits of data in a space an inch
or two across. Such memory chips are now commercially available. But the bubble
cannot be used to perform computations on the storage data. The Bell Lab
scientists quickly realized, however, that the magnetic bubbles someday would be
developed to perform these functions, which are done by circuits called logic
devices. Logic devices that use magnetic bubbles could have a major impact upon
future computer development because they would be smaller, more durable and
faster.

At present, logic devices are made on silicon chips. These integrated circuits
are similar to the silicon chips that contain the microprocessor, the tiny
computer the size of a thumb. But because of the atomic structure of the
material itself, silicon ultimately has limits to how small the logic circuits
can be, which will limit the size of computers. Although this size limitation
hasn't been reached yet, engineers see it looming closer.

But the size limits for magnetic-bubble materials is believed to be much
smaller. If scientists and engineers can master the intricacies of making
computer logic devices from magnetic bubbles, great new vistas of smaller and
smaller computer components that operate more efficiently and faster than
silicon devices might be opened. The nation that can develop this technology
will have a substantial advantage in the computers of the future.  ''We can't
let this opportunity slip by,'' Humphrey says.  Floyd Humphrey was at Cal Tech
when Bell Labs revealed its work with magnetic bubbles in 1968. The bubbles
fascinated him at once because he had worked in magnetics at Bell Labs for five
years a decade before and knew some of the researchers involved. He soon hit
upon the idea of constructing an instrument that would use a microscope to study
the bubbles in motion and measure how their environment affected the motion. He
suffered the problems that most scientists encounter in trying to obtain the
necessary money to purchase equipment and pay graduate students to help with the
work, but he obtained funding from the National Science Foundation and Cal Tech
and, during the 1970's, published numerous research reports about his
investigations.

Two years ago, Mark Kryder, one of Humphrey's former students at Cal Tech, who
had gone to I.B.M.'s research laboratories in Yorktown Heights, north of New
York City, was offered a faculty position at Carnegie-Mellon. Humphrey found
himself urging his former student to take the job. In the process, he realized
that if he were to move to Carnegie-Mellon, he and Kryder could collaborate on
magnetic bubbles. Carnegie-Mellon happened to be looking for a new
electrical-engineering department head, and a deal was struck.

''After 20 years in paradise in the ivory tower of science at Cal Tech, you need
your pot stirred,'' Humphrey says. ''I was concerned about magnetism. I was
concerned that there was no academic center in this country doing work in
magnetic materials. I saw this as a chance to form a group with Mark Kryder.''

Floyd Humphrey had scarcely unpacked in Hamerschlag Hall a year ago before he
begin encountering the problems that so typify the nation's receding position in
world technology.

He discovered, for example, that 13 of the electrical-engineering seniors were
not going to graduate in June. ''They hadn't completed the work in one of the
courses,'' Humphrey recalls. ''I found that they hadn't been attending class
because they were out interviewing for jobs.'' The average senior had 15
interviews; these resulted in so many plant visits that took away so much of the
seniors' time that Humphrey had to set up a special summer course so that they
could get their degrees. This year, he called in the class of '81 and gave them
a lecture, lest it happen again.

Humphrey found that of a master's-degree class of 60 students last year, only
seven stayed on to work on a doctor's degree. He feels his department needs a
minimum of 20 to thrive. Without enough graduate students, there are not enough
people in the department to teach the undergraduate courses. The faculty
members' research projects wither, because it is the graduate students and their
research which helps sustain the overall effort. Without the necessary level of
research activity, the money from Federal and private research grants will
decline. The exodus of faculty, already under way because of the lucrative pay
available in industry, will accelerate. The reserch grants will decline further,
making it ever more difficult to attract new faculty and students.

Not long after Humphrey arrived at Carnegie-Mellon, one of his younger faculty
members announced he was departing for an industry job. He couldn't be
dissuaded. In fact, as Humphrey faces a new term next fall, one-third of the
electrical-engineering faculty positions are open. When he leads a visitor on a
tour of the electricalengineering department, it is surprising how many of the
graduate students are from other countries -about 40 percent, he says. Humphrey
must contend, too, with laboratory equipment that is much too old. He brought
some with him from California and part of his contract with Carnegie-Mellon
provided a $25,000 fund to purchase needed equipment. But it wasn't enough. So,
as he has done most of his research career, Humphrey makes do with odds and
ends.

''Very shortly I'm going to have to find $12,000 somewhere to buy a computer we
need,'' Humphrey says. ''I don't know where that's going to come from, but we'll
manage.''

And that's not all. His dream is to build the nation's newest ''clean room'' -
the ultimate high-technology workshop whose air is filtered so finely that tiny
dust particles are kept from contaminating the research - and assemble the
people and equipment to build and study computer logic devices based on
magnetic-bubble technology. The price tag for that venture will be $3.5 million.
Carnegie-Mellon has decided to make $1 million of its own discretionary funds
available, but Humphrey somehow must raise another $2.5 million to purchase
equipment.  Scientists and engineers take as a given that spending lavishly on
research ultimately will bring benefits far greater than the cost of the
research.

That is why a decline that has taken place in the proportion of the gross
national product spent on research and development so alarms the scientific and
engineering community. The immediate consequence of reduced spending may be a
lessening of the nation's technological standing in the world marketplace. Of
even greater concern is the possibility that the nation is setting the stage for
a ''knowledge gap'' in two or three decades whose consequences would be much
more serious.

''In the years ahead, this country is going to have to live by its wit,'' says
Dr. Frank Press, President Carter's science adviser and the new president of the
National Academy of Sciences. ''Our products will have to be high-technology
competitive. With the lower labor costs in most of the rest of the world, there
are certain things we're just not going to be able to do. We'll have to replace
them with new concepts, new kinds of industries based on new technology. We have
to remember that a significant portion of the growth of the gross national
product is due to new knowledge. And we have to support acquiring that
knowledge.''

Last year, the United States spent an estimated $60.4 billion of Federal and
private money on research and development. After accounting for inflation, the
amount represented a slight increase over the year before. When measured in
dollars of constant value, the nation's total research and development effort
has grown only slightly since 1971.

But what worries many research-spending analysts is that since the mid-1970's
increasing proportions of the total research dollar have gone into energy
research and development. Although some of this research will produce new
technology and lead to new products for a world beleaguered by energy problems,
much of the expenditures have gone to find new ways to reduce energy consumption
and keep up with rising energy costs. The energy research is coming at the
expense of other work.

When scientists and engineers outline how to rescue American technology, their
solution invariably is more money. Laboratory equipment is obsolete because
there isn't enough money to buy new equipment. Faculty members are leaving
academia because they can't earn enough. Massive infusions of funds are required
if the decline in the proportion of the nation's wealth devoted to research and
development is to be halted. Traditionally, the Federal Government has been
looked to for the billions of dollars needed.

But when the nation's science and engineering leaders appear before
Congressional committees to deplore budget cuts and urge more funding, they are
perceived as another pressure group, which, of course, they are. The difficulty
is that no one can say how much spending on research and development is enough.
Legislators and the public have to accept on faith the contention that the more
the nation spends on research and development, the more it will get back in a
stronger economy, increased employment and all the other benefits that come from
a robust technology.

On the whole, the Reagan Administration's first budget largely protects the
science community from the deep cuts suffered other recepients. Support for
basic research would be raised to $5.5 billion in 1982, a 10 percent increase.
This amount barely keeps abreast of inflation, however. In a written statement
offered to The Times for this analysis, Mr. Reagan's newly appointed but not yet
confirmed science adviser, George A. Keyworth, said, ''In the spectrum of basic
research, applied research development and demonstration, the heaviest
responsibility for basic research naturally falls on the Government. This is
especially true where longterm high-risk research is involved, and in areas
where the payoff is likely to be in broad social benefits. Where the benefits
are apt to be more oriented towards commercial products and quicker profits,
industry should assume the greater portion of research support.''

But while the Administration has reaffirmed its commitment to basic research it
neverthelesss would severely cut some ancillary programs that many scientists
feel will ultimately undermine the nation's capacity to perform that research.
For example, it would cancel entirely the $80.7 million President Carter
proposed for upgrading laboratory instrumentation in universities and would
almost entirely kill the National Science Foundation's programs to promote
science education in high schools and colleges. Many scientists say it is a
myopic approach, that the nation cannot long continue to do first-rate research
without the latest equipment and without young blood.

Few realists in the scientific and engineering communities believe the Federal
Government will or can provide the full support for what needs to be done. More
money, it is clear, must come from private sources, principly American industry.
Industrial scientists such as Dr. Lewis M. Branscomb, vice president and chief
scientist at I.B.M., Edward E. David Jr., president of the Exxon Research and
Engineering Company, and others speak of this need with increasing frequency.
They are calling for specific tax incentives that would stimulate increased
research and development both in industrial laboratories and on the nation's
campuses. The ideas range from something as simple as permitting a company that
donates equipment to a college to deduct from its taxes the market value of the
equipment rather than the actual cost to manufacture it, which is lower. Special
tax deductions might be provided for companies that channel funds for specific
research related to their problems into the academic community. Other tax
incentives would encourage a company to send its scientists and engineers back
to school for advanced degrees. Still others would make it more profitable for a
company to beef up its own internal research and development operation.

But to make such industry involvement in the nation's academic research
laboratories work, the traditional barriers that have existed between industry
and academia in this country would have to be dismantled.

''There is an enormous adversarial barrier that has grown up between industry
and Government and the universities,'' says Representative Brown of California.
''First, we have to overcome that.''

Still, many intellectuals suspect that financial gain from a university-industry
collaboration may benefit the company involved more than the university or the
professor. And there are those like Representative Albert Gore Jr., a Tennesse
Democrat, who are concerned about the rush to commercialize genetic engineering,
for example, wondering whether the trend is compromising scholarly independence
and whether the taxpayers who for decades have paid for the basic research are
now getting a fair return. ''My gut feeling is that the taxpayers are not being
given sufficient consideration,'' he says.

Exxon's Edward David concedes that there are risks in forging close ties between
industry and academia. But, he adds, ''I think that the integrity of people and
institutions need not be compromised, and the spoils can be fairly divided.''

At any rate, the new bonds are being formed. This spring, for example, the
German chemical company Hoechst announced that it would give Massachusetts
General Hospital in Boston, which is a teaching hospital affiliated with Harvard
Medical School, $50 million over the next 10 years to carry out basic research
into genetics. The company hopes that the money will buy new discoveries in
recombinant DNA technology and help it to quickly establish a toehold in the
field.  Under the agreement, the Boston scientists are free to pursue whatever
they wish in the laboratory. Exxon has signed an agreement with the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology to provide $8 million over a 10-year
period for research in combustion. Exxon will designate what some of the
research should be, but the two M.I.T.  professors involved will also have money
to pursue projects of their own. And last year, I.B.M. gave 20 academic research
groups grants of $25,000 each, no strings attached. The company plans to double
the amount this year.

At Carnegie-Mellon, Floyd Humphrey is keenly aware of the increased interest
industry is showing in academic research. In fact, he is counting on American
industry to solve many of his problems. Humphrey hopes, for example, to solve
his faculty shortage problem by luring middle-aged, experienced industrial
engineers to faculty positions. His electrical-engineering students would
benefit from the first-hand experience of such new faculty members, and the
companies would benefit, he believes, because they would have an ally in
academia when they come to the campus to recruit new engineers.

He is also trying to keep electrical-engineering students in graduate school by
trying to persuade major employers to offer summer jobs to them and then
supporting them during the extra year of schooling it takes for them to earn a
master's degree. ''Giving a company a tax break for doing that would have quite
an effect,'' Humphrey predicts.

He is pursuing industry wherever he can. One week out of every three, an
engineer who is working on magnetic-bubble logic devices at I.B.M. comes to
Carnegie-Mellon to work with Humphrey and his colleagues. I.B.M. continues to
pay the engineer's salary, and the National Science Foundation has agreed to
cover the travel expenses.  Humphrey - and he is not alone - is concerned that
these measures as well as others being considered may not by themselves be
enough to end the nation's technology troubles. He recalls the national mood
after the Soviet Union launched sputnik 24 years ago. There was a wave of alarm
and a rolling up of national sleeves that hadn't occurred since World War II. In
the decade afterward, American science and engineering flourished. American
public-school students were better trained in science than they have been since.
The nation cared about meeting the challenge. The ''missile gap'' that the
nation responded to may never have existed. And sending men to the moon may have
seemed a hollow victory afterward. In any case, the momentum gathered by the
Russian space challenge spent itself on the national trauma of the Vietnam War.
But the experience illustrated what the country can do if it wants.

And it is this American response to a problem that Lewis Branscomb at I.B.M. is
thinking of when he says that the American people must roll up their sleeves and
get to work, or when Representative Brown says the country must get its act
together.

''We too often take a short-range view of things,'' says Branscomb. ''We are a
pragmatic, change-oriented kind of people. We used to be adventure-oriented as
well. As long as we were adventure-oriented and optimistic, then the fact that
we were terribly pragmatic and to hell with tomorrow didn't hurt us. We'd go out
there and take a flyer and let tomorrow take care of itself. And tomorrow did
pretty well by us. But I think as we tend to turn inward and become a more
securityoriented society, it becomes very difficult to go for that long term.''

Humphrey's eye is on the long term and risk doesn't frighten him.  He leads a
visitor down into the depths of Hamerschlag Hall.  Descending the steps two at a
time, he leads the way into the cavernous chamber where the giant boiler once
stood. Across a catwalk and down old cast-iron stairs he scurries through the
dim light until he stands amid rubble on the floor, a tiny figure dwarfed by
pipes and valves and remaining machinery.

Spreading his arms wide, standing in the gray light that filters through grimy
windows high above, gesturing grandly, his voice filled with the excitement that
the idea generates within him, Humphrey describes how he and his colleagues will
build their new laboratory. Here, they will conduct frontier research into
magnetic bubbles, seeking to discover in this exotic technology a few bits and
pieces of new knowledge that will help thrust the computer industry forward
another step that, in turn, will thrust American technology forward. Could not
the old building become a new metaphor for American technology reborn?

Though American scientists discovered the transistor, developed the
semiconductor and revolutionized the electronics industry, foreigners - most
notably the Japanese - are now giving Americans a run for their
research-and-development money and threatening America's position in these and
other fields.

Not unconnected to these developments is the fact that American funds for
research and development, as a proportion of the gross national product, have
been declining since the late 1960's. In the same period, the Japanese, Germans
and Russians have increased their proportion. And during the 1970's, the
fraction of United States patents granted to noncitizens increased
substantially. Since 1975, noncitizens have received more than one-third of all
patents issued by the Patent Office, as compared with one-fifth a decade ago.

During the last decade, the number of doctorates awarded in engineering in this
country declined by one-third. And one-third of those awarded went to
''temporary residents,'' or foreign students, many of whom returned home. During
the 1950's and 60's, American workers increased their productivity at a
respectable average rate of 3 percent each year. But in 1978 the rate fell to
0.5 percent and then, in 1979, for the first time, American productivity
actually declined by almost one percentage point. Between 1968 and 1978,
American productivity increased a total of only 22 percent. During the same
period, Japanese worker productivity grew almost 90 percent; Italian, French and
West German, 60 percent.

When productivity experts project the amount of work that each worker will
accomplish in 1990, they see France, Germany and Japan all outstripping the
United States, although at the moment American workers and machinery still get
more done than their foreign counterparts.

Another clearly connected development is the fact that the amount of science
taught in the public schools in the United States has been drop-ping during the
last decade. Dr. Marjorie Gardner at the National Science Foundation cites a
study showing that of 18-yearold American students, only 9 percent have taken a
physics course, 16 percent a chemistry course and 45 percent a biology course.
The rest take only general science. Educators say the requirements in other
industrial nations are much stiffer.

The nation's engineering schools have a more perplexing problem: a glut of
undergraduate students and a paucity of graduate students and faculty. In 1979,
there were 340,000 undergraduate engineering students, resulting in an average
student-faculty ratio of 20 to 1 - much too high for quality education. In the
last decade, while undergraduate engineering enrollment was growing 47 percent,
the number of doctorates was down one-third. In 1980, an estimated 10 percent to
15 percent of the nation's engineering faculty positions were unfilled. In 1979,
the number of positions open in industry and academia for ''computer-related
Ph.D.s'' was 1,300, but the number of new doctorates available was only 326.

Japan, which has half the population of the United States, graduated 19,257
electrical engineers with bachelor's or master's degrees or doctorates in 1977,
whereas the United States turned out 14,290. And that gap is believed to have
been widening.

At first glance, the high demand for electrical engineering graduates, who
command immediate salaries that are as high as $30,000 a year, seems healthy.
But it signifies a serious problem. Because so many new graduates are being
siphoned off immediately for jobs in industry, the ranks of the nation's
engineering graduate schools are being rapidly depleted. Thus, there are fewer
and fewer engineers with master's degrees to take the jobs in industry that
demand more training and, of even more concern, fewer and fewer engineers with
doctorates. In effect, the farmer is eating his seed corn instead of planting it
to get a new crop.- W.S.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Floyd Humphrey at Carnegie-Mellon photo of
molecular biologists studying DNA fragments photo of photovoltaic cells which
convert sunlight to energy photo of laser bombarding hydrogen isotopes photo of
laser array at University of Rochester photo of Arthur Ruoff of Cornell in
laboratory photo of sentry robot photo of workaday robot

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              333 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 28, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 6; Page 62, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 207 words


John Kifner writes, ''For it was America, in the Iranian view, that supported
and propped up the Shah, that took the oil, that profited from the enormous
sales of arms and that helped train the Savak. The Shah, in the Iranian view,
was a creature of the United States'' (''How a Sit-In Turned Into a Siege'').

The American people need to realize that this is not just ''the Iranian view.''
It is historic truth. What is more, the Iranian people suffered arrest, torture
and death under the Savak. Many Americans jumped to the conclusion that the
Iranian students were not students but Communist agents. Mr. Kifner's article
dispels that idea. But Americans cannot fully understand these problems without
knowing what the United States did under President Eisenhower in countries like
Iran, Vietnam and Guatemala. In each case the United States arranged to erect a
government which it could control in ways favorable to its economic interests.

Our opponents in these countries are indeed rebels. But they are neither
terrorists nor Communists in their early rebellion. They are doing exactly what
Americans would do, if another country had done to our country what we did to
theirs.
(THE REV.) RALPH M.  CARMICHAEL, Raquette Lake, N.Y.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              334 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 28, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICAN DEFENSE: SPENDING

BYLINE: By MARTIN F. NOLAN; Martin F. Nolan is editor of the Boston Globe
editorial page.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1227 words


NATIONAL DEFENSE By James Fallows.  204 pp. New York: Random House. $12.95.

A BILLION here, a billion there,'' the late Everett McKinley Dirksen used to
say, ''and pretty soon you're talking about real money.'' That is something for
Caspar Weinberger to remember during his first term as Secretary of Defense, for
he will be spending approximately $1.6 trillion of the taxpayers' money. And if
Dirksen's words aren't enough of a reminder, Mr. Weinberger should find time to
read James Fallows's forceful and patriotic ''National Defense.''

In spare, controlled prose unencumbered by liberal cant, Mr.  Fallows discusses
survival in a dangerous world. He does not ridicule the military or the weapons
industries. Rather, he addresses himself to the ''culture of procurement,''
which ''draws the military toward new weapons because of their great cost, not
in spite of it.'' And he quotes former Secretary of Defense Melvin Laird's
warning about the danger of this culture: ''The worst thing that could happen is
for the nation to go on a defense spending binge that will create economic havoc
at home and confusion abroad and that cannot be wisely dealt with by the
Pentagon.''

The Department of Defense was created in 1947 to end the bureaucratic problems
resulting from the interservice rivalry between the War and Navy departments. In
a chapter called ''Two Weapons,'' Mr. Fallows documents how the problems
persist, swathed in layers of separate bureaucracies dedicated to their own
self-perpetuation. He follows the fate of the F-16 fighter plane from the
drawing board through the Pentagon maze. As ''the Air Force management group
grew toward 200 people, and the contractor's team rose from 150 engineers to
about 1,500,'' what began as a mobile, flexible tactical fighter went through
''structural and electronic changes ... conveniently reducing its status as a
competitor to the Air Force's favorite fighter, the F-15.'' The result was ''an
aircraft that cost 75 percent more than the original YF-16 would have; that is
being fielded in units with airto-ground missions rather than pure fighter
units; that weighed roughly 24,000 pounds instead of around 20,000, with a
proportional reduction in acceleration; and that came loaded with
hard-to-maintain electronic equipment.''

Mr. Fallows describes other products of the ''culture of procurement'': tanks
that are laden with sophisticated electronic equipment but cannot survive dust
and dirt, antitank weapons that work on a computer printout but not on a
battlefield, airplanes that perform well in wind tunnels but not in combat.
Older, simpler weapons of naval warfare, such as mines, are overlooked. The
author quotes the explanation of one member of the Defense Science Board: ''No
one can command a mine,'' he says. ''You don't get promoted for procuring them.
There's no glamour to them.''

''National Defense'' includes some stunning historical analogies.  In the
aftermath of Little Big Horn, Mr. Fallows writes, ''near the bodies of Custer's
men were found their standard-issue Army rifles, the single shot Trap-Door
Springfields, which the Ordnance Corps had developed and which the Indians had
not deigned to take.'' A century later, the Vietcong likewise left behind the
early models of the M-16 rifle issued to American soldiers in Vietnam.

In ''National Defense,'' Mr. Fallows is also concerned with the effect of
technology on the military leadership. ''The orders given to Dwight Eisenhower
were to invade France and liberate the continent; the details were left to
him,'' the author writes.  ''Because of the profligate use of modern
communications, the commanders of the failed American rescue missions to Iran
and the Mayaguez both had to clear each minute tactical move by radio with the
Joint Chiefs of Staff on the other side of the globe.''

And Mr. Fallows is concerned as well about the troops. In a chapter entitled
''Employees,'' he is skeptical about the claims made for the volunteer Army.
''In 1980, of the 100,860 men who were serving their first term as enlisted men
in the 'combat arms' of the Army - infantry, armor, artillery, the ones who
fight,'' he asks, ''how many possess degrees from any college, of any quality,
anywhere in the United States? Twenty-five. Not 25 percent, but 25 people. There
are nearly twice as many graduates on any 45-man team in the National Football
League.'' Although he is fair to both critics and defenders of the draft, Mr.
Fallows concludes that some kind of national service requirements are necessary
as ''the gestures of a nation that realized its defense was a serious business,
not to be discussed in airy generalizations or contracted out to the poor.''

In this regard, the most eloquent words of the 32-year-old author are in his
dedication:''For My Sons.'' And Mr. Fallows frankly admits in his introduction:
''I came of military age during the war in Vietnam. As I have described at
length elsewhere (in the October 1975 Washington Monthly), I deliberately
avoided service in that war.'' With the justification of that confession, he
takes an ad hominem approach in his examination of the ''deep psychological
forces'' underlying the positions of such public figures as Henry Jackson, John
Stennis and George Will (none of whom served in the military) on defense
matters.

Mr. Fallows is reasonably tolerant of the revolving door between the military
and weapons manufacturers, but he doesn't hesitate to cite cold facts: ''United
Technologies,'' he writes, ''which makes helicopters and jet engines, among
other things, received $2,553,600,000 (in Pentagon business during one year,
1978). ... the president of United Technologies was Alexander Haig -former
fourstar general, former Supreme Allied Commander of NATO forces, Reagan's
Secretary of State, and perhaps the most dramatic example of the traffic between
defense contractors and the Government.''

As for nuclear strategy, Mr. Fallows puts in historical perspective the balance
of terror that has ruled American foreign policy for more than three decades:
''The 'best' minds of the defense community have been drawn toward nuclear
analysis,'' he points out, ''but so were the best minds to be found in the
monastery, arguing the Albigensian heresy, in the 14th century. A novel theory
about how the Kremlin might respond to nuclear strike may be advanced, may make
the author's name, and may lead to billions in expenditures without entering any
further into the domain of fact than did the monks' speculations about the
nature of God.'' Although his chapter on nuclear weapons seems weak compared
with his previous chapters, everyone else's theories about the subject seem weak
too. ''There has never been a nuclear war,'' he argues, ''and nobody knows what
nuclear war would mean ... whether human society would be set back for
centuries, decades or merely months as a result.''

Of the many experts, in and out of uniform, quoted by Mr. Fallows, Edward
Luttwak is most pointed regarding leadership and the relationship of the
military to the larger society: ''What civilian society is not competent to
manage is, precisely, conflict.'' That is precisely the case. That is also why,
in an age soon to be increasingly dominated by military spending, prudent
soldiers and thoughtful civilians should arm themselves with a copy of
''National Defense.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawings

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              335 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 28, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET DIPLOMACY: BLUFFING

BYLINE: By ADAM ULAM; Adam B. Ulam is Gurney Professor of History and Political
Science and director of the Russian Research Center at Harvard.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1449 words


DIPLOMACY OF POWER Soviet Armed Forces as a Political Instrument.  By Stephen S.
Kaplan with Michel Tatu, Thomas W. Robinson, William Zimmerman, Donald S.
Zagoria and Janet D. Zagoria, Paul Jabber and Roman Kolkowicz, Alvin Z.
Rubinstein, David K. Hall, Colin Legum.  733 pp. Washington: The Brookings
Institution. Cloth, $29.95. Paper, $14.95.

''THERE is nothing extraordinary about a great nation using armed forces to
attain political objectives abroad without going to war,'' writes Stephen S.
Kaplan in the introduction to this highly informative and well-reasoned study of
''Soviet Armed Forces as a Political Instrument.'' He might have added that such
a practice still appears highly irregular if not immoral to most Americans;
their attitude reflects the fact that the United States has not been
particularly successful, to put it mildly, in using its military power for
political ends.

In contrast, what is extraordinary about the Soviet Union is the skill and
perseverance with which it has employed the techniques of what Mr. Kaplan calls
''coercive diplomacy.'' With the single exception of Afghanistan, since World
War II the U.S.S.R. has not engaged in a major military intervention outside of
its European Communist bailiwick. Yet on numerous occasions Moscow's threats or
boasts that it would use its military might have paralyzed the will of a
prospective prey or extorted concessions or solid political benefits. And some
of the most impressive successes of Soviet diplomacy have relied not on explicit
threats or publicized troop or ship movements but on hints. The Kremlin would
strike an ominous pose and escalate its rhetoric, and foreign statesmen would
anxiously begin to search for ways of propitiating the Soviet leaders.

It is instructive that of the 190 instances of ''coercive diplomacy'' which the
authors find since World War II, over 100 occurred before the early 60's - that
is, during the era of decisive American nuclear superiority. To be sure, the
authors' attempt to quantify complex international problems is occasionally
misleading. Some of their examples hardly fit their scheme. Take No. 65 on their
list, puzzlingly identified as ''Austria State Treaty, May 1955.'' Presumably
the authors mean to indicate that as a consequence of the treaty, Soviet armed
units withdrew from Austria. Does this item really belong on the same list with
incident No. 102, ''Emplacement of missiles in Cuba, July 1962''? And was the
Soviet withdrawal from Port Arthur and Dairen in May 1955 (No. 66) really an
instance of Soviet ''coercive diplomacy'' or a glaring case of its failure
(since the U.S.S.R. was militarily much stronger than the Chinese)?

Nonetheless, the case studies and analyses in the book are of high quality. One
is impressed by the succinctness and precision of Michel Tatu's account of the
three politico-military crises in Eastern Europe: Poland and Hungary in 1956 and
Czechoslovakia in 1968. Though it is hard to do full justice, in fewer than 100
pages, to the convoluted story of Soviet goals, fears and maneuvers in the
Korean and Vietnam wars, the respective chapters by Donald S. Zagoria and Janet
D. Zagoria and by William Zimmerman are more instructive than many full-sized
books on these subjects.

There can be no doubt that the Soviet leaders' largely self-contrived aura of
intransigence and readiness to use force has been a great asset to Russian
foreign policy. Still, ''The Diplomacy of Power'' is very instructive in showing
that the Kremlin, though often reckless in its rhetoric, has usually been quite
prudent in its actions. And Moscow's mixture of intimidation, brazenness and
bluff has occasionally proved counterproductive. Observers often forget or
disregard the fact that the Kremlin has sometimes backed down when the other
side was unyielding. Khrushchev's bombast and missilerattling, for example,
gradually grew less and less convincing and eventually led to the 1962 Cuban
missile crisis, which ended in Soviet withdrawal.

Furthermore, ''coercive diplomacy'' has seldom proved effective when tried on
those trained in the Soviets' own methods. Moscow has simply learned to live
with situations it had initially proclaimed to be intolerable and likely to lead
''to the gravest possible consequences'' (in the notorious Kremlin phrase that
still sends shivers through the world's chancelleries). For instance, at a time
when Washington and London feared to challenge Russian hegemony over Eastern
Europe lest Stalin launch his armies against the West, the little Balkan country
of Yugoslavia refused to bow to Soviet threats and regained its independence.
And for a while during the 50's, Peking also gave Moscow a taste of its own
medicine. With implicit threats and by advocating more militant Communist
policies during the 1958 Quemoy/Matsu crisis, which threatened to drag the
U.S.S.R. into a shooting conflict with the United States, the Chinese put the
Soviets on the spot and frustrated their plans for a partial accommodation with
America.

To be sure, all of this offers scant consolation to an American or Western
European policy maker who correctly feels he cannot negotiate with the Soviets
on an equal basis during a crisis: They can usually gauge how far his country's
public opinion will allow him to go, whereas he can never be sure whether the
Soviets are in earnest or are bluffing. When confronted with Soviet ''coercive
diplomacy'' - bullying, in plain English - a representative of a democratic
society can seldom be expected to display the equanimity and steadfastness
(whether real or feigned) of a Mao or a Tito.  Furthermore, in the past,
Moscow's tactics of intimidation often worked even though Soviet strength,
either industrial or strategic, was only a fraction of the West's. One does not
have to emphasize the significance of the recent and greatly altered balance of
military and industrial power.

It is largely true, as the authors write, that ''In the Third World the U.S.S.R.
did not obtain very stable positions as a result of its coercive diplomacy.''
But the Soviets have primarily sought to undermine the stability of various
regions that were until recently within the Western sphere of influence. Thus it
would be difficult to discover any direct advantages the U.S.S.R. derived from
its relationship with Castro's Cuba or Nasser's Egypt. But such liaisons have
indirectly benefited the Soviet Union by weakening Western influence, prestige
and self-assurance, not only in those areas but throughout the whole
non-European world.

The unceasing Soviet search for opportunities to humiliate the West or force it
to retreat may follow from the nature of the Communist system and mentality. Or
perhaps the U.S.S.R. has simply been succumbing to the kind of temptation that
even saints (much less the present masters of the Kremlin) could not resist.
Experts disagree, but it is certain that Soviet propaganda has applauded
practically every international development harmful to Western interests and
prestige - even if the ultimate effects may prove embarrassing or injurious to
the Soviet Union itself (as with the rebirth of Moslem fundamentalism in the
Middle East).

The success of the Kremlin's ''coercive diplomacy'' in the Near East, Angola and
the Horn of Africa and along the Sino-Soviet border remains an open question;
the chapters in ''Diplomacy of Power'' dealing with those areas are of necessity
rather tentative in their conclusions. And the book was obviously completed too
early to take any but the most cursory notice of the Afghanistan invasion, or to
deal at all with the Polish crisis. The latter has shown the Kremlin's
''coercive diplomacy'' at its most tenacious: a mixture of fatherly advice to
the Poles, rumors of Soviet troops already on the move, military maneuvers
accompanied by unconvincing Soviet expressions of confidence in the Poles'
ability to take care of their own problems, and ill-tempered threats and
unsubtle reminders of Czechoslovakia in 1968 and Hungary in 1956.

But whatever its resolution, the Polish crisis has already demonstrated certain
inherent limits and enduring dilemmas of Soviet power. (The Politburo has
obviously kept in mind the enormous risks and economic costs of a possible
intervention.) These are unlikely by themselves to alter the course of Soviet
''coercive diplomacy'' in the foreseeable future; to change this pattern of
behavior requires more sophisticated policies on the part of the West, which can
only come from more detailed knowledge of the methods, strengths and weaknessess
of Soviet diplomacy. To this end, ''Diplomacy of Power'' makes a valuable
contribution.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              336 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 28, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Best Sellers

SECTION: Section 7; Page 24, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1135 words


Jx

FICTION
1 1 8 NOBLE HOUSE, by James Clavell. (Delacorte, $19.95.) British and Chinese
businessmen struggle for control of one of Hong Kong's oldest trading houses.
2 2 12 GORKY PARK, by Martin Cruz Smith. (Random House, $13.95.) A triple murder
in Moscow leads to a chase on two continents.
3 3 10 GOD EMPEROR OF DUNE, by Frank Herbert. (Putnam's, $12.95.) Leto continues
as guardian and savior of the human race in the fourth novel about the planet
Dune.
4 12 3 GOODBYE, JANETTE, by Harold Robbins. (Simon & Schuster, $13.95.) Two
randy sisters at large in the Parisian world of haute couture.
5 4 10 FREE FALL IN CRIMSON, by John D. MacDonald. (Harper & Row, $10.95.)
Travis McGee investigates the murder of an ailing tycoon.
6 9 24 MASQUERADE, by Kit Williams. (Schocken Books, $9.95.) An illustrated
fable about the Sun, the Moon and a hidden treasure.
7 6 10 THE WHITE HOTEL, by D.M. Thomas. (Viking, $12.95.) Sigmund Freud treats a
young woman whose case epitomizes the neuroses of the 20th century.
8 1 THE GLITTER DOME, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Morrow/Perigord, $12.95.) Two veteran
homicide detectives trapped by the seductive vices of Hollywood.
9 1 THE CARDINAL SINS, by Andrew M. Greeley. (Warner/Bernard Geis, $12.95.) The
triumphs and tragedies of two Chicago boys as priests in the Catholic Church.
10 8 7 XPD, by Len Deighton. (Knopf, $12.95.) The British and the Russians race
to get proof that Churchill once did business with Hitler.
11 3 LICENSE RENEWED, by John Gardner. (Richard Marek, $9.95.) James Bond
against a mad nuclear physicist.
12 7 36 THE COVENANT, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) Fifteen
thousand years of South African history.
13 10 13 CREATION, by Gore Vidal. (Random House, $15.95.) A journey through that
greatest of all ages, the fifth century B.C., in the company of a man critical
of it all.
14 5 11 TAR BABY, by Toni Morrison. (Knopf, $11.95.) A black fable of race and
eroticism set on a Caribbean island.
15 11 12 REFLEX, by Dick Francis. (Putnam's, $11.95.) A British jockey copes
with blackmail and discovers his own missing past.
.)

NONFICTION
1 1 8 THE LORD GOD MADE THEM ALL, by James Herriot. (St.  Martin's, $13.95.) The
further adventures of the Yorkshire vet at home and behind the Iron Curtain.
2 2 21 NEVER-SAY-DIET BOOK, by Richard Simmons. (Warner, $14.95.) A regimen for
exercise, diet and life style devised by a Hollywood television personality.
3 3 6 THE BEVERLY HILLS DIET, by Judy Mazel. (Macmillan, $9.95.) A regimen
devised by a Hollywood nutrition guru.
4 14 7 THE EAGLE'S GIFT, by Carlos Castaneda. (Simon & Schuster, $12.95.)
Another journey into the land of sorcery, hallucinatory visions and Mexican
Indian lore.
5 4 33 COSMOS, by Carl Sagan. (Random House, $19.95.) Thirteen billion years of
the universe's evolution explained by the NASA medal-winning space scientist.
6 8 4 THE PRITIKIN PERMANENT WEIGHT-LOSS MANUAL, by Nathan Pritikin. (Grosset &
Dunlap, $14.95.) A nutritionist's regimen for health and long life.
7 1 MISS PIGGY'S GUIDE TO LIFE, by Miss Piggy as told to Henry Beard.
(Knopf/Muppet Press, $12.95.) Advice about everything from the superstar porcine
personality.
8 13 12 MARIA CALLAS, by Arianna Stassinopoulos. (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) A
gossipy biography of an extraordinary singer and electrifying personality.
9 7 17 YOU CAN NEGOTIATE ANYTHING, by Herb Cohen. (Lyle Stuart, $12.) Ways to
avoid conflict and get what you want.
10 12 10 DR. ATKINS' NUTRITION BREAKTHROUGH, by Robert C. Atkins, M.D.
(Morrow/Perigord, $10.95.) How common illnesses can be treated without drugs,
but with diets supplemented by vitamins and minerals.
11 1 THEORY Z, by William G. Ouchi. (Addison-Wesley, $12.95.) The reasons for
Japanese business success.
12 28 BETTY CROCKER'S INTERNATIONAL COOKBOOK. (Random House, $13.95.) A new
collection of recipes under a l ongestablished name.
13 1 THE ALPHA STRATEGY, by John A. Pugsley. (Stratford Press, $13.95.) Advice
on financial survival in an economically unstable world.
14 6 22 NICE GIRLS DO, by Irene Kassorla. (Stratford Press, $9.95.) A
psychologist advises women ''how to solve their own sexual problems.''
15 10 14 WILLIAM E. DONOGHUE'S COMPLETE MONEY MARKET GUIDE, by William E.
Donoghue with Thomas Tilling. (Harper & Row, $12.95.) ''How to profit from
inflation and fluctuating interest rates.''
The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 1,600
bookstores in every region of the

United States.

FOOTNOTES
Of the two new fiction titles this week, ''The Glitter Dome,'' by Joseph
Wambaugh, is selling more on the West Coast than in other parts of the country;
''The Cardinal Sins,'' by Andrew M. Greeley, is selling best in the Midwest,
Father Greeley's territory. Of the new fiction runners-up, Morris West's ''The
Clowns of God,'' another book about the Catholic clergy, is selling best on the
West Coast; Philip Roth's ''Zuckerman Unbound,'' the further adventures of
Roth's writer hero, has 45 percent of its sales in the Midwest. On the general
list, ''Miss Piggy's Guide to Life'' and ''The Alpha Strategy'' are doing best
in the West; ''Theory Z'' in the East. Of the new general runners-up, ''Jane
Brody's Nutrition Breakthrough'' is scoring on the West Coast; Al Santoli's
''Everything We Had,'' an oral history of 33 American soldiers in the Vietnam
War, is doing best in the Midwest. The only new title on the paperback lists is
''Music for Chameleons,'' the Truman Capote miscellany.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              337 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 28, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STATE MUSICIANS AT WHITE HOUSE

BYLINE: By RUTH ROBINSON

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 8, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 944 words


THE state will be well represented at the Fourth of July party that President
and Mrs. Reagan are giving for the executive staff of the White House and their
families. In keeping with the theme of a casual turn-of-the-century small-town
Fourth of July picnic on the South Lawn, there will be chicken in the basket,
draft beer, root beer, ice cream, and badminton and croquet as well as fireworks
and musical entertainment by seven ensembles and a name entertainer to be
announced. No fewer than five of the musical groups are from the Connecticut.

''Artists all over the world are dying to sing at the White House and here we
are, a bunch of old Fairfield housewives going down there,'' said Jeri Rovsek,
who sings alto and plays drums with A Touch of Class, a contemporary group of 12
women vocalists.

''It's the biggest thing we've ever done,'' said Robert Tellalian, top tenor of
the Eastonaires, a barber-shop quartet, three members of which have been singing
together for 35 years.

''It's awesome in a way,'' said Dave Mechler of Huntington, who plays cornet
with the Bourbon Street Seven, a Dixieland band, ''but we're going into it
prepared to have the same kind of good time we always do.''

''I think it's a real privilege to go down there and sing for the President and
his lady,'' said Henry Yasdik of Huntington, lead of the Soundsmen, another
barber-shop quartet, which traveled as far afield as Guam and Tokyo to entertain
troops during the Vietnam War.

''We've had some pretty big commitments, but never anything like this,'' said
Robert Chamberlain of Newtown, a founder of the 27-yearold Easton Banjo Society.
He said they would probably play ''California Here I Come,'' at the White House,
along with a lot of Roaring 20's stuff and some turn-of-the-century numbers.

The groups were given only about six weeks' notice, but that presented no
particular problem, because they all perform regularly and have their repertory
in good shape. Nonetheless, A Touch of Class is rehearsing madly and adding a
couple of numbers for the occasion - a red white and blue medley with ''America
the Beautiful,'' ''Yankee Doodle Dandy'' and ''It's a Grand Old Flag'' as well
as a medley on cities arranged by Alice Valkenburgh of Wilton. To Jane Foster,
their musical director, goes the honor of singing ''God Bless America'' solo. A
Touch of Class has been in existence for only four years, but most of the women
had sung together before, in church choirs or with the Junior League, doing
charity performances at nursing homes and the like. ''We wanted to be
entertainers rather than music-therapy kind of girls,'' explained Mrs. Rovsek.
''We consider it a form of work in that we have an agent and are paid for our
performance,'' said Patricia Grabau, a first soprano.

The women, who sing everything from Bach to rock, perform at clubs, corporate
parties and Christmas functions. And they don't just stand up there and sing,
their numbers are staged and involve choreographed movement. They have their own
electric piano and sound equipment, and are able to bring the costume changes.
The White House engagement justified a new very Fourth of July outfit -flounced
ankle-length skirts of red or navy dotted swiss and camisole tops trimmed with
white eyelets threaded with red or blue ribbon.

The Bourbon Street Seven, which evolved about a year ago out of basement
sessions at the home of Earl Capron in Trumbull, plays once a month at the
Bourbon Street Restaurant in New Haven and has occasional gigs at places like
Down the Hatch in Brookfield and Anderson's Angus Corral in Westbrook. The group
plays mostly for fun and relaxation though, and is known for numbers like
''Bourbon Street Parade,'' ''When the Saints Go Marching In,'' ''Basin Street
Blues'' and ''After You've Gone.'' Its members, who range in age from the early
30's to mid-70's, include a physician, an auto mechanic and a carpenter.

This group often performs with the Soundsmen, members of which, in addition to
Mr. Yasdik, are Wayne Paul of Wallingford, a teacher; Jack Macgregor of
Trumbull, a standards analyst, and Al Costello of Branford, a buyer at Sikorsky
Aircraft, where Mr. Yasdik is a purchasing agent. The Soundsmen have been
singing together for 15 years. Their White House program will be very
traditional, with old favorites like ''Yes Sir, That's My Baby'' and ''Five Foot
Two,'' rendered with instrumentation and comedy routines as the situation
demands.

The Easton Banjo Society, an amateur group with a complement of 14 male members,
including a contractor, a barber and an architect, performs on an average of
once a week and meets every other Thursday at a member's home. Musicians
sometimes switch for special effects to instruments such as the bass fiddle or
the washboard, a specialty of Dr. Robert Berry, a thoracic surgeon. They often
enlist the services of a wife or two on the gut bucket.

The Eastonaires, a nonprofessional quartet that sings for charity and is
involved in community affairs, consists of Bill Moffett, who is in real estate
and residential building; Reid Spencer, a banker; and Ralph Wainwright, a
chemical engineer, in addition to Mr.  Tellalian, a lawyer. He and Mr. Moffet
have been harmonizing together since their days in the class of '42 at Yale.
Their White House program will probably include ''Sincere'' ''Lida Rose,'' from
''The Music Man,'' and a Gay 90's medley.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of A Touch of Class

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              338 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

INDIA AND CHINA ANNOUNCE TALKS ON BORDER ISSUE

BYLINE: By KASTURI RANGAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 774 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, June 28


India and China announced their intention today to hold early negotiations on
their long-deadlocked border dispute.

Prime Minister Indira Gandhi and the Chinese Foreign Minister, Huang Hua, said
after a 70-minute meeting that they had agreed on talks at an ''appropriate
level'' to try to resolve the issue. Indian officials said that the talks would
be held in September with a visit by an Indian delegation to Peking.

Mrs. Gandhi also said that she had accepted an invitation to visit China at a
mutually convenient date.

First Visit by Top Aide Since '60

Mr. Huang's visit here was the first by a top-ranking Chinese leader since Prime
Minister Zhou Enlai came to India in 1960. During his three days of talks, he
appeared to have concentrated on building new friendship and getting India to
agree to seek an early negotiated settlement of the border dispute.

The two nations went to war in 1962 over a Chinese claim to vast Indian
territories along the 2,500-mile Himalayan border. The Chinese seized, and still
hold, a large piece of territory in Ladakh in the western sector but they later
withdrew from the eastern sector in India's northeastern frontier region.

The border dispute long kept the two Asian giants at loggerheads, but in the
last few years both have tried to establish normal contacts and resolve their
differences by negotiations.

Initiative Taken by India

The first major initiative was taken by India in 1979 when Atal Bihari Vajpayee,
who was then Foreign Minister, visited Peking. Mr.  Vajpayee was received well
by the Chinese but his trip ended in failure because of the sudden attack
carried out by the Chinese against Vietnam, a friend of India.

Last year Mr. Huang was scheduled to return the visit but he canceled his trip
after Mrs. Gandhi's Government recognized the Soviet-backed regime of Heng
Samrin in Cambodia.

Mr. Huang spent many hours in discussions here, talking mostly with Foreign
Minister P.V. Narasimha Rao on Soviet involvement in Afghanistan and the
Vietnamese presence in Cambodia. The views of the two sides on these matters
were sharply at variance, according to officials, but these questions were
relegated to the background.

Mr. Huang said at a news conference that he was ''optimistic and positive''
about a ''fair, comprehensive and reasonable'' settlement of the boundary
question.

He was asked whether the settlement he envisaged would include any return of
territory to India. ''The question involves a controversy and I would not like
to address myself to it,'' he replied.

Mr. Huang was also blunt in stating that the Chinese had not changed their
attitude in disputes over Kashmir and Sikkim. China has sided with Pakistan on
the longstanding Indian-Pakistani dispute over Kashmir. Peking has also
denounced the merger of Sikkim, formerly an autonomous Himalayan kingdom, with
India in 1974 and has refused to recognize it.

Nevertheless, Mr. Huang said that both sides had adopted ''a forward-looking
attitude'' during the discussions and had agreed that the ''dispute and
differences should not be allowed to stand in the way of developing our
bilateral relations.''

'Friendship and Peace' Stressed

He said that the exchange of views had a ''major significance'' against the
background of the ''turbulent, tense, complex and volatile international
situation of the 80's.'' The development of friendly relations between China and
India, he declared, will be beneficial to peace and stability in Asia and the
world at large.

''Both our peoples need friendship and peace so that we may concentrate our
energies on developing our respective national economies at a relatively fast
pace,'' he said.

The Chinese official said that his country favored a nonalignment policy and the
establishment of a new international economic order.  China will ''always belong
to the third world,'' he asserted.

An Indian spokesman said it had been decided during the talks to draw up
programs for annual cultural, scientific, technological and economic exchanges.

As a gesture of good will, Mr. Huang readily granted an Indian request for
access to Manasarovar Lake and Mount Kailash, both in Tibet, which are regarded
by Hindus as the abode of Shiva, the god of destruction. Mr. Huang said that his
country would make temporary arrangements for visits by Indian pilgrims to the
holy places pending agreement on long-term facilities.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              339 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

The Women's Draft Can't Be Deferred

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 533 words


''The Constitution requires that Congress treat similarly situated persons
similarly, not that it engage in gestures of superficial equality.'' So said a
6-to-3 Supreme Court majority in explaining why it is constitutional to register
males but not females for the military draft. It was a curt rejection of serious
claims by draftage men that excluding women not just from combat but from
registration for duty amounts to sex discrimination. Although the Court gave
them the back of its hand, their argument is not so easily dismissed.

Except for that slur about superficial gestures, Justice Rehnquist's majority
opinion actually makes no judgment about the wisdom of calling only men. The
opinion points to the manifest power of Congress to raise armies and its
traditional exclusion of women from combat service. In military matters,
Congress is due more than ordinary deference, the Court said.

When it comes to filling the combat ranks, it is indeed the view of many,
including most of the male leaders of the armed forces, that some distinction
between the sexes is not only appropriate but essential. But most military
service is not combat, and registration is not yet service. The armed forces do
not shrink from assigning women to a vast array of military jobs, including
quite hazardous ones.

Equal exposure to military service is surely a symbol of sexual equality, and it
is more than that. It is a doubling of the Pentagon's potential personnel
assets, a fresh source of national strength. As Justice White points out in his
dissent, it is far from clear that Congress believes ''that every position in
the military, no matter how far removed from combat, must be filled with
combatready men.''

So whether or not it was appropriate, the Court's deference hardly disposes of
the matter. It did not say that Congress must exclude women from the draft, only
that it may do so. If this question is buried until the draft is actually
revived in some emergency, it will haunt the recruitment process in serious
ways.

That only men should interrupt their careers to honor an obligation to society
is not a doctrine that will stand much longer in American society. The fact that
only a small fraction of even eligible men were drafted during the Vietnam war
created widespread resentment and produced a corrupting pattern of deferments
and evasions. The clearer it becomes that women deserve equal treatment in all
walks of American life, the greater will be the appearance of injustice to the
males who are asked to sacrifice.

No long-term military draft is likely to achieve public support unless it is
perceived as fair, involving equal sacrifice. If there has to be a draft, it had
better be universal. And if there are to be workable plans for a draft, even if
only for the reserves, they had better recognize that Americans increasingly
expect the imaginative use of the entire pool of men and women.

And what the public perceives as just will sooner or later be found to be also
constitutionally necessary.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              340 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1268 words


Chinese Communist Party marks 60th anniversary this week A2
Haig rejects Soviet criticism on China arms decision A3
Iraq's response to Israeli bombing remains a matter of conjecture A3
Nuclear aide doubts Israeli scien- tists were linked to Iraq raid A4
Beheshti was regarded as Iran's second most powerful figure A6
Sudan leader says efforts to expel Libya from U.N. have begun A7
Labor Party needs a major vic- tory to topple Begin A8
Around the World A11

Government/Politics
Country's last state board of cen- sorship fades away A13
City commission's role in plan- ning viewed as diminishing B1
Tolls between N.Y.C. and N.J.  should stay stable until 1984 B3
Supreme Court could tip to the right if a conservative is chosen B6
About Washington: Democrats singing the Beltway blues B6
Lordi to step down as head of Jer- sey casino commission D10

General
Around the Nation A12
Hammond, Ind., residents appeal for action on chemical dumps A12
Philadelphia area worried by threat to commuter rail service A12
Dangers seem no deterrent to mountain climbers A13
12th annual Gay Pride March held up Fifth Avenue B1
At a park in Queens, city dwellers learn about nature B3
Grand jury to hear case of woman who shot husband as intruder D10

Industry/Labor
Hollywood directors and produc- ers reach an agreement C12

Education/Welfare
The State University of New York is still searching for its place A1

SportsMonday
Auto Racing: Mears wins twice in his return to competition C8
Baseball: Trials of Jim Buckner, a minor leaguer C1

No talks in view as strike by players enters 18th day C4
Basketball: Kings of the half- court tournament C6
Boxing: Finkel, rock promoter, hits right notes in fight world C3
Columns: Red Smith on Bowie Kuhn C4

Dave Anderson on Joe Na- math's second life C5
Features: Sports World Specials C2

Question Box C9
Golf: Pate wins Memphis tourna- ment by two strokes C1

Mrs. Lopez-Melton, on 71-285, wins by two shots at Rochester C3
Harness Racing: Insko, Gibbons, Gaines join Hall of Fame C10
Outdoors: Nature's own food festi- val C9
Running: Fanelli wins half-mara- thon for second year in a row C6

Meyer wins Cascade Run Off, accepts prize money C6
Soccer: Cosmos lose, 6-5, to Sting in a shootout C1
Sports News Briefs C5
Statistics C10
Tennis: A relaxed Connors is im- pressive at Wimbledon C7

Tradition and controversy blend at Wimbledon C7

Religion
Jewish life in Latin America weakens with assimilation A10
Evangelical institute in Michigan preaches ecology B12

Arts/Entertainment
Rip Taylor to fill in for Rooney in ''Sugar Babies'' C11
Jazz Festival salutes Chicago styles since the 20's C11
''Wild Women Don't Have the Blues'' in jazz festival C11
Joanne Brackeen plays a swing- ing jazz piano recital C11
''Covering Islam'' by Prof. Ed- ward W. Said is reviewed C14
''The Christians,'' 13-part series, begins on WOR-TV C14
Caramoor opens with Mozart C14
Merle Park leads cast changes in ''Sleeping Beauty'' C15
One-acters by Charles Eastman at Theater for the New City C16
Black and Spanish-speaking lead- ers protest cuts in arts budgets C16

Style
Relationships: Disabled must cope in a ''normal'' world B5
Surrogate mothers: Why women volunteer B5
A Yale senior, a Vietnam me- morial and a few ironies B5
At Guardian Angels wedding, a well-adorned beret B5

Obituaries
Terry Fox, Canadian hero, ran in marathon despite cancer D10
Robert E. Condon, former N.Y.C.  director of Civil Defense D10

Features/Notes
Notes on People C12
Going Out Guide C13

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A14

Women's draft: not deferrable Consumer cost of shoe quotas Loft owners vs.
tenants Roger Starr: on depression Letters A14
Flora Lewis: to ease world fears about U.S.-Soviet relations A15
Rand H. Fishbein: implications of Saudi loan to the I.M.F.  A15
Felix G. Rohatyn: a revived R.F.C. for N.Y.C. transit A15
Victor Gotbaum/Edward Hand- man: what may undo Reagan A15

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              341 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Relationships;
DISABLED MUST COPE IN 'NORMAL' WORLD

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 1; Style Desk

LENGTH: 821 words


Recently several able-bodied members of the New York State Legislature used
wheelchairs, canes and blindfolds to try to get some idea of what it was like to
be disabled. With them were two Assemblymen who were handicapped in reality, one
due to childhood polio and the other from Vietnam war injuries. Meanwhile,
scores of other handicapped New Yorkers staged a lobbying effort in the
Legislative Office Building.

All this culminated in the overwhelming passage by the Assembly on June 17 of an
11-law package, now awaiting Senate action, that is designed as a ''bill of
rights'' for the 2.5 million handicapped people in the state.

That small experiment in pretending made a point. The disabled, like any
minority group, must cope in a world of the majority. And efforts at
communication between the groups may stumble on similar obstacles of ignorance,
misunderstanding - even as indefinable a feeling as discomfort.

''You feel uncomfortable when you encounter a severely disabled individual,
because your ordered world has been disordered and you have been confronted with
something that might happen to you,'' said Dr. Charles Siegal, a psychiatrist
with the rehabilitation medicine service at Presbyterian Hospital. ''You ask
yourself how you would feel in that position.''

Also, the nondisabled person is distressed by the realization that despite all
the skills of modern medicine, ''There is someone who did not get well,'' he
said. ''The permanency of it gets to you.''

Compounding these feelings is a kind of denial of disability by the average
person living in a society that worships bodily perfection and beauty, according
to Dr. Siegal. ''We don't use cripples in ads for jeans or furniture,'' he said.

Disabled people are well aware of the kinds of feelings they evoke. ''They learn
how to put people at ease, how to wipe out some of those tensions,'' said Dr.
Leonard Diller, chief of behavioral science at the Institute of Rehabilitation
Medicine of New York University Medical Center. They achieve this, he said, by
not trying to hide the disability but also by not allowing the disability to be
the focal point in a relationship. ''It can be as simple as knowing when to give
help and when to ask for help,'' he said.

Such matters as giving and asking for help take on wider dimensions in an
intimate relationship. ''There, helping is supposed to be part of the normal
interraction,'' he said. In a shaky marriage, feelings of guilt may make a
spouse reluctant to leave, Dr. Diller said. And any marriage is tested by the
arrival of a physically or mentally disabled child, he said, who can ''trigger
enormous strains.'' The well-meaning outside world doesn't help much either.
''Everybody gives you advice, which imposes an added strain,'' Dr. Diller said.

When someone develops a handicap, ''New kinds of relationships may emerge in the
family,'' he continued. ''When the disabled person first comes home from the
hospital, he is treated like a guest. The family may be afraid to talk back.
That changes with time.''

Enormous strides have been made since World War II in drawing the handicapped
into the mainstream, both socially and in the work place. Rehabilitation
medicine has become an accepted specialty, and most medical centers are skilled
at bringing people who have suffered a disabling accident or disease to the
maximum of function. Disabled people have been the heroes of films - Jon Voight,
as the paraplegic in ''Coming Home,'' for instance. The special athletic events
set up for the handicapped, such as the Pan-American Wheelchair Games,
demonstrate physical ability rather than disability.

''But the public has to realize that these people have approximated function,''
Dr. Siegal said, ''that they are different.  Many of them can drive, work, be
with their spouses, raise children.  But they need special parking areas, ramps
and equipment. And there may be real problems in the sexual area.''

While public facilities should be made accessible to the greatest extent
possible, the tendency on the personal level to make allowances for the disabled
is natural but probably detrimental, he said. ''It all works out better if they
are treated like everyone else -held responsible for their behavior and faults.
Otherwise, in a sense, they are being treated as second-class citizens.''

And what can be done about the ''normal'' person's feelings of discomfort in the
presence of the handicapped? ''It will help if you are aware that these people
can approach a normal state, that they are often really independent, that they
are not as badly off as you think,'' he said. ''And don't be controlled by your
pity.'' Olive Evans

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              342 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

YALE SENIOR, A VIETNAM MEMORIAL AND A FEW IRONIES

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 117 words


Miss Lin says she made her memorial V-shaped and burrowed it slightly into the
ground, up to about 10 feet at the apex, to draw passers-by. ''The V-shape
doesn't have anything to do with 'Vietnam' or 'victory' or 'veterans,' '' she
explained. ''I hate war, all war.  But Vietnam was something I only remember as
a child. There's no particular great issue about it for me.''

Once drawn into the memorial, the visitor will be confronted, left and right, by
polished black walls of granite, each 200 feet long. On the walls, in
chronological order, will be the names of the 57,692 Americans who died in
Vietnam.

The memorial is scheduled to be dedicated on Veterans Day 1982.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Maya Ying

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              343 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ADDITION OF CONSERVATIVE TO COURT COULD TIP BALANCE

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1523 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 27


The philosophical balance of the Supreme Court could tip significantly to the
right in several important areas of constitutional law if President Reagan
appoints someone who shares his conservative views to succeed Justice Potter
Stewart, who has announced his plan to retire next month.

These areas include the death penalty, the rights of criminal defendants and the
First Amendment rights of the press. In considering each of them, Justice
Stewart has cast crucial votes and gave forceful opinions on issues that might
be decided differently in the future if his successor sides with the Court's
more conservative members.

But no radical shift in the Court's approach to most of the politically charged
cases it must decide is likely to occur, at least not unless and until Mr.
Reagan has an opportunity to appoint a second or third justice to the
nine-member Court.

The most controversial of the Supreme Court precedents that Mr.  Reagan has
criticized, those allowing abortions, prohibiting prayers in school and
upholding busing as a desegregation tool, were decided by wide enough margins
that they would probably stand even if Justice Stewart's replacement were to
vote to overrule them.

These conclusions emerge from a review of the voting patterns in some of the
more celebrated Supreme Court decisions in recent years and interviews with
constitutional experts.

No Indication on a Successor

President Reagan has given no indication whom he will nominate to succeed the
Justice Stewart, 66 years old, who announced last Thursday that he would retire
July 3, after 23 years on the Court.

But the President said last week through a spokesman that he would appoint a
''constitutionalist,'' a man or woman who shares his view that ''the role of the
courts is to interpet the law, not to create new law by judicial fiat.''

In a harsh attack on the Court in a campaign statement in February 1980, Mr.
Reagan assailed decisions that he said ''override public opinion'' and ''invade
the prerogative of the legislature'' on such issues as abortion, school prayer,
desegregation and treatment of criminals.

''There must be new Justices on the court, women and men who respect and reflect
the values and morals of the American majority,'' Mr. Reagan said.

Appointed by Eisenhower

Justice Stewart has been viewed as a moderate with conservative instincts since
he was appointed to the Supreme Court by President Eisenhower in 1958. In recent
years he has sided with his most conservative colleagues, Justice William H.
Rehnquist and Chief Justice Warren E. Burger, more often than with the Court's
most liberal members, William J. Brennan Jr. and Thurgood Marshall, according to
statistics compiled by the Harvard Law Review.

He has opposed, as unconstitutional, those Government ''affirmative action''
programs that give special preferences to members of minority groups, and he has
dissented from the Court's decisions prohibiting prayer and other religious
observances in the public schools.

But Justice Stewart has also borne out the truism that Supreme Court Justices do
not fit neatly into ideological categories. He has joined the majority in
several cases, the outcomes of which outraged Mr. Reagan and other like-minded
conservatives. Among the case was the 7-to-2 decision in 1973 upholding a
woman's right to have an abortion and some, but not all of the Court's decisions
upholding broad school desegregation orders which included busing.

In some cases on which the Court was closely divided, Justice Stewart's vote or
the force of his reasoning may have been decisive.

Foe of Death Penalty

Justice Stewart has been one of five Justices who, voting as the majority, have
invalidated hundreds of death sentences by subjecting capital punishment laws
and sentencing to rigiorous constitutional scrutiny.

In 1972 he joined the majority in a 5-to-4 decision that invalidated all state
and Federal death penalty laws then on the books, reasoning that the laws had
been ''wantonly'' and ''freakishly'' administered by the sentencing judges and
juries.

In 1976, after many states had passed new death penalty laws, Justice Stewart
again joined with four other Justices in striking down those laws that made
captital punishment mandatory for certain crimes, while he voted to uphold other
laws that specified detailed criteria for determining which defendants should be
condemned to die.

If he is replaced by a Justice who believes, as Justice Rehnquist asserted in a
recent opinion, that the Court should help clear the way for the states to get
on with executing more of the 780 convicted murderers now on death row, the pace
of executions might pick up dramatically.

Justice Stewart has often voted with the majority in decisions to void criminal
convictions because evidence was obtained illegally or because of other police
misconduct, decisions denounced by conservatives as ''coddling criminals.''

Deciding Vote in Key Cases

While some of the most important precedents in this area were decided by large
majority votes and seem unlikely to be overruled, in other cases Justice Stewart
supplied the fifth vote for the majority.

One example was Brewer v. Williams, a 5-to-4 decision striking down a murder
conviction in 1977, in which Justice Stewart wrote the majority opinion. He said
the police had violated the defendant's Sixth Amendment right to counsel by
playing on his religious feelings while his attorney was not present and
persuading him to reveal the location of the victim's body.

Chief Justice Burger, one of four dissenters, called this result ''intolerable''
and said it continued the Court, ''by the narrowest margin, on the
much-criticized course of punishing the public for the mistakes and misdeeds of
law-enforcement officers.''

Justice Stewart's successor could also make a difference in the Court's approach
to the Fourth Amendment, which has been used to bar the use of evidence obtained
through illegal searches and seizures.  At least four Justices, not including
Justice Stewart, have expressed a distaste for continuing to apply this
exclusionary rule, which is also under attack in Congress because it sometimes
allows guilty defendants to go free.

Upheld Press Freedoms

According to Floyd Abrams, a New York lawyer who has represented press interests
in many Supreme Court cases, Justice Stewart has in recent years been the
Court's leader ''in articulation of an expansive view of the rights of the press
to publish and be free of governmental intrusion by deciding what to publish and
what not to publish.'' Mr. Abrams called Justice Stewart's resignation ''a great
loss.''

In the 1971 Pentagon Papers case, for example, Justice Stewart was one of six
Justices who upheld the right of The New York Times and The Washington Post to
publish a classified study of the Vietnam War despite the Nixon Administration's
arguments that publication would damage the national security.

Only two of the six, Justices Brennan and Marshall, will remain after Justice
Stewart retires next month. Mr. Abrams says ''the appointment by the President
of the new Justice will be of more than usual importance'' in determining
whether the Court will afford similar protection to the press in any future
clashes with the executive branch.

Of course, it is easier for a President to criticize the Supreme Court than to
change its course by appointing new Justices. No President can hope to control a
Justice he has appointed to a life term, or predict with confidence how he will
vote in particular cases. A number of Presidents have been surprised and
sometimes horrified by some of the actions of Chief Justice Earl Warren, who led
the Court through the most liberal activist period in its history.

Reluctance to Upset Precedents

In addition, a Reagan conservative on the Court might feel constrained by the
customary reluctance of the Justices to overrule the Court's own precedents,
even precedents they disapprove of.

On the other hand, Court-watchers stress that if the President does appoint a
strong and persuasive figure with views similar to his, the new Justice might be
able to sway the votes of the others, as Chief Justice Warren and Oliver Wendell
Holmes did as an associate justice in the late 1800's. This might galvanize
changes in the law more pronounced than could be produced simply by changing one
vote in a few cases.

Professor Laurence H. Tribe of the Harvard Law School said, however, that the
potential for major constitutional change, ''with consequences lasting long past
the current national mood,'' would increase ''exponentially,'' if and when Mr.
Reagan had the opportunity to replace one or more other Justices.

Five of the remaining eight are 72 years or older, including the Court's two
most liberal members, Justices Brennan and Marshall, as well as the Chief
Justice and Justices Lewis F. Powell Jr., and Harry A. Blackmun, who are more
conservative but not as conservative as Mr. Reagan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Potter Stewart

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              344 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

EVANGELICAL GROUP PREACHES ECOLOGY

BYLINE: By KENNETH A. BRIGGS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 910 words

DATELINE: MANCELONA, Mich., June 28


In a remote, thickly forested setting on the shores of Big Twin Lake, an
environmental movement has quietly begun that may have broad implications for
the nation's evangelical Christians.

The 130-acre site, the home of the Au Sable Institute of Environmental Studies,
is a former religious nature camp for young people. It took its new role after
the discovery of oil on the property in 1975. With a total of $1,500 a day being
pumped by two wells into the institute's coffers and its endowment already at $1
million, the directors of the project have strengthened their resolve to make
ecology a central concern among the 40 million Americans who belong to
evangelical churches.

Dr. Calvin DeWitt, director of the institute, a scientist at the University of
Wisconsin, said that ''a better theology' for dealing with the environment was
''badly needed because so much is very superficial.''

Like many in the fledgling movement, Dr. DeWitt says that the principal need is
for a better understanding of the Christian idea of stewardship, or care of
material goods provided by God. To many churchgoers, the term stewardship refers
only to dropping a gift into an offering plate, but Dr. DeWitt and others urge a
broader meaning in terms of concern for the whole creation. ''We want to
permeate the Christian community and the community at large with the dream of
stewardship,'' Dr. DeWitt said.

Goals Are Discussed

Last week, the institute held a conference on subjects ranging from energy
conservation to the responsibility of Christians to avert the destruction of the
Amazon rain forest. Most of the 30 participants were professors at evangelical
colleges, and their attention was heavily concentrated on the spiritual concepts
that have an impact on how Christians regard the issue of use and abuse of the
earth.

Carved into the woodwork on the wall of the meeting room is a quotation from
Psalm 19: ''The heavens declare the glory of God and the firmament Sheweth his
handiwork.''

Many of the participants expressed the belief that the movement must avoid the
debate over evolution, which they felt had distracted evangelicals by turning
their attention away from caring for the world as it exists.

They also expressed concern about statements made by a fellow evangelical,
Interior Secretary James G. Watt, who has said that it is the duty of humanity
to ''occupy the land'' and has evoked the image of the ''second coming of
Christ'' in advocating expanded use of the earth's natural resources before time
runs out.

Debate Among Evangelicals

Such convictions are in conflict with feelings expressed at the conference,
which ended yesterday, and have touched off a wider debate among evangelicals
that strikes at the core of belief in the relationships among God, humanity and
nature. Participants at the conference agreed that while many conservative
Christians had become involved in other social issues, they had largely
neglected the environmental crisis.

''Unlike civil rights, Vietnam and the bomb,'' Wes Michaelson, who is in charge
of global resources and environment for the Reformed Church in America, told the
conference, ''opposition to environmental degradation has found no easy or
natural alliance with the church, liberal or conservative.''

As evangelicals analyze the cause of the growing ecological problems, many blame
the emergence of a modern mentality that rejects God and encourages humanity to
take matters into its own hands. They say that the results have been
selfishness, greed and exploitation.

Emphasis on Scripture is another feature of the evangelical ecological movement.
Many leaders of the movement insist that Christians must look to the Bible to
correct many distortions that have crept into the churches' view of nature.

Reflecting that view, Howard Snyder, a conference participant from Chicago who
directs an urban training center for students from Christian colleges, said,
''The ecological crisis verifies what is revealed in the Bible: that all
creation is interrelated and interdependent.''

''Most American Christians are so enamored of the American dream of unlimited
growth,'' he said, ''that they are immune to much of what scripture says.''

Many of the new activists say that ecology as a social concern for evangelicals
has been postponed by the controversy over Darwin's theory of evolution. Many
people concerned about the environment were so caught up in the debate that they
were not talking to one another, said Dr. Edwin Squires, a professor at Taylor
University in Indiana, the director of the conference.

The institute, which is 40 miles from Traverse City, has begun to bring these
people together. It now operates a vocational school and runs programs for
college students, local school children and holds conferences for professionals.

Harold Snyder, who owns the property, has been the guiding force behind the
program. Referring to the temptations and decisions that ensued from the sudden
oil bonanza, Mr. Snyder, a biologist, said: ''We have to be very careful to use
these funds in the way that the Lord wants us to. In the process you discover
there's a lot of humanity you have to overcome.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              345 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

YALE SENIOR, A VIETNAM MEMORIAL AND A FEW IRONIES

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 1161 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 28


''I don't even know how to draft yet,'' said Maya Ying Lin with a laugh,
enjoying one of the many ironies in her first place finish in teh national
competition to design a memorial to veterans of the Vietnam war.

She held up the winning entry. It was a soft pastel, a landscape of subtle
greens, with a simple, black, V-shaped wall tucked gently into the side of a
slight rise.

Miss Lin, a slight first-generation American of Chinese parentage, had come up
with what seemed more a work of modern art than a concept for a $7 million
monument to be situated on the mall near the Lincoln Memorial.

Nevertheless, a few weeks ago the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund found her
concept the best of the 1,421 contest entries submitted and awarded her the
$20,000 contest prize. She arrived in Washington a week or so ago, found a
walk-up apartment in Georgetown to share with some friends, and now is working
on the final design.

Not Trained Architect

When the contest jofficials made their decision earlier this spring, they did
not know that Miss Lin was not a trained architect. They discovered that she
was, instead, a 21-year-old senior at Yale University, about to graduate with a
bachelor's degree in architecture, but with several years of graduate work and
several years of apprenticeship still ahead before she could put ''architect''
after her name.

The officials found, too, thatr the Vietnam war was not one of the big issues in
her life. She was too youg for that.

And, finally, they learned that when she submitted her memorial concept for a
classwork grade at Yale, she was awarded a ''B''.

''The classroom job was a little sloppy,'' she explained. Then, a smile creasing
her face, she added, ''My professor entered the war memorial contest, too.''

Of course, none of that was important to the contest officials; it was only
subsequently ironic. What they were looking for was a design that honored the
57,692 dead of the Vietnam war without making a political or military statement
about the war's controversial nature.

They rejected concepts that were heroic, concepts that were partisan, even a
concept that was, basically, a helicopter pad. Then, strolling about the giant
government aircraft hangar in which the 1,421 designs were displayed, they came
upon Miss Lin's pastel and were captured.

''It is uniquely horizontal, entering the earth rather than piercing the sky,''
the contest officials said in their statement of acceptance, alluding to the
nature of most monuments in this city.

''This is,'' they continued, ''very much a memorial of our own times, one that
could not have been achieved in another time or place.''

Many of the nation's architecture critics agree. The Lin design has been highly
praised.

As for Miss Lin, she is taking it all in stride, pleased and enjoying herself,
but far from overcome by sudden fame. ''I liked my idea,'' she said,
self-assured despite her youth and inexperience. ''That's why I entered the
contest.''

Miss Lin did not go to college with an architecture career in mind. ''I didn't
really know what I wanted to be,'' she said. ''I just knew I wanted to be in
some profession since I'd grown up as a 'faculty brat'.''

Miss Lin's father and mother are both professors at Ohio University in Athens,
where she was born. Her father, Henry Huan Lin, is dean of fine arts and her
mother, Julia Chang Lin, teaches English and Oriental literature. Both left
China shortly after World War II, Mrs. Lin to attend Smith College on a
scholarship, Mr. Lin to escape possible imprisonment by the conquering Chinese
Communist forces.

''My father's family was fairly prominent,'' Miss Lin said, adding with a
chuckle, ''I think way back there were some relatives who were architects. Some
day, I'd like to visit China.''

Miss Lin's parents did not meet until after they arrived in the United States.
Besides Miss Lin, they have a son, Tan, a 24-year-old poet who recently
graduated from Columbia University and resides in New York.

Took Many Courses

Since she was unsure about choosing a career when she arrived at Yale, Miss Lin
initially signed up for a wide array of courses, including a number in
photography. ''It's something I really enjoy,'' she said, ''along with cooking
and making my own clothes which, incidentally, I find I like betterh than
anything I can buy.'' So how did she come to settle, in the end, upon
architecture as a major?

''One day,'' she recalled, ''I was just staring up at the ceiling, at all the
lines and painting on it and the like, and, suddenly, I decided I was going to
be an architect. Just like that.''

While a number of architecture courses were required in her major, she was also
required to balance her curriculum with liberal arts and other general courses.
''An undergraduate architecture major just scratches the surface of being an
architect,'' she said. She plans to spend her $20,000 in prize money to continue
her studies at Yale after working here on the memorial plan.

While in Europe several summers ago, Miss Lin found herself fascinated by the
elaborate monuments and memorials in many city cemeteries. Then, last year,
someone suggested to the architecture department at Yale that her class take a
seminar in funerary architecture.

''I thought it was a great idea,'' she recalled. ''I guess, like a lot of
people, I've always been intrigued with death and man's relation to it.''

To Draw Passers-By

As one of the projects in the architecture course, Miss Lin was required to
design a memorial to World War III. She came up with a brooding mound, shot
through with dark, circuitous passages and tunnels, a ''journey to an awareness
of death, one meant to terrify,'' as she puts it.

While her class was still studying funerary architecture, word arrived that
Congress had authorized use of a two-acre site a few hundred yards northeast of
the Lincoln Memorial for a Vietnam war memorial. It was to be built with public
donations. The design would be chosen in a national competition, much as designs
were chosen for the United States Capitol and the Washington Monument.

At the urging of their professor, Andy Burr, Miss Lin and her classmates decided
to enter the competition. In the end, however, only she and professor actually
submitted entries.

Miss Lin says she made her memorial V-shaped and burrowed it slightly into the
ground, up to about 10 feet at the apex, to draw passers-by. ''The V-shape
doesn't have anything to do with 'Vietnam' or 'victory' or 'veterans,' '' she
explained. ''I hate war, all war. But Vietnam was something I only remember as a
child. There's no particular great issue about it for me.''

Once drawn into the memorial, the visitor will be confronted, left and right, by
polished black walls of granite, each 200 feet long. On the walls, in
chronological order, will be the names of the 57,692 Americans who died in
Vietnam.

The memorial is scheduled to be dedicated on Veterans Day 1982.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Maya Ying

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              346 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 30, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EX-P.O. W. SEEKS MONEY PAID TO WIFE

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 808 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 28


When Col. Fred V. Cherry's Air Force fighter was hit by ground fire over North
Vietnam in October 1965, one of his last thoughts as he bailed out was that he
had signed Form 246.

This meant that if he survived the the ejection from his F-105D, which crushed
his shoulder, his wife and four children would be supported by allotments from
the salary that he could not collect as a prisoner of war in Hanoi.

Until his release in February 1973, Colonel Cherry defied his captors, despite
surgery without anesthesia, 702 days in solitary confinement and repeated
beatings. The North Vietnamese wanted the colonel, who is black, to make tape
recordings urging black American soldiers to quit fighting.

The colonel's conduct won him the Air Force Cross, the Legion of Merit and the
Bronze Star. His larger-than-life likeness, labeled ''Portrait of a Fighter
Pilot,'' was hung earlier this year in a ''P.O.W. alcove of honor'' at the
Pentagon.

Suing to Recover $147,184

But in what for him is a bitter legacy of the Vietnam War, Colonel Cherry is
suing the Air Force to recover $147,184 in salary and allowances that it paid to
his wife while he was a prisoner. The United States Court of Claims has held
that his wife ''had a child by another man while being supported by Colonel
Cherry's military pay'' and was ''extravagant with his money and dissipated it
without let or hindrance by the Air Force.''

The Cherry suit is one of relatively few involving claims for family abuses of
military pay during such separations. But the Government and others regard it as
''the lead case'' in litigation that may bring cash settlements to several other
military husbands and perhaps inspire reforms in the defense establishment's
handling of similar situations.

The Court of Claims upheld Colonel Cherry's claim for the lost pay. However, the
ruling, made last November, is still being contested by the Air Force. A trial
judge must still decide the amount of money due the colonel.

The case was confused by the loss of Colonel Cherry's Form 246. The office that
was to process the form could not find it after he was shot down, so a new one
was filled out and his name signed to it by someone else.

The court said that while the Air Force was ''not required to police the
fidelity of his wife'' despite ''suspicions'' about her conduct, it had failed
to protect the serviceman's interests by ''arbitrarily and capriciously
satisfying the more vocal demands of his dependents as painlessly as possible
for it and for the dependents,'' without consideration for his concerns.

The court record shows that despite Mrs. Cherry's request for funds ''for
surgery'' in a civilian hospital in 1970, a procedure that turned out to be the
birth of a child, and despite a warning letter in 1972 from the colonel's
sister, the Air Force remained ''overeager to care for Mrs. Cherry's every want,
to the enormous disadvantage of Colonel Cherry.''

''I began to find out what was going on at the airport in Hanoi, when they flew
us out,'' Colonel Cherry said in an interview last week. The navigator of the
Air Force rescue transport was a close friend of the colonel and familiar with
some of the activities of the colonel's wife.

'Lost Everything I Lived For'

''My escort officer when I got to the Philippines on the way home was another
friend,'' he said, ''and he told me about my wife. I was wiped out. I suddenly
lost everything I had lived for for nearly eight years.''

''I had had an allotment of $450 a month going to a savings bank.  They gave her
that, too - my savings. The Form 246 they used was not the one I signed. It was
forged. It was dated Oct. 25, 1965 - three days after I was shot down.''

Colonel Cherry, who said he can barely use his left arm, has been classified as
having ''zero disability'' for retirement compensation, but his bitterness is
muted. He has been divorced since 1973 and is now considering a career in real
estate. His children are well, he said, and his youngest child, a 20-year-old
daughter, is living with him in a Maryland suburb while she completes college.

His attorney is Kaletah Carroll of Fairfax, Va., an Air Force wife and the
mother of two sons, one of whom died in an Air Force training accident. She
described as ''blatant denial'' the Air Force's request for nine continuances so
far this year in the final disposition of Colonel Cherry's case: a court
determination of the exact amount to be awarded.

An Air Force spokesman referred questions about the delays to the Justice
Department. Frances Nunn, the Justice Department attorney in charge of the case
for the Air Force, said she had been busy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Col. fred. V. Cherry

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              347 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 30, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
TUESDAY, JUNE 30, 1981

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 945 words


International
A leadership shift in China increased the power of Deng Xiaoping, Peking's
strongest leader. Hu Yaobang, a close associate of Mr. Deng, was named chairman
of the Communist Party, replacing Hua Guofeng.  Party leaders declared that Mr.
Hua, who rose to power five years ago as the personally chosen successor of Mao
Zedong, was unfit to remain chairman because of ''leftist errors.'' (Page A1,
Column 6.)
An American-Egyptian nuclear accord that will allow Cairo to buy two large
atomic reactors and fuel to generate electricity was signed in Washington. The
agreement contains two provisions that State Department officials said were
designed to prevent Egypt's possible use of the material and technology for
military objectives. (A1:5.)
A vow that Iran's revolution will go on was made by Ayatollah Khomeini as he
named a new Chief Justice to replace Ayatollah Mohammed Beheshti, who was among
72 public figures killed by a bomb explosion Sunday night. No clue was reported
as to who was responsible for the explosion. (A1:4.)
Washington had ''no involvement'' in the bombing in Teheran that killed 72
people, Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. declared.  State Department
officials expressed concern that Iran might be moving toward another period of
major disorders that could invite Soviet interference. (A11:1-2.)
National
The President deplored ''handouts'' by the Government in a speech in Denver
before the N.A.A.C.P. Asserting that Federal programs of the last 20 years had
created ''a new type of bondage'' for those dependent on them, Mr. Reagan
appealed to members of the civil rights organization to join his ''coalition for
change'' and let business and industry achieve ''economic emancipation'' of
blacks and the poor. (A1:2-3.)
The reception accorded the President at the N.A.A.C.P. convention was polite but
cool. Mr. Reagan received only brief smatterings of applause from the audience
of more than 5,000 people, and some delegates did not stand as he entered and
left the meeting.  (D21:1-2.)
The impact of budget cuts approved by the House last Friday would bring about a
$1.1 billion reduction in welfare benefits that will largely affect small
children and working mothers, according to Congressional analysts and welfare
specialists. They said that aid would be halted or reduced for nearly 660,000
households. (D21:5-6.)
The resignation of Fred Silverman as president of NBC will be announced today,
according to high-ranking sources at the network. In his four-year tenure, NBC's
audience ratings and profits have dropped sharply. Grant Tinker, the president
of MTM Productions, is expected to be named as Mr. Silverman's successor.
(A1:1-2.)
Broad power to revoke passports on security grounds is held by the executive
branch of the Government, the Supreme Court ruled. By a 7-to-2 decision, the
Justices upheld the State Department's revocation of the passport of Philip
Agee, a former C.I.A. officer.  He has vowed to expose the agency's global
operations. (A1:6.)
A workplace health rule stays in effect. The Supreme Court let stand strict
Federal controls on permissible exposure to lead, rejecting challenges by dozens
of major industries and the Reagan Administration. (B9:1-3.)
Family misuse of military pay has led to several suits by former prisoners of
war. The Court of Claims has upheld the contention of a much-decorated colonel
seeking recovery of $147,184 that the Air Force paid his wife during his seven
and a half years as a prisoner in Vietnam. The court ruled that the wife
''dissipated'' his money without hindrance by the Air Force. (A12:3-5.)
An American accused of espionage had begun to cooperate with Federal agents
before he and a young Polish national were arrested Sunday, the F.B.I.
disclosed. The alleged plot, involving covert payments in gold, furtive flights
abroad and clandestine meetings established with a code phrase, was outlined at
the arraignment of the two men.  (A12:1-2.)
Increasing numbers of Catholic women are altering the ritual of the mass to meet
their concerns, and some now share the bread and wine of holy communion without
the presence of an ordained priest.  (A12:1-5.)
Metropolitan
Reduced bus service will continue indefinitely in New York City despite the
expected arrival of 1,300 new buses in the next few weeks, according to sources
in the Transit Authority. The plan will reduce the regular fleet to its smallest
size in a decade. (A1:1.)
A total of 24,745 pupils were held back under a new program in New York City's
public schools that denies promotion to pupils with reading deficiencies. At
least half the pupils are expected to attend an intensive remedial session this
summer, after which they will be tested for possible promotion in September.
(A1:3-5.)
A key cable TV franchise was awarded to Cablevision of Connecticut after 80 days
of hearings held by the state utility commissioners.  Ten companies applied for
the much-desired franchise, which covers 10 well-to-do communities in Fairfield
County. (B1:5-6.)
The ''serpent'' of Lake Champlain has been reported sighted by a growing number
of people. Scientists who have examined a photograph of the so-called monster
say they cannot determine whether the object in the picture was animate or
inanimate, something ordinary or extraordinary. (C1:2-3.)

Business Digest, Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              348 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 30, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WILLIAM F. SHERMER

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 6; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 63 words


William F. Shermer, a producer for WCBS-TV news, died of cancer Saturday at
Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J. He was 38 years old.  Mr. Shermer had also
worked for CBS News in Boston and Philadelphia. He received awards for
documentaries on children in Biafra, Vietnam and Boston.

Surviving are his wife, Dona, and two daughters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              349 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

           June 30, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition EGIN> , ,
                            Late City Final Edition

SPORTS OF THE TIMES;
ROGER STAUBACH'S POLITICAL FOOTBALL

BYLINE: By Dave Anderson

SECTION: Section 5; Page 7, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 825 words


NOW that he is no longer a quarterback with a sense of drama, the real Roger
Staubach has stood up as a politician with a sense of humor.

For too many years Roger Staubach was thought of merely as an automaton who
threw touchdown passes in the last two minutes for the Dallas Cowboys on strict
orders from Tom Landry, the computerized coach. Not many people knew that Roger
Staubach once pretended to jump out the window of the 11th-floor office of Tex
Schramm, the Cowboys president; he landed safely on a nearby ledge. And on the
sidelines once, he watched Tom Landry stare at the sky through the oval opening
in the Texas stadium roof as the coach pondered what play to call next.

''I always wondered,'' the quarterback told him, ''where you got the plays.''
Tom Landry never even heard him. But now that Roger Staubach is a CBS
commentator, people are paying more attention to what he says instead of what he
does. Maybe too much attention. He discovered that last Sunday during the
telecast of the Cowboys-Cardinals game in St.  Louis.

''Do me a favor,'' he had said to the play-by-play announcer, Frank Glieber,
before the game. ''Ask me what the Cowboys have to do to stop the Cardinals.''

From his own experience, Roger Staubach knew that Mel Gray, the Cardinals' wide
receiver, had terrorized the Cowboys defensive unit through the years by
catching a total of 12 touchdown passes. After the broadcast began, Glieber
asked the question that Roger Staubach had suggested.

''I talked to my daughter, Amy, this morning about it,'' Roger Staubach replied.
''And she said the No. 1 problem was the bomb.'' His remark, of course, was a
takeoff on President Carter's line during his debate with Ronald Reagan
regarding the fears of the President's daughter, Amy, about nuclear
proliferation. As a father of five who really does have a 4-year-old daughter
named Amy and as a Reagan supporter, Roger Staubach insists he was only trying
to be funny. But a voice in the CBS truck was not laughing.

''I was told,'' he says, ''to take it easy on the Amy stuff, but CBS has never
slapped my hands. They took it as a funny line.''

Most viewers also apparently accepted it for what it was - a funny line from an
ex-football player at a football game. But other viewers took it seriously. Or
perhaps they take football too seriously. Some of the offended phoned the CBS
outlet in Dallas, others phoned the Dallas newspapers. When the news of the
remark reached the White House, a Carter aide phoned CBS to demand that Staubach
apologize.

''You're having enough trouble with Reagan,'' a CBS executive suggested. ''Do
you want to take on Staubach, too?'' Quickly, the Carter aide backed off. But
shortly after Roger Staubach returned to his suburban Dallas home Sunday night,
his phone rang. A reporter for The Dallas Morning News informed him that their
switchboard operators had received what were described as ''irate'' calls.

''You've got to be kidding me,'' Staubach said. ''Are people really that
sensitive?'' In the middle of page one the next day, The Dallas Morning News had
a short story headlined, ''Staubach Hurls TV Bomb.'' That day the Cowboys'
switchboard handled 21 phone calls from viewers - 13 critical of Staubach, eight
supporting him. His real-estate office handled about 20 phone calls that day,
''most of them supportive,'' his secretary, Roz Cole, reports. In the days that
followed, his office also received 24 letters - 21 for him, 3 criticizing him,
Mrs. Cole says. But as an ex-quarterback who always knew how to scramble, Roger
Staubach did not run out of bounds.

''My daughter Amy,'' he has been saying all week, ''knows as much about football
as Amy Carter does about nuclear proliferation.''

The controversy flared, primarily because Roger Staubach openly supported Ronald
Reagan during the campaign. He even stumped in southern Texas for the
President-elect in the months before last Tuesday's election.

''I was concerned about the country for three reasons,'' Roger Staubach
explains. ''One, that a government that governs less governs best. Two,
inflation; people are really suffering. And three, on military defense.''

Roger Staubach, a Heisman Trophy winner at Annapolis, was a naval officer for
four years (one in Vietnam) before joining the Cowboys.  ''My classmates at the
Naval Academy are commanders of ships now,'' he says. ''They tell me that the
government is deceiving us if it tells us we're still strong militarily. Peace
is achieved through strength. I would not want another weapon to be built if the
Soviets did not have any weapons, but they do. I believe that Reagan will cut
the fat out of the government and increase our defense. I pray that happens.''

Spoken like any quarterback who appreciates his defensive unit. But the election
result relieved him of one concern.  ''For the next four years,'' Roger Staubach
says, ''I don't think I have to worry about being audited by the I.R.S.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Roger Staubach

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              350 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

           June 30, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition EGIN> , ,
                            Late City Final Edition

RUDENESS IS OUR ONLY HOPE

BYLINE: By BENJAMIN DeMOTT; Benjamin DeMott is Andrew W. Mellon Professor of
Humanities at Amherst and a contributing editor to the Atlantic.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1856 words


RAY By Barry Hannah.  113 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $7.95.

LET'S be up front here: The reviewer's job is to provide a no-nonsense account
of the work at hand - something about form and content, connections if any
between the work and earlier productions by the same author and others, an
estimate of Overall Worth and zero prattle (one hopes) about the reviewer's
problems or quandaries. I'm eager to satisfy these expectations in treating
''Ray,'' the fourth distinctively flavored volume of fiction by a Southern
writer still in his 30's, but I'm not optimistic about the chances. The trouble
is that, while ''Ray'' is the funniest, weirdest, soul-happiest work of fiction
by a genuinely young American author that I've read in a long while, ordinary
reviewerese is no help in explaining why. You need a fresh lingo to do justice
to this much magic, mystery and hilarity. You need new strategies, new
arguments, new adjectives, new everything.

However.  Ray Forrest, hero of ''Ray,'' is a 33-year-old, twice-married,
womanizing yet uxorious Tuscaloosan with six children. Ray tells his story in an
amusingly schizzy mixture of the first and third person singular and in chapters
that shorten up considerably as we move along. Ray is an ex-Navy man haunted by
memories of fighter pilot service in Vietnam, also by memories of Jeb Stuart's
Civil War campaigns, also by a perhaps not unreasonable conviction that Ohio is,
at present, the worst state in the union. Ray is a medical doctor who teaches
night classes in American Civilization at the local university on the side and
writes bad poems as well as awardwinning research papers on ''The Nervous Woman
and Valium,'' ''Three Seraxes a Day for the Alcoholic,'' ''Satyriasis and Acute
Depression.'' Ray's emphasis as a physician is upon the gladdening drugs; he
prescribes tranquilizers and morphine in quantity. Ray has been a drunk in his
time and is discovered, in the opening pages of the book, in a hospital in
Mobile where he's recovering from a drug overdose (''there are dry tiny horses
running in my veins'').

Ray, Ray, Ray. Others besides Ray, though, have a place in this book, most
notably the Hooches, Ray's best friends. Mr. Hooch is a poetry-writing tugboat
hand. Sister Hooch, a daughter with whom Ray is intermittently in love, is a
sexually appetitive country music singer billeted chez Hooch in a multi-purpose
bedroom-sound-studio upstairs. The Hooch family as a whole, plus pets, connects
in splendid ways with a tribe some of us first met in drawings by George Price
and Booth:

''The loud and untidy failures of the Hooches pour from the exits.  Their broken
car is on the curb in front, pasted over with police citations. Around the base
of a ragged bush near the front door is wrapped an old rotten brassiere. In the
small front yard parts of toys and soaked food lie. A rope hangs from a second
story window.  The drainpipe has been beaten out of place by the children. ...''

Plot-wise ''Ray'' is not one of your page-turners. But in its course at least
one accident occurs - Ray steals a Learjet owned by Pfeifer Wire, flies it to
Canada, crashes it and survives - and also a tragedy. (The tragedy flows from an
encounter between Maynard Castro, a Baptist minister, and Sister Hooch, who to
her eventual sorrow agrees to Castro's request that she sing at the latter's
''Youth Impact.'') Equally worth mention is that the book ends with affirmation.
On the final page Ray himself is still kicking, ablaze with desire, hope,
delight not only in his surviving friends and children, but also in the glory of
the Southern Past. (''Hoo! Ray!  ... Ray in the fourth decade! Ray, yes Ray!
Doctor Ray is okay! ...  Sabers, gentlemen, sabers!'')

Among many pleasures afforded by ''Ray'' I would single out the descriptions of
objects located in the foliage of a ravine behind the Hooch domicile. I
particularly enjoyed an abandoned station wagon ''with (a) wooden Indian at the
steering wheel now rotting off the fierce colors of its face.'' Numerous
exchanges in dialogue also struck me as memorable:

'' 'What are you looking at, Doc?' she (Mrs. Hooch) says.  '' 'Everything in
your backyard looks hungry,' says I. 'There's a bird that looks like he doesn't
know what to do.' '' 'It's all we got.' '' Or again: ''Mr. Hooch says, 'Guess
what I told the foreman stevedore today when we were docking. ... He's always
nagging about tiny things. He's a big man with the makeup of a warhorse and the
mind of a shrieking little woman. I told him little certificates come out his
mouth and he ain't got the wings of a bee.''

'' 'That's fine,' say I. 'That's the way to tell them.' '' Still another
pleasure for me lies in Ray's unique manner of speech: You do not fault a person
who identifies his girlfriend's grandmother as ''a Presbyterian missionary
killed by the gooks.'' Or a person sufficiently observant to notice that when
moonlight fills his friends' back yard, and ''the Hooch animals roam out into
it,'' they do so ''smelling the life of themselves.'' Ray is the kind of fellow
who, when watching a first-rate marching band, complete with ''synchronized
Chargettes throwing their legs around the whole affair,'' understands
effortlessly that spectacle is not merely asinine but magnificent. I cannot
think of a magazine, Federal or state agency, foundation or academic department
- oh, especially academic department - for which I have ever worked that
wouldn't be functioning better today if management had had brains enough in
earlier times to staff up heavily in top-level Rays.

At a point in my reading of ''Ray'' a loved one appeared in the study doorway
concerned by a wheezing-gasping sound coming from within. The sound was
occasioned by a passage in the book wherein Ray is forced by a former student
and would-be poet to listen to several quatrains of a work in progress entitled
''Certain Feelings'':

I have certain feelings about this room.  I have certain feelings about doom.  I
have certain feelings about trees and gnats I have certain feelings about this
and that ...

Ray's response is as follows: ''They always say Southerners can write. So I
slugged this skinny lad. I laid him down the steps ...  his family is saying
they'll sue.''

On the matter of relationships between ''Ray'' and works by other performers an
immense amount could be said. Phrases, tones or situations in the book reminded
me of the following contributors to cultural life: Hunter Thompson, Flann
O'Brien, Terry Southern, Flannery O'Connor, William Saroyan, David Byrne, Donald
Barthelme, Jimmy Rushing (''Trix Ain't Walkin' No More''), Jack Kerouac,
Nathanael West, Thomas Pynchon and, of course, Price and Booth. In every
instance of seeming echo, however, I was aware of differences even as I noticed
resemblances, viz: Barry Hannah's cruelty is better-natured than Hunter
Thompson's; his people are less abstract than Donald Barthelme's partly because
blessed with backyards; his repugnance at shopping mall U.S.A. is more
energizing than David Byrne's because accompanied by responsiveness to what's
left of America the Beautiful between stores; his playful linkages of
aeronautical and sexual behavior are more exhilarating than Pynchon's because
accompanied by an imagination of sexual congress that is in no wise detached.
And so on.

N the matter of relationships between ''Ray'' and Barry Hannah's earlier books
there's plenty to say. Bits from ''Geronimo Rex,'' Hannah's first novel, turn up
in ''Ray'' - the marching band, for example. The odd Civil War fragments
interspersed throughout ''Airships,'' Hannah's extraordinary collection of short
stories, are shrewdly worked into the texture of this new book, setting up
resonances with the Vietnam experience that weren't fully felt in ''Airships.''
No individual passage or episode in ''Ray'' matches the intensity and poignance
of such wonderful stories in ''Airships'' as ''Our Secret Home'' or ''Midnight
and I'm Not Famous Yet.'' I was vexed by a few needless patches of novelistic
self-consciousness and by some intervals of machismo and fantasy. But I'd say
that, on balance, ''Ray'' constitutes a definite forward step for this writer.
It's in command of itself from start to finish, is admirably modulated and above
all spare - no waste, no filler.

Coming to the Overall Estimate: Devoted readers of reviews of books by serious
American fictionists may at first conclude that ''Ray'' is a thoroughly
conventional piece of work. The manner is throwaway (who knows, forget it, so
what, etc.) and the matter - war, dope, rock, self-pity - long ago ceased being
news. Still, I doubt that anybody who actually lays hands on this book will
incline toward dismissiveness. Barry Hannah is in direct touch with what's out
there in our plains and cities. He knows about a lady who ''won a Sony TV by
coming in third on a massmurderer quiz in Oui magazine.'' He knows about
dentists who get you in a corner and tell ''these old-fashioned clean filthy
jokes.  ...'' He knows about ''Tina, the live-in maid, an illegal immigrant from
Chihuahua, who cooked Mexican holistically and, with other Mexican immigrants in
the community, read the Holy Bible every night. They had converted to Assembly
of God. ...''

What's more, he imparts this knowledge in sentences that are consistently
eventful - even those that come down pretty much to ''Joe glanced at Jim.''
Better than any of this, Barry Hannah is marvelously rude. Irreverent,
blues-ridden, mocking, utterly clean of class pieties, he's a democrat in his
soul. Some - such as William F. Buckley - say that what this country needs is
better manners, which once in place can be trusted to clean up the garbage in
the streets and the soaked food on the Hooch non-lawn. Hannah is not fooled. He
grasps that rudeness is our only hope. Loud, firm, interruptive, vulgar protest
on behalf of the Hooches - which is to say, on behalf of the truth that it's the
Nice Folks in charge of general socio-economic arrangements who've shaped a
situation in which slobbism sometimes seems essential to self-respect (how else
can you disquiet the Nice Folks?).

I would recommend as follows vis a vis ''Ray'': Buy a copy and sit down beside
your loved one (this may save steps) and begin turning pages. If, after a few
hundred words or so, no chuckles or sudden pitchings forward or helpless yelps
occur, you will have learned once more never to trust the Sunday paper. But if
all at once you sense - hesitantly, unbelievingly, at length joyously - that
what you have before you is the first authentic, no-hype, utterly unfraudulent
laugh riot you've studied on in years, then I say: Shake, friend, and I wish you
luck in the hard days before you. Because you're bound to want to share your
experience with others - and bound (like me) to encounter frustration in your
effort. Enough, more than enough, of reviewerly whining. Will you welcome,
please, a sensational new American comic writer, one with poetry in his pulses,
witty hot wires in his sentences and, so I'll swear, sunny love for every single
Jack and Jill of us in his sly and larking heart?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              351 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

           June 30, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition EGIN> , ,
                            Late City Final Edition

BOOK ENDS;
NOVELS IN BLUE AND GRAY

SECTION: Section 7; Page 51, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 865 words


Some Southerners call it the War Between the States; most Northerners call it
the Civil War. Whichever, the war is not gone with the wind in the typewriters
of contemporary novelists. By happenstance, there seem to be more novels about
the Civil War than about the Vietnam War this season. Here are some current
titles that feature Johnny Reb and Billy Yank:

Richard Slotkin's ''The Crater'' (Atheneum) is a novel about the Battle of the
Crater, July 30, 1864, that famous engagement in which a regiment of Union coal
miners tunneled under the Confederate trenches in an effort to capture
Petersburg and Richmond. The Army of the Potomac's only black division was then
supposed to spearhead a charge. But the battle ended in disaster. ''The Crater''
is an alternate selection of the History Book Club - the first novel ever chosen
by that club. The author, who teaches at Wesleyan University in Connecticut, was
born in Brooklyn.

Douglas C. Jones's ''Elkhorn Tavern'' (reviewed on page 15) also centers on a
battle, this one known as the Battle of Pea Ridge, and covers part of the Civil
War in the West. Actual historical personages in the novel include Wild Bill
Hickock and Philip Sheridan. Mr. Jones is author of ''The Court-Martial of
George Armstrong Custer.''

Not novels but the stuff of fiction are two noteworthy works, Mary Boykin
Chesnut's famous ''A Diary From Dixie,'' edited by Ben Ames Williams (newly
reprinted by Harvard University Press in cloth and paperback), with a foreword
taken from Edmund Wilson's ''Patriotic Gore,'' and ''A Civil War Courtship: The
Letters of Edwin Weller From Antietam to Atlanta,'' edited by William Walton
(Doubleday), the narrative of a poignant wartime romance.

Among other Civil War novels rooted in factual events are F. Van Wyck Mason's
posthumous ''Armored Giants'' (Little, Brown), about the battle between the
ironclads Monitor and Merrimac, and Thomas Keneally's ''Confederates'' (Harper &
Row), which reaches its climax at the Second Battle of Antietam.

An Australian's Confederacy

Because Mr. Keneally lives in Sydney, Australia, we had a chat with him when he
was in town recently so that we could ask him the obvious: How does an
Australian know so much about the American Civil War?

''The family went two ways from Cork between 1890 and 1916,'' he said. ''Some
uncles went to New England, my branch went to Australia. I lived in New Milford,
Conn., in 1975 and 1976, writing other books. I used to go down to Virginia with
my wife and daughters in a little van. We discovered that the Southerners in
some areas were like Aus-
tralians: They have an oral tradition and they're also more unbuttoned than the
Yankees. We're all products of our environment.  Researching the scenes, I
followed some of the routes taken by Stonewall Jackson. On some of the
backroads, it still seems likely that you're liable to meet a regiment of
butternut boys.

''I was particularly interested in the Shenandoah Valley people, the poor whites
in the Confederate Army, not the plantation owners.  And even when you add it
all up, there is still the abiding mystery of how Americans could fall on each
other. I can't imagine Australians killing each other that way on a moral and
economic issue. Yet I suppose the Civil War was inevitable.''

As with other Blue and Gray fiction, real persons are turned into
''characters.'' How did Mr. Keneally know how President Lincoln, for example,
talked? ''I depended a great deal on Carl Sandburg's great biography,'' he said.

Mr. Keneally is not a historian but a novelist (his ''The Chant of Jimmy
Blacksmith'' was turned into a film) who writes his books at his beachside home
north of Sydney. It is quiet there: ''Not enough interruptions for a novelist,''
he said, ''but the saving grace is that I live at the topless end of the
beach.''

Ved Mehta's Documentary

Not since Merle Miller's ''Only You, Dick Daring'' has there been a book that
describes with such elan the difficulties involved in the making of a television
film as Ved Mehta's ''The Photographs of Chachaji,'' newly published by Oxford
University Press. The difference is that Mr. Mehta's film was not lost in the
commercial network scheme of things but eventually became a poignant documentary
about those who live in poverty in India.

The New Yorker writer, author of a dozen books, was sitting in his office a few
years ago when he got a call from the executive producer at WGBH, the pioneering
public television station in Boston, asking him if he had any writing projects
in mind. Instead of an obvious theme, Mr. Mehta and the television crew filmed
the daily life and trials of his uncle (chachaji means ''uncle dear''), an
83-year-old poor relation. Fortunately the author kept a journal describing the
fun and games of the filming, and that became the basis for his New Yorker
articles and the book.

When ''uncle dear'' saw himself in the film, it was like a religious experience;
he thought he was in Heaven, Mr. Mehta recalled. After his own television
experience, the author is now back working on something with less Sturm und
Drang: a book about his childhood, the third volume of his autobiography.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Drawing

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              352 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

           June 30, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition EGIN> , ,
                            Late City Final Edition

THEATER IN RTEVIEW;
PARADOXES AT THE FACTORY

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 15, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 862 words


EAST FARMINGDALE JOSEPH LIZARDI is a paradox. His plays are up to the minute in
their concerns, but a throwback in structure and style. His voice is distinct,
yet derivative. The passion and gusto of a talented writer are unmistakably
there, but so are the echoes of other playwrights.  These encompass Rice, Odets,
Miller - even Ibsen - in Mr. Lizardi's current work alone, ''Blue Collars,'' a
play about the exploitation of the working class, the possibility of a wildcat
strike, the election of a shop steward and tons of other things.

The Arena Players Theater's investment in Mr. Lizardi, its resident playwright,
continues to pay off in terms of exposure for him and enjoyment for the
audience. There is a sense of sheer life in his writing.

With his third play in half a year, and with a fourth possibility before
season's end, it is time to wonder how a talent thrice exposed is being
nurtured. Is Mr. Lizardi writing too much too quickly? How much should he be
allowed to cram into one play? Arena Players has become a showcase for a variety
of Lizardi plays, but what about the process of developing a particular one?

By now, we have seen a couple of two-character comic sketches (''The
Powderroom''), a slice of tenement life, symbolic neoabsurdist comedy set in the
decaying South Bronx -where Mr.  Lizardi was raised (''El Macho''), and a slice
of factory life - a soda bottling plant in the South Bronx, where in real life
the afterhours playwright sunlights (''Blue Collars''), playing through next
Sunday.

For all its relevance and universal, not just local, color - Mr.  Lizardi
clearly writes (and writes clearly) about people and situations he knows -''Blue
Collars'' could have been written in the 30's. It is an outgrowth of agitprop
theater. Instead of refining a form by perfecting the craft, the playwright
seems merely to have mimeographed messages. He has not given us an original, but
a stencil.

To an extent, he is showing us a new slant on union ''goons'' working in cahoots
with management. This remains an unexplored irony, a secondary theme worthy of
primary consideration.

Unexplored too are relationships, sketched like those vignettes that seem to
have become Mr. Lizardi's stock in trade, as opposed to more fully fleshed
characters.

Here, for example, we have Old Helen, a forlorn office manager, telling a worker
about her past love affair with his dying father.  In Mimi Sobell's affectingly
downtrodden performance, the woman comes to momentary life, but the moment comes
out of nowhere - just another of those ''cameo'' scenes Mr. Lizardi contrives so
expertly.

Then there is the opening scene, which goes nowhere. Phil, played to physical
perfection by Joe McCabe, is the terminal macho man and gung-ho bigot, who longs
to return to ''the days of Joe McCarthy when we had national pride.'' He
complains to a long-suffering wife about the indolence of their son, a
27-year-old veteran of the Vietnam War (after all, it only took Phil two days to
get over Korea!), but that's that, until a phone call near the end informs Phil
that the young man is a drug addict.

As a playwright with a device, Mr. Lizardi has made his share of overcalls in
the past, but this one rings false enough to disconnect his service. And a
couple of final melodramatic gunshots really draw a blank.

''Blue Collars'' has a sizable cast -15, by actual count - and the director,
Frederic De Feis, has marshalled them with the exactness of a master commander.
Several get to serve their time in the spotlight to fine effect.

Michael Dacunto is excellent in the John Garfield part of the idealistic
organizer who insists on acting upon his own dreams instead of those that are
being inflicted upon him. Tony Ray shines as Sugar, a spaced-out but ultimately
militant spokesman against a ''white man's factory.''

And Adam Di Petto is a funny pint-sized plant clown, an X-rated leprechaun
gleefully prancing about, enunicating each expletive as if it were the Last
Word.

We get a vivid sense of the time-card-punching zombies to which a ''system'' has
relegated these workers - plus the implication that this could be a school or
any bureaucratic institution where ''clocking in'' can represent the triumph of
the day and the ultimate measurement of accomplishment. Besides, this particular
plant is named ''American Soda'' - how's that for a metaphor?

Still, ''Blue Collars'' is typed rather than peopled. There are the foremen,
Duke, a bully (hiss); Little Polack, the lovable clown; Larry, the occupational
victim, and so on. In some cases, the types are stretched to make a point: There
is a religious fanatic, kissing his plain piece of wheat bread and sprouting
prayers, who Mr. Lizardi indicates (often writing by indication as he does) ''is
probably the only sane one here,'' but actually he seems to have wandered in
from some other play.

Joseph Lizardi is writing about the dignity of man as it is messed up by the
politics of labor, of management, of unions - and by the cowardice and
ineptitude of man himself. The theme is timeless. The play is dated and
unwieldy, but it should give you pause before buying another bottle of soda.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Tony Ray, Joe McCabe, and Bill Marinelli

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              353 of 353 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

            June 30, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition GIN> , ,
                            Late City Final Edition

THEATER IN REVIEW

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 22, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 834 words


%'BEATLEMANIA' CAPTURES THE PANORAMA OF A DECADE

By ALVIN KLEIN
HEMPSTEAD A NATIONAL touring production of ''Beatlemania,'' being promoted as
''the first Broadway show to be presented in its original form'' at the
Calderone Concert Hall (where it plays through next Sunday), is a note-for-note,
image-for-image likeness of the original, which never actually was a Broadway
show - except geographically. It was a mixed-media hybrid, combining the
components of a rock concert, not a musical play or revue.

In fact, ''Beatlemania'' never officially ''opened.'' Critics were emphatically
uninvited to review it. The show just hung around for more than two years of
previews.

What set ''Beatlemania'' apart from a standard rock concert, besides the obvious
presence in the foreground of four clones recreating the look and sound that
changed popular music and manufactured a new mythology, was what was happening
in the background - and a coy preperformance announcement requesting the
audience's ''cooperation by not smoking - anything -in the theater.''

Multiple-image slides had been a standard ingredient of rock concerts throughout
the 1960's, but somehow the visual concept of the lighting designer Jules Fisher
created a cohesive theater piece out of stock effects, so that a panorama of the
decade flickered before our eyes, and singing simulators with their instruments
suddenly seemed secondary.

Much of the time, they were behind a scrim anyway. The mystique they represented
was all that mattered; the pictures told the story, and the music was its
logical embellishment.

When projected scenes of assassinations (Martin Luther King and Robert Kennedy),
bombings (Hanoi), street riots (Detroit and Watts) and holocausts, Vietnam
style, flash forward, as if in rapid-fire pictorial counterpoint to the
incessant, driving rhythms of ''Hey Jude'' (with its lyric, ''Take a sad song
and make it better''), the show rises to a climactic crescendo that is as
dramatically ironic - amid a country's divisiveness, the ''fabulous four''
themselves were heading for a split -as it is musically stirring.

It would be redundant to explain or explore the musical impact of the Beatles,
from simple beginnings through experimental and complex development. It is
enough to say that their output created a popular music dichotomy, thereafter
known as ''pre and post Beatles,'' and that well before the end of the decade
they symbolized their songs infiltrated the mainstream, to the point of being
included in ''pops'' concerts and piped into elevators.

The show's pictorial montage is still too immediate and haunting to evoke real
nostalgia. ''Beatlemania'' may be pitched to adolescents and teen-agers, for
whom it is an historical crash course, but no one can find it as stunning as
those who actively survived the turmoil of the times.

The neon headlines that roll by on high span the important, (''Christiaan
Barnard performs first heart transplant''), the inane (''Mia Farrow meditates in
India''), the quaint ('' 'Hair' liberates Broadway''), and the debatable (''Pope
nixes birth control;'' ''Catholic laymen vote for birth control'').

Some strike a new awareness (''L.B.J. assures equal opportunities for women in
the armed forces''). Others just reinforce a sense of finality (''The Beatles
break up'').

Arbitrary visuals (desert scenes, pyramids, giraffes) contrast with the
meaningful (the march from Selma to Montgomery). Sound effects (the blasts of
war pitted against astronauts' blast-offs) create their own dramatic tension.

The four simulators appear in a number of costume changes, from Sergeant Pepper
uniforms to white satin suits, and seem to be more prominent than in the
Broadway staging. They relate to the audience.  The emphasis here is more on the
''Beatle'' part, less on the ''mania.''

Mitch Weissman, the original Paul McCartney look-and-sound-alike (who emanates
from Fresh Meadows and grew up in East Meadow and Great Neck), has a most
effective solo moment, singing ''Yesterday.'' Joe Bithorn (who lives in
Cedarhurst) was George Harrison, Jim Riddle was John Lennon and Bennett Gale was
Ringo Starr at the performance I attended. As on Broadway, there is an alternate
foursome.

That the group does not induce the spooky sensation of a mobile waxworks museum
is a tribute to the overall production design. The sound track of filmed
sequences is muffled, but the live sound system is better than Broadway's. The
lyrics - so many of them comprising the true poetry of rock -are intelligible; a
rare thing in any amplified theater, especially one as cavernous as the
Calderone.

If ''Beatlemania'' is indeed to be considered a Broadway show in Hempstead, and
if, as a press release maintains, others will follow in an attempted ''cultural
renaissance in this rebounding Long Island village,'' then an instant ban ought
to be placed on picture-taking during performances. No professional Broadway
theater management would tolerate it. Or smoking - anything.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of ''Beatlemania'' group

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
