
                               1 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 1, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ROSCOE DRUMMOND, 81, IS DEAD; POLITICAL COLUMNIST FOR 50 YEARS

BYLINE: By DOROTHY J. GAITER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 33, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 508 words


Roscoe Drummond, a reporter-editor and syndicated columnist for more than 50
years who covered Presidents from Calvin Coolidge to Ronald Reagan, died
yesterday at the Tenacre Foundation in Princeton, N.J. He was 81 years old and
had lived at the Tenacre, a Christian Science nursing home, since he was injured
in an auto accident in 1981.

''He was a reporter to the end,'' said his wife, Carol Cramer Drummond. ''Right
up to the time of his death, he was working on his memoirs.''

Was Writing a Novel

In a taped message to Washington colleagues last October, Mr. Drummond said: ''I
am keeping buoyant and alert by writing my professional and personal
relationships with the last nine Presidents and also writing a mystery novel.
They may prove to be interchangeable.''

During his career, Mr. Drummond wrote for The Christian Science Monitor, The New
York Herald Tribune and The Los Angeles Times Syndicate. At its peak, his
column, ''State of the Nation,'' was published three days a week in 150
newspapers in the United States and abroad. He stopped writing it after the auto
accident.  Mr. Drummond was a popular figure in Washington and had access to the
most influential. President Dwight D. Eisenhower, in his book, ''The White House
Years: Mandate for Change 1953 to 1956,'' wrote that he regularly read Mr.
Drummond's column.

A Graduate of Syracuse U.

J. Roscoe Drummond, as his parents named him, was born in Theresa, N.Y. He began
his career in 1924, when on the day of his graduation from Syracuse University,
he was hired as a reporter by The Christian Science Monitor in Boston. He
eventually became executive editor, and then from 1940 to 1953 served as chief
of the paper's Washington news bureau. From 1949 to 1951, he was on leave from
the paper as European director of information for the Marshall Plan.

He worked against censorship and coined the phrase ''creeping censorship'' to
describe what he saw as a growing trend by government to withhold information.
In 1952, he headed an advisory committee working with a Senate investigation of
the handling of news by Government agencies.

He left the Monitor's Washington bureau in 1953 to become chief of The Herald
Tribune's Washington office.

A Colleague's Recollection

Richard Strout, a longtime colleague at The Monitor, remembered him yesterday as
''charming and warming.'' ''He was a little under height and kind of comical at
the Gridiron Club,'' an organization of of Washington journalists, which Mr.
Drummond once headed.

In his columns, Mr. Drummond discussed a wide range of subjects, from the
''abrupt overthrow of Nikita Khrushchev'' to Vietnam, saying: ''One thing the
American people do not want about Vietnam is false optimism. We know the road
ahead will be anxious and painful.''

He was the co-author of a book, ''Duel at the Brink,'' about Secretary of State
John Foster Dulles.

He survived his first wife, Charlotte Bruner, and a son, Geoffrey. Burial will
be private, and a memorial service will be held at a later date.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Roscoe Drummond

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 2, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MURDER OF BANKER IN MINNESOTA SPURS MANHUNT FOR FAILED FARMER

BYLINE: By ANDREW H. MALCOLM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1916 words

DATELINE: RUTHTON, Minn., Oct. 1


It began with a late-night phone call to Rudy Blythe, president of a local bank.
Someone wanted to meet him at an empty farmhouse he had been trying to sell for
nearly four years.

Within hours Mr. Blythe and Deems Thulin, his chief loan officer, walked into a
fatal ambush. Mr. Blythe, wounded, attempted to flee but was carefully stalked
and slain with a rifle. The shootings Thursday morning set off a five-state
manhunt for a dispossessed farmer and his 18-year-old son, and early today they
were formally accused of the murders.

The killings appear to be by far the most violent outburst yet in connection
with the threatened or actual eviction of many of the nation's farmers.
Foreclosures and tight farm finances are each extremely emotional issues across
the Middle West, whose agricultural sector is still reeling from the effects of
the recession.

''Who can know what these hard times do to some people?'' asked Duane
DeBettignies, a local businessman. ''Every man has his breaking point.''

Shortly before dawn today Sheriff Abe Thompson of Lincoln County here in
southwestern Minnesota issued arrest warrants for James Lee Jenkins, a
46-year-old local dairy farmer, and his 18-year-old son, Steven Todd Jenkins,
who were last seen speeding over a nearby hill in their white pickup truck while
firing a rifle back at a pursuing patrol car.



Neighbors Reconstruct Events

The events leading up to today's warrants and the continuing air-and- ground
manhunt were pieced together by dozens of interviews with friends and neighbors,
businessmen and the law-enforcement authorities in three counties.

They paint a picture of two men who recently traveled from Texas to keep a
deadly rendezvous. One was the banker who loved his prominent local social and
economic role, but was increasingly troubled by a growing number of delinquent
loans. The other was the farmer who loved to care for animals but was incapable
of handling the complex finances of a dodern agricultural operation, a man the
banker classified a bad credit risk.

They paint a picture of two fathers who loved country life for themselves and
their boys. They tell of the small- town banker whose wife seemed to prefer
big-city life and the small-town farmer whose wife divorced him. And they show
how the two men's lives apparently came to a fatal clash over 10 acres of
overgrown prairie.  The former Jenkins farm is a small patch of pasture,
outbuildings and a simple white house trimmed in green, sitting amid some woods
turning bright fall colors. Mr. Jenkins has lived on many farms in this area
since his childhood, reportedly becoming very attached to a farmer's independent
way of life - one governed by hard work, the seasons and the sun. ''He was an
only child,'' said Bernard Knuth, a friend. ''His parents thought the sun rose
and set on him.'' He was quiet, which is not unusual for a farmer. ''A loner,''
recalled Gary Lindahl, a cafe operator. ''And so was his son.''

'A Likeable Sort'

''He was a likeable sort,'' added Sheriff Thompson. ''Nothing unusual. No
trouble.'' Some of his bills were paid late, but that is not unusual, either,
for agricultural income comes in spurts with the periodic sale of crops or
livestock.

People remember Mr. Jenkins moving from farm to farm, once even trying the
earthmoving business. ''He was going to be a road contractor,'' said Mr. Knuth.
''He bought a lot of machinery, but he never got much business. And his dad, who
cosigned on the loan, had to mortgage his house to clear the boy. The father
still has a little yet to pay off.''

About seven years ago Mr. Jenkins settled on a small farm three miles north of
here, on a county road whose sharp corners follow old property lines. It was
just the remnants of a larger farm but all that Mr. Jenkins could afford and
seemed to want. He bought 45 dairy cows. ''He's a hard worker,'' said Mayor
LeRoy Burch, ''just loves to milk cows.''

Ran Into Money Problems

But Mr. Jenkins ran into money problems again. There was not enough pasture for
cheap feed; he had to buy all his hay and grain, an increasingly expensive
proposition. His income was not growing, so more bills were paid late, if at
all. Soon, the livestock became malnourished. Liens were slapped on his
machinery. His wife left.

And after many months of patience in 1980, Mr. Blythe and his Buffalo Ridge
State Bank foreclosed. Bitter words were exchanged more than once. And some
people say Mr. Jenkins tore out the sink, the tub and some flooring before
leaving. ''Oh, they knew each other real well,'' said Sheriff Thompson in the
early hours this morning as he examined a bullet-riddled car stored by his
office. ''Or rather, they knew each other real bad.''

''How are you going to blame a banker for bad times?'' said Mr. DeBettignies.
''He's got to run a business too.''

With the rise in farm foreclosures, forced farm auctions and voluntary
liquidations in recent months, banks and Federal loan agencies have been the
target of mounting criticisms and demonstrations, some violent, among a wide
range of farm, organized labor, environmental and anti-nuclear groups coalescing
around the financial plight of farmers and unemployed workers across the Middle
West.

Caught in a Squeeze

The farmers are caught between rising costs for their supplies - fuel, seeds,
fertilizer - along with higher interest for the money they borrow to buy them,
and declining prices for their farm commodities and lowered value for their farm
property and collateral.

After the foreclosure on Mr. Jenkins's farm, he disappeared for a while. Friends
said they thought he did construction work in Texas. Sometimes his son went with
him, sometimes he stayed with his grandparents near here.

But three or four weeks ago, Mr. Jenkins reappeared, driving a white pickup with
Texas license plates. His son Steve, who fashioned himself a junior commando,
was with him, still sporting a military-style haircut and, as always, wearing a
military camouflage uniform. He had a tattoo on his right arm and residents
recall that he liked to wear a long knife strapped to his lower leg.

Trouble Again With Credit

Mr. Jenkins seemed happy. He said he had bought a farm about 40 miles south of
here and was going to buy some more cattle. But he had trouble getting credit.
''Every time somebody would ask about his credit,'' said a friend who asked to
remain anonymous, ''everybody would refer them to the bank and they'd shut the
door real quick-like.''

The Buffalo Ridge bank, like most small-town banks, played a prominent local
role. As president, Mr. Blythe was respected by many (he helped found the Lions
Club), envied by others and feared by some. ''Rudy was leaning hard on some
farmers to pay up,'' said one farmer.

Buffalo Ridge Bank attorneys on Friday informed another local farmer, Dennis
Utoft, that they would pursue a court hearing on Monday to seize some of his
machinery and personal possessions, even though his loan payments are current.
As many banks have done recently, the Ruthton bank contends that the book value
of Mr. Utoft's collateral property has fallen enough to make their loan
unsecured.

''Rudy had tried to be helpful to some of these farmers,'' said Mr. Lindahl, the
cafe owner who served him coffee every day in the same booth next to the
soft-drink cooler ''But maybe he let people borrow when they shouldn't have, you
know? And now he was getting a little worried.''

Mr. Blythe, who had tried another job in Dallas while retaining bank ownership,
recently returned here with his wife, Sue, and their son, Rudolph Jr. His father
called him Rolph. ''They were so close - like this,'' said Tammy Burch holding
her fingers together ''They'd go canoeing and camping and fishing together.''

Teasing Because of Wealth

Miss Burch would have been a schoolmate of Rolph's here, but every morning his
mother took him instead to school in Pipestone, about 17 miles away. ''Rolph got
a lot of teasing because they were so rich,'' said Greg Martin, who saw all the
flashing police lights at the Blythes' large house Thursday noon.

One day last year, it seems, Rolph proudly arrived at baseball practice in a new
New York Yankees uniform, his mother's hometown team. Because no one else had a
new uniform, the other children teased him loudly. And they told him that their
loyalty was to the Minnesota Twins.

Mrs. Blythe had just returned from delivering Rolph to Pipestone Thursday
morning when she decided to drive out to the old Jenkins place. She knew her
husband was there because the night before he had gotten a call at home from a
man expressing interest in buying the farm.

When she arrived at the farm about 9:15 A.M., she saw her husband's car parked
in back by a white pickup truck. He came out of the house with ''Toby'' Thulin,
his loan officer, who spent two tours in Vietnam. Mr. Blythe told his wife to go
phone Sheriff Thompson because there were some trespassers about.

She drove the five miles to Tyler. At precisely the same moment, Sheriff
Thompson's phone console was lighted up by two incoming calls. One was Mrs.
Blythe. The other was a passer-by who reported a man writhing in a ditch in
front of the old Jenkins place.

When the ambulance and police arrived, they found Mr. Blythe in the ditch, dead.
He had been shot in the backyard and then pursued down the 150-foot drive and
shot again. Thirty- caliber carbine shell casings were found in the grass.

Body in Station Wagon

In the backyard Sheriff Thompson found the Blythes' green Ambassador station
wagon. A bullet had made a fist- sized hole in the windshield on the passenger's
side. Another bullet had torn a hole in the open door. And a third had pierced
the rubber around the little vent window. Mr. Thulin, the 37-year- old divorced
father of three who had joined the bank just 10 months ago, was hanging out the
car door, dead.

The passer-by, a part-time policeman named Paul Bartz, also reported seeing a
white pickup truck race down the driveway and head south. The description was
radioed to surrounding counties.

Shortly before 2 P.M. in Pipestone County, Deputy Ron McClure began following a
white pickup and recorded its Texas license plate. The number was registered to
a James L. Jenkins.

After three miles of pursuit, the truck pulled onto a gravel road, someone fired
three shots at Deputy McClure and the truck speeded over a hill. But Mr. McClure
saw its brake lights come on and suspected an ambush should he follow alone. He
radioed for air and ground help. But by the time it arrived, the truck was gone.
Some .30-caliber carbine casings were found.

Two Buy Ammunition

A quarter hour later an older man and a teen-ager, who said they were going
hunting, bought 100 rounds of hollow-point .30-caliber carbine ammunition from
Harvey's Trading Post in Luverne. Such shells are illegal for hunting. The same
pair bought some .410 shotgun ammunition and a flashlight at another store. Both
purchases were paid with checks drawn on the account of James L. Jenkins.

That afternoon sheriff's officers visited the home of Mr. Jenkins's elderly
parents. They found some spent .30- caliber carbine casings and a stuffed dummy
dressed like a man. It had been shot several times.

Friday afternoon the senior Jenkinses issued an emotional plea for their son and
grandson to turn themselves in. ''We love you,'' they said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of James Lee Jenkins, son Steven Jenkins; photo of farm near
Ruthton, MN

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 2, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Cynthia Heneage Becomes a Bride

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 70, Column 1; Society Desk

LENGTH: 215 words


Cynthia Heneage, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Peter Heneage of Westport, Conn., was
married yesterday to Stephen Hartman, son of Mr. and Mrs. Robert S. Hartman of
Huntington, L.I. The Rev. Dana Forrest Kennedy performed the ceremony at Christ
and Holy Trinity Episcopal Church in Westport.

The bride is an alumna of the University of Connecticut. Her father is president
of Levinson Blinds and Shades in Bridgeport, Conn. Her mother, Jacqueline P.
Heneage, is a manager for the GTE Corporation in Stamford, Conn., and was the
First Selectman of Westport from 1973 to 1981. The bride is a granddaughter of
the late Mr. and Mrs. William Benfield Pressey of Hanover, N.H., and the late
Mr. and Mrs. Harry Heneage, also of Hanover. Mr. Pressey was Willard Professor
of Rhetoric and Oratory at Dartmouth College, where Mr.  Heneage was director of
athletics.

Mr. Hartman, a petty officer second class in the Navy now stationed aboard the
U.S.S. Hammerhead, served three tours in Vietnam as a marine and received two
Silver Stars and three Bronze Stars for valor. His father is an electrical
contractor in Huntington. The bridegroom is a grandson of the late Dr. and Mrs.
Matthew Hartman of New York and Huntington and Mrs. William E. Noel of Jackson
Heights, Queens, and the late Mr. Noel.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 2, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Susan Powel, Justin Parks Are Married

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 68, Column 3; Society Desk

LENGTH: 243 words


Susan Hyde Powel, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Thomas I. H. Powel of Southport,
Conn., was married yesterday to Justin David Parks, son of Mr. and Mrs. Charles
H. Parks, also of Southport. The Rev. Stephen Chinlund performed the ceremony at
Trinity Episcopal Church there.

Abigail Johnson was the maid of honor and David Parks was his brother's best
man.

The bride, a graduate of the Greens Farms Academy in Westport, Conn., and George
Washington University, is a travel consultant in Southport. Her father is
president of Product Planning Techniques there. She is a grandaughter of the
late Mr. and Mrs. Thomas I. H. Powel of Newport, R.I., and the late Mr. and Mrs.
Donald R. Hyde of Greenwich, Conn. She is a descendant of Samuel Powel, the
first Mayor of Philadelphia, and of Gov. William Bradford of the Plymouth
Colony.

Mr. Parks is an associate product manager for the Heublein Corporation in
Farmington, Conn. An alumnus of the Fairfield Country Day School, the Sterling
School and Hampshire College, he received a master's degree in business
administration from Columbia University. He was a first lieutenant in the Army
Medical Corps in Vietnam, where he was awarded the Bronze Star for

 valor. His father was a manager for the Bullard Company in Bridgeport. The
bridegroom is a grandson of the late Mr. and Mrs. William H. Parks of
Springfield, Mass., and New York and of the late Mr. and Mrs. Lucian W. Jenney
of New York and Rye, N.Y.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Susan Parks

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 2, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PENTAGON IN YEAR-END RUSH, SPENDS BILLIONS

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 37, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 622 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 1


The Defense Department, like all Government agencies, resists having money left
over at the end of a fiscal year. When the Pentagon faced the end of the Federal
fiscal year 1983 on Friday, it went on a $4.2 billion shopping excursion.

Military experts said it was the largest one-day expenditure by the department
since the Vietnam War ended a decade ago.

Meanwhile, President Reagan signed the stopgap spending bill to keep Government
agencies running through the start of the new year.

The Senate gave final Congressional approval to the measure Friday night, in a
voice vote taken five hours before the Oct. 1 start of the Government fiscal
year. The measure was intended to keep money flowing to the Government through
Nov. 10.

Normal Operations Approved

In anticipation, the Office of Management and Budget told affected agencies to
continue normal operations over the weekend in spite of the technical lapse in
appropriations.

To avoid having to return any part of its appropriation for the expiring fiscal
year to the Treasury Department, the Pentagon awarded 234 contracts and wiped
out what would have been a surplus. The bare-bones descriptions of the last-
minute contracts took 29 pages.

By contrast, the Pentagon normally announces two dozen to four dozen contracts
every day. For example, on the previous Friday 40 contracts were let with a
total value of $777.3 million.

Buildup of More than a Trillion

The Defense Department is in the midst of a five-year, $1,700 billion buildup, a
record spending plan for peacetime. The plan is designed to cure what President
Reagan and top Administration officials say are years of neglect of the military
machine. In the 1983 fiscal year, the Pentagon was authorized to spend $178
billion.

Although the contracts were announced Friday, they were the product of months of
work by more than 7,000 Pentagon employes.

The majority were contracts in which the Pentagon negotiates a price with a
single company and buys only from it.

Lack of Bidding Criticized

Such ''sole source'' contracts have been assailed by by critics of military
spending who say competition could tend to reduce prices. Defense Secretary
Caspar W. Weinberger has ordered the Pentagon to seek competitive bidding where
it can.

But many contracts are from a single concern, particularly a company that has
won an earlier contract to produce a particular weapon.

For example, only Lockheed makes the C-130 Hercules, a cargo airplane popular
with military leaders around the world because of its large carrying capacity
and ability to take off and land on relatively short airstrips. The Air Force
awarded Lockheed a $22.24 million pact for a pair of C-130's.

The largest single contract went to Honeywell, a $450 million agreement for
3,205 torpedoes and related work.

Pratt & Whitney and General Electric each received a $202.7 million contract for
the Joint Fighter Engine Program, an Air Force effort to develop a single engine
for use in different fighters.

While the Pentagon was spending $4.2 billion, it also rewarded a Navy employee
who saved the service about $10,000.

Irene Usowski, a purchasing agent at the Naval Supply Center in Norfolk, Va.,
was given a $1,000 reward because she challenged prices, ranging from $554 to
$792 each, that a sole source contractor had quoted for fiberglass plates. She
found they could be bought for far less, and the Navy ended up paying $20 each.

The Pentagon has been stung in recent weeks by disclosures that it paid high
prices for spare parts, such as $450 for a simple claw hammer, and Mr.
Weinberger has ordered special attention paid to contract for spare parts.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 2, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A 1963 PEACE CORPS GROUP REVELS IN OLD CAMARADERIE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 58, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 982 words


The year was 1963. The Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. had a dream, and Bob
Dylan said the answer was blowing in the wind. Vietnam was still somebody else's
war. Watergate was just an architect's blueprint.

For the 30 men and women who came from across the country to New York City last
weekend, 1963 was a milestone. It was the year they had joined the Peace Corps,
a commitment they said changed their lives.

''We were such a starry-eyed, optimistic, idealistic group of people,'' said
42-year-old Gaye Vorkink, now a nursery school teacher in Exeter, N.H. ''We
wanted to make an impact. But we were the ones who were affected.''

Twenty years ago, Mrs. Vorkink and 52 others in their 20's and early 30's began
their Peace Corps training at Columbia University's School of Social Work. Four
months later, they were in Colombia, helping the urban poor of that South
American country with community development projects, from building latrines to
setting up schools.

'There Was a Closeness'

When their volunteer service was over two years later, they promised to keep in
touch. At first there were frequent telephone calls and letters. Then just
Christmas cards and, finally, nothing.

So, a reunion was in order.

They met Sept. 23 at the Taft Hotel in midtown. They kissed and hugged and
assured one another they had not changed a bit. They held hands and linked arms,
revived nicknames and corrected one another's Spanish. It seemed as though they
had never parted.

''There was a closeness, a camaraderie, an esprit de corps with us,'' said
Thomas Kolodz, 42, a Chicago real-estate appraiser and law school student. ''We
were a family.''

The next day, they gathered for their reunion dinner at Victor's Cafe 52, a
midtown restaurant that serves Spanish and Latin American food.

Straight to the Memories

Robert Kenison, 45, a Government lawyer in Washington, quickly handed out
biographical sketches bringing everyone up to date on careers, marriages,
children and even divorces. That ended all the polite inquiries. They could go
straight to the memories.

''Do you remember?'' The pygmy goats? Polymagma (pills taken to prevent
diarrhea)? Ron Viejo de Caldas (''the best rum in the world'')? Hearing the
Beatles for the first time in some Colombian bar? The stars?

One of their most vivid memories was the day President John F. Kennedy was
assassinated. They were in Spanish class at Columbia when they heard the news.
Many of them had joined the Peace Corps because of the President. It had been
one of his favorite projects.

''The Peace Corps was part of the Kennedy milieu,'' said Mr. Kenison. ''We had
such faith in what Kennedy was doing, and we all wanted to be a part of it.''

Somber and Purposeful Mitchell I. Ginsberg, who served as the Peace Corps
training director at Columbia when he was the Dean of the School of Social Work,
said the President's death had devastated many of his students.

''They couldn't imagine the Peace Corps without the President,'' he said. ''Some
of them considered dropping out.''

But no one did. Photographs taken then show the trainees somber and purposeful
in their crew cuts and Peter Pan collars. ''We wanted to finish what he
started,'' said Frances Gatins, 43, a proofreader in Richmond.

Despite the 60 hours a week of classes at Columbia and the weeks of field work
in the slums of New York and Puerto Rico, they were not prepared for the poverty
of Colombia.

Bicycles Were a Luxury

In the good neighborhoods, the floors were dirt and pigs roamed the streets. Tap
water had to boiled. Naked children with distended bellies begged on the
streets.

As Peace Corps volunteers, they took a vow of poverty. A monthly $60 stipend had
to cover all expenses, including food and rent. Furniture and clothes were
frequently handmade. Volunteers who had once owned Porsches and MG sports cars
now considered bicycles a luxury.

Judith Sweeterman, 42, now a student in Neenah, Wis., joined the Peace Corps
with her husband, David, 42, now an owner of a paper company. She still
remembers the day of their arrival.

''We had only our clothes and this mattress on the floor,'' she said. ''When we
lay down to sleep, this rat ran across the room. I cried and said, 'Why are we
here?' My husband said, 'Let's just try to stick it out for six weeks.' Of
course, by then, the rats were the least of our problems.''

Small Successes Treasured

The frustrations were many. The volunteers were laughed at when they
mispronounced Spanish words. They had to cope with a different set of values.
Many times the Colombians did not understand the volunteers' mission, and
sometimes the volunteers were not sure of it themselves.

The small successes were treasured - a new pigpen, a new latrine, a schoolyard
fence, a child's hug.

Colombia affected their lives. Many changed their career plans and went into
social work or Government service. Several married Peace Corps volunteers they
had met abroad.

Charles Buckwalter Jr., 52, who joined as a widower, fell in love with a
Colombian and married in Bogota. Doris Stilwell, 43, a Lexington, Ky., social
worker and doctoral student in educational psychology, named her daughter Belen.
It was the name of the barrio in which she had worked.

''I wonder if the idealism is gone?'' Mrs. Stilwell asked. ''Now we're so busy
paying the mortgage, paying for the kids' braces.''

Mr. Kolodz slapped the palm of his hand against his forehead. ''Oh, God, the
braces,'' he said.

''Taking them to their piano lessons and soccer practice,'' Mrs. Stilwell
continued. ''I wonder if, somehow, we didn't lose some of our idealism along the
way.''

Mr. Kolodz looked around the restaurant where his old friends were talking and
laughing. ''Yeah, it's lasted,'' he said softly. ''It's alive, here in this
room. It's still in all of us.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Frances Gatins, Celeste Torrens, Tom Carey, 1963, now

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 2, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV RETURNS TO VIETNAM TO DISSECT THE WAR

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2104 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


Louise D America's first television war will be entering living rooms across the
country again this week, as the Publis Broadcasting Service begins an
extraordinary 13-hour documentary on the Vietnam war. Titled ''Vietnam: A
Television History,'' the series will have its national premiere, including New
York's Channel 13, on Tuesday at 9 P.M. It is the most ambitious project ever
undertaken by public television and required six years to complete.

The result is a meticulously researched and carefully balanced, if sometimes
bland, documentary that may broaden many Americans' understanding of Vietnam, if
not change their opinion about the war that ravaged the Southeast Asian country
from 1945 to 1975 and divided America as no event has since the Civil War.

Its 13 episodes range from ''Roots of a War,'' tracing the origins of the
conflict back to Vietnam's 2,000 years of conflict with China, through the U.S.
military buildup in the mid- 1960's and finally the collapse of the South
Vietnamese regime in 1975. From the vantage of a correspondent who covered the
war, the series, which cost nearly $5 million to make, has something to offend,
and please, both hawks and doves.

Some of the most revealing new insights are offered by Communist generals and
former guerrillas whom a PBS camera team interviewed during three weeks of
filming in Vietnam in 1981 (the trip took a year to arrange). They concede that
North Vietnam began infiltrating regular army troops into the South in 1964,
before President Lyndon B. Johnson dispatched the first U.S. ground forces to
Vietnam in 1965, as the White House asserted at the time. They also confirm that
for them the 1968 Tet offensive was a military failure, just as Gen. William C.
Westmoreland, commander of U.S. forces in Vietnam, claimed.


In perhaps the most powerful sequence in the entire documentary series, a battle
for a village near Danang is described alternately from the perspective of U.S.
Marines and Vietnamese peasants. The fight itself was routine, insignificant in
the history of a 30-year war, just a company assault on a suspected Vietcong
hideout. But it was also characteristic of the predicament American soldiers
often found themselves in - harassed by gunfire from guerrillas sheltered in a
village.

For three days the Marines were pinned down in a rice paddy outside the village
by intense Communist fire. Their lieutenant was wounded along with two-thirds of
their patrol, they went without food, water or sleep, and it rained the whole
time. Finally, with air strikes and artillery support, the Marines stormed the
village. Some peasants were killed in the attack, but how?

In 1981, when the PBS crew visited the village with Communist cadres as guides,
the peasants charged that the Marines had committed an atrocity, like the Mylai
massacre.

''There were only women and children around then and we didn't know where the VC
were,'' says Nguyen Bay, a young man who had been in the fourth grade at the
time. ''But they shot us anyway,'' Bay contends.

''Some of the wounded people went to their beds to lie down. The soldiers shot
their ears, then their stomachs,'' he adds.

But Jack Hill, a former Marine private, remembers it differently. ''I didn't
shoot any old ladies and kids,'' he says. Still, Mr. Hill admits, ''After three
days of blood and guts in the mud, you can't take it.'' Some of the men in his
squad ''did what they had to do'' to try to find the Vietcong hiding in the
village. ''The way I seen it, it was war.''

The effect of this vignette is like ''Rashomon,'' the 1951 film by the Japanese
director Akira Kurosawa, in which the viewer is left to decide which version of
a story about a rape/murder is the true one. Its ambiguity is also reminiscent
of the stark marble Vietnam Memorial in Washington, which in its simplicity
leaves its message about the war to the eye of the beholder.

To Richard Ellison, the executive producer of the series, that is what he
intended. ''I think the story we are trying to tell has some innate
ambiguities,'' he said recently at the studios of WGBH, Boston's
public-broadcasting station where the series was produced.

To try to assure a balanced tone, Mr. Ellison dispensed with both a dramatic
musical score and a sonorous, omniscient narrator. The only music is a brief
lead into the title; the narrator is a relatively unknown Boston actor with a
dispassionate voice, Will Lyman, who speaks infrequently.

Instead of relying on a narrator to carry the films, Mr. Ellison, a 59- year-old
independent producer who has worked for CBS as well as PBS, chose to let the
actual participants tell their own stories as much as possible.


Hence, most of the film is documentary material intercut with interviews filmed
over the past three years. In one of the most dramatic moments in the series,
Harry McPherson, President Johnson's speechwriter, recalls in an interview how
the White House was affected during the Tet offensive when the pictures shown on
the evening news differed from the optimistic reassurances cabled from Saigon by
General Westmoreland.

Suddenly the program cuts to the now-famous TV film footage of Saigon's police
chief, Brig. Gen. Nguyen Ngoc Loan, executing a Vietcong guerrilla with a pistol
shot to the head.

''We could have had a narrator telling you what to think, that's the easy way,''
said Stanley Karnow, a veteran reporter for The Washington Post and Time
magazine who served as chief correspondent for the production. Mr. Karnow
covered the war in Vietnam from 1959, when the first American soldier died, to
the late 1960's.

''But it's not the adult way,'' added Mr. Karnow, who has written a 750- page
book entitled ''Vietnam: A History'' that will be published simultaneously with
the series and provides greater detail than the television program can offer.
''We wanted to make the audience think and draw their own conclusion,'' he said.

Critical to this technique was a search to find ''the footage that was the right
battle, at the right time and the right place,'' explained Mr. Ellison. ''We
were very strict with ourselves not to use 'wallpaper,' '' he said, using the
industry term for stock footage.

To locate the accurate footage, the producers assembled a team of 10 film
editors and researchers who scoured 70 archives around the world, collecting
over 100 hours of film, including 1,800 television news stories from American
and foreign networks. All the film was catalogued by computer.

The two most important sources were the Sherman Grinberg Film Libraries in New
York, where ABC News footage is stored, including outtakes not used on the air,
and the U. S. Armed Forces Film Depository at Norton Air Force Base in
California. But the editors also secured film from Hanoi, France, Britain, Japan
and West Germany.


A special help, Mr. Ellison says, was furnished by Lawrence W. Lichty, a
journalism professor at the University of Maryland who had already compiled a
list of everything about Vietnam that had appeared on regular television news
and in network documentaries from 1965 to 1975. With his encyclopedic memory
Professor Lichty could often locate a necessary piece of film instantaneously.

To supplement this archival film, the producers conducted 300 interviews,
including 100 in Vietnam. Almost everyone asked consented, except former
Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, Nguyen Van Thieu, South Vietnam's leader
from 1967 to 1975, and Le Duc Tho, the Communist leader who negotiated the Paris
Peace accords signed in 1973.

Some, minor bit players on the larger stage of history, add a marvellous sense
of the era, like Maj. Archimedes L. A. Patti, an operative with the Office of
Strategic Services, the O.S.S., who met Ho Chi Minh in 1945. Major Patti was
assigned to enlist Ho's help in rescuing downed American flyers in Vietnam from
the Japanese, and after several talks with Ho, he was convinced the Vietnamese
leader could be pro-American. ''We had Ho Chi Minh in our hands,'' he recalls on
camera.

Then there is a cameo appearance by Madame Ngo Dinh Nhu, President Ngo Dinh
Diem's sister-in-law. Dressed in a mink stole open to reveal a silver crucifix
worn over a red silk dress, she is still acerbic in maintaining that the U.S.
blundered in supporting the coup against Diem.


One of the most revealing interviews is with Clark Clifford, the suave
Washington lawyer whom President Johnson named Secretary of Defense in early
1968. Johnson figured him for a hawk and appointed him to decide on the
Pentagon's request for 206,000 additional troops after the Tet offensive.

For three days, Mr. Clifford recollects, he met with the Joint Chiefs of Staff
in a crisis-like setting. ''We had long talks,'' he says. ''How long would it
take? They didn't know. How many more troops would it take? They didn't know.
Would 206,000 answer the demand? They didn't know. Might there be more? Yes. So,
when it was all over, I said, 'What is the plan to win the war in Vietnam?' ''
The only plan was attrition, to wear out the North Vietnamese, and the generals
conceded that wasn't working either, he recalls.

So, Mr. Clifford reversed course and began pushing President Johnson to
de-escalate, eventually leading to Johnson's decision on March 31, 1968, to stop
the bombing of North Vietnam and not run again for President. It was the
beginning of the end of the war.

Following several fresh analyses of White House decision making, which the
series' producers studied carefully, Johnson himself emerges as a more
sympathetic and tragic figure, not just the grand manipulator from the Alamo.
Bill Moyers, then a Johnson aide, remembers in the documentary the President
telling him as the escalation started in 1965, ''I feel like a hitchhiker caught
in a hailstorm on a Texas highway. I can't run, I can't hide and I can't make it
stop.''


The series was not without its problems, the major one being a shortage of
funds. Both PBS and ABC initially contributed $50,000 after Mr. Ellison and Mr.
Karnow came up with the idea for the series. The National Endowment for the
Humanities also provided $1 million, and eight foundations offered a total of
$285,000.

But the only corporate funding, a grant of $350,000, came from the Chubb Group
of Insurance Companies. Other companies that often sponsor programs on PBS, such
as Mobil Oil and Exxon, turned the filmmakers down, Mr. Karnow said. ''I think
they were scared to get involved in something controversial,'' he said.

As a result, the producers worked out an arrangement whereby Britain's Central
Independent Television produced four of the programs and France's Antenne-2 was
responsible for another two, almost half of the total. In return, the British
and French are also showing versions of the series.


Mr. Ellison denied there were any serious differences in interpretation between
the three national groups. The Americans got to screen each show at the
rough-cut stage to iron out any changes deemed necessary, he said.

But another filmmaker involved in the series said the British had taken a ''more
moralistic stance, anxious to accentuate the aspects of the war that were
immoral at the expense of looking at it afresh.'' They argued, for example, that
the Marine attack on the village near Danang should be labeled a war crime, he
said.

The British attitude may also account for one of the small mistakes in the
series. In the episode titled ''Vietnamizing the War,'' which was produced by
the British, the narrator explains that to retaliate for the Communist's large
Easter offensive in 1972 President Richard Nixon stepped up the bombing. ''Along
with conventional bombs, the planes also dropped napalm,'' the narrator adds.

The program then cuts to the horrible scene of the young Vietnamese girl running
naked down a highway after being hit by napalm. The clear impression is that an
American plane was responsible. In fact, as I saw myself, it was a South
Vietnamese Skyraider.

''Legacies,'' the final installment in the series, is scheduled to be shown on
Dec. 20, but last week Mr. Ellison and his colleagues were still viewing the
rough cuts. Mr. Karnow, however, feels the central legacy of Vietnam is clear.

''In 1964, public-opinion surveys showed that 63 percent of the American people
were paying little attention to Vietnam, though we had 12,000 U. S. advisers
there and were spending $400 million a year,'' Mr. Karnow said. ''Today, as a
result of Vietnam, people are asking questions about U. S. troops in Lebanon and
Central America. The public is much more sensitive to American involvement
abroad.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 2, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WAR POWERS DEBATE REFLECTS ITS ORIGEN

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1003 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Gen. P.X. Kelley, the Marine Corps Commandant, was facing some hard questions
from a Congressional panel a couple of weeks ago. ''The mission, the role, of
the marines,'' he said, ''who went into Vietnam. . . .'' The audience gasped as
the General plunged ahead. ''I mean into Lebanon,'' he corrected himself, ''a
Freudian slip.''

General Kelley was voicing a thought that troubled many last week as Congress
approved - 54 to 56 in the Senate, 253 to 156 in the House - a resolution
permitting President Reagan to keep the marines in Lebanon for 18 more months.
But as Representative Jim Wright of Texas, the majority leader noted, Vietnam
''means different things to different people. When some say Vietnam, they mean
we'd be damn fools ever to get involved in another war like that. To others,
Vietnam conjures up a vision of the ultimate in cowardice. They feel we
abandoned the effort before we won, and should have stayed the course.''

The resolution that passed Congress was a compromise shaped by conflicting
lessons drawn from the same legacy. Mr. Reagan can now keep the marines in
Lebanon well past the next election. But Congress for the first time exercised
its authority under the War Powers Act and placed distinct limits on the size
and scope of the mission. To both Congress and the White House, these precedents
are critical. Negotiators bargained in the full knowledge that power
relationships established over Lebanon today could be applied to El Salvador, or
elsewhere, tomorrow.

The War Powers Act is itself a major political result of the Vietnam conflict.
It reflects the determination of Congress to prevent the nightmare of another
unauthorized, undeclared war. Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. spoke for many
members when he vowed, ''As long as I'm here, it will never happen again.''

Critics of the Marine mission see many parallels between Lebanon and Vietnam.
Perhaps their biggest fear is that by committing a small force of 1,200 men now,
the Administration will eventually get drawn into an endless swamp. ''You recall
how the Vietnam War developed,'' warned Senator Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia,
the Democratic leader. ''A little more and a little more and a little more. . .
.'' Supporters of the Administration policy say Vietnam cannot happen again
precisely because the lessons are too clear. ''Easy analogies can be dangerous
ones,'' said Representative Sander M. Levin, Democrat of Michigan. ''I, for one,
don't equate Lebanon with Vietnam. We have a clearly stated purpose and a very
limited number of troops.''

'Who Are We Fighting?'

Legislators also differ strongly over the goals in Lebanon and the proper use of
American power to attain them. To critics of the current course, the struggle in
Lebanon is a civil war and President Amin Gemayel resembles the factional
leaders the United States backed in Vietnam. ''We don't even know who the enemy
is,'' Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., a Delaware Democrat, said. ''Who are we
fighting?''

To the Administration and its backers, the enemy is clear, and so is the prize.
Secretary of State George P. Shultz has stressed repeatedly that Lebanon is not
a civil war, that the marines are aiding the duly elected Government and that
the its foes are subsidized by Syria and the Soviet Union. Many Congressmen
advanced a Middle Eastern version of the domino theory: if Lebanon falls, other
allies and their oil fields will be in danger.

To some extent, Congress is divided by a generation gap. Many younger members,
still traumatized by the shaping conflict of their youth, Southeast Asia,
refused to believe the Administration when it promised to limit American
involvement. And they refused to believe that America had the will, or the
right, to use its power to mold events abroad. But older members harked to
attitudes shaped by World War II. Representative Henry J. Hyde, Republican of
Illinois, described himself as a ''World War II young man, who believed some of
the things I heard then when Hitler was the enemy.'' One of them, he said, was
''that America had responsibilities in a world that was changing in the face of
efforts to dominate it by dictators and the enemies of freedom.''

Others maintained that the lesson of Vietnam was not to be timid in the face of
foreign turmoil, but decisive. Representative Robert H. Michel of Illinois, the
Republican leader, said America should emerge from the ''dark valley'' of self-
doubt through which it has been walking for a decade. That view was shared by
some younger members, particularly those who are strong supporters of Israel.
Representative Howard Berman, a freshman Democrat from California, told the
House that the key to success was to join with allies in the sort of
multinational force stationed in Lebanon so ''We will not be lone gunslingers
going into some far off land.''

While Congress might be willing to leave the ''dark valley'' of the post-Vietnam
era, the public still seems reluctant to risk American lives for foreign policy
objectives. A New York Times/ CBS Poll last week found that by a margin of 2 to
1, Americans fear that Lebanon resembles Vietnam. Unless that changes, the
Administration could find its options severely limited not only in the Middle
East but also in Central America.

There also could be a political price. The poll showed that, for the first time
since Mr. Reagan took office, significantly more Americans - 47 percent to 38
percent - disapprove of his conduct of foreign policy than approve of it. The
shooting down of a Korean jetliner by the Soviet Union was considered the most
important foreign- policy question facing the country. Lebanon was second, and
Central America third.

''The real concern and meaning to our people,'' said Senator John Stennis,
Democrat of Mississippi, in an emotional moment in the debate, ''is that, by and
large, they are the ones that are going to have to put up the boys and the blood
and the members of their families to fight a war if we get into it now or
later.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 2, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BESTSELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 36, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 772 words

DATELINE: MASS MARKET Mass market paperbacks are soft


-cover books sold at newsstands, variety stores and supermarkets, as well as in
bookstores. This listing is based on computer-processed reports from bookstores
and representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 outlets across the United
States.

1

THE VALLEY OF HORSES, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $3.95.) A fictional saga of
human survival at the dawn of civilization.

2

MASTER OF THE GAME, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $3.95.) The secret behind a
woman business tycoon's rise to power: fiction.

3

ACCEPTABLE LOSSES, by Irwin Shaw. (Avon, $3.95.) A New York literary agent's
life is threatened by a mysterious stranger: fiction.

4

DIFFERENT SEASONS, by Stephen King. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Four novellas with
mainly nonhorror themes by a modern master of horror.

5

MAX, by Howard Fast. (Dell, $3.95.) The birth of the film industry in New York
at the turn of the century: fiction.

6

SPELLBINDER, by Harold Robbins. (Pocket, $3.95.) From soldier in Vietnam to
television evangelist: fiction.

7

THE 13TH VALLEY, by John M. Del Vecchio. (Bantam, $3.95.) The war in Vietnam:
fiction.  8

SECOND HEAVEN, by Judith Guest. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Loves in various forms heal
three battered people: fiction.

9

THE CLAN OF THE CAVE BEAR, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $3.95.) The beginning of
the saga continued in ''The Valley of Horses.''

10

TOUCH THE DEVIL, by Jack Higgins. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Tracking down a K.G.B.
agent who has stolen NATO secrets: fiction.

11

19 PURCHASE STREET, by Gerald A. Browne. (Berkley, $3.95.) A Mafia operation
that has become ''respectable'': fiction.

12

CLOAK OF DARKNESS, by Helen MacInnes. (Fawcett, $3.95.) A counter-terrorist
agent finds himself on an assassination list: fiction.

13

JADE, by Pat Barr. (Warner, $3.95.) An English girl, kidnapped to China, makes
her way in Oriental society: fiction.

14

FRIDAY, by Robert A. Heinlein. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $3.95.) The adventures on
Earth of an Artificial Person: science fiction.

15

THE CASE OF LUCY BENDING, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $3.95.) The aberrant
society of Florida's Gold Coast: fiction.

 TRADE Trade paperbacks are soft-cover books usually sold in bookstores and at
an average price higher than mass market paperbacks. This listing is based on
computer-processed reports from about 2,000 bookstores in every region of the
United States .

1

THE COLOR PURPLE, by Alice Walker. (Pocket/Washington Square Press, $5.95.)
Black men and women in the South: fiction.

2

THURSTON HOUSE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $7.95.) Three generations of a wealthy
San Francisco family: fiction.

3

COLOR ME BEAUTIFUL, by Carole Jackson. (Ballantine, $8.95.) Beauty tips for
women.

4

LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo F. Buscaglia. (Fawcett, $5.95.) Inspirational
talks by a California professor.

5

LIFE EXTENSION, by Durk Pearson and Sandy Shaw. (Warner, $10.95.) How to add
years to your life and life to your years.

6

BLOOM COUNTY, by Berke Breathed. (Little, Brown, $6.95.) Cartoon strips
featuring some very odd characters.

7

WHAT COLOR IS YOUR PARACHUTE? by Richard Nelson Bolles. (Ten Speed Press,
$7.95.) Guide for job hunters and career changers.

8

THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $4.95.) Philosophical humor.

9

LINDA EVANS BEAUTY AND EXERCISE BOOK, by Linda Evans. (Simon & Schuster/Wallaby,
$9.95.) How-to by the television personality.

10

MISS MANNERS' GUIDE TO EXCRUCIATINGLY CORRECT BEHAVIOR, by Judith Martin.
(Warner, $10.95.) Etiquette prescribed by an amusingly bossy lady.

11

ROYAL SEDUCTION, by Jennifer Blake. (Fawcett/Columbine, $5.95.) A New Orleans
belle, a European prince, international intrigue: fiction.

12

THE RAPTURE, by Hal Lindsey. (Bantam, $6.95.) Predictions about an approaching
global event based on an interpretation of the Bible.

13

WRAP ME IN SPLENDOR, by Ellen Tanner Marsh. (Berkley, $5.95.) A proud heiress
and an arrogant sea captain: romance in 19th-century England, India and America.

14

THIN THIGHS IN 30 DAYS, by Wendy Stehling. (Bantam, $2.95.) How-to.

15

GARFIELD EATS HIS HEART OUT, by Jim Davis. (Ballantine, $4.95.) Cartoon humor.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 3, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
A VIEW FROM MANAGUA

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 824 words


The recent burst of military activity by the so-called ''contras'' operating out
of Honduras against the Sandinista regime in Nicaragua was caused by orders from
the Central Intelligence Agency to ''do or die,'' The Washington Post has
reported.

Since earlier efforts by the contra guerrillas had been mostly ineffective, the
report said, the C.I.A. told their parent group, the Nicaraguan Democratic Force
(F.D.N.), to show some results by the end of September or Congress probably
would cut off their funds.

That lends point to recent remarks to a small New York audience by Father Miguel
d'Escoto, the Maryknoll priest who is Foreign Minister in the Sandinista
Government. Pointing out that the U.S. Congress was debating whether ''to devote
millions of dollars to the destabilization of another country,'' Father d'Escoto
asked in tones of disbelief: ''Is this a government of laws?''

That's a good question that can't quite be answered by accusations from
Washington that Nicaragua itself is trying to ''destabilize'' El Salvador by
furnishing arms to guerrillas there.

The Reagan Administration has produced no proof of this and U.S. sources in
Central America concede that the supposed flow of supplies is down to a trickle,
of mostly nonlethal materials at that. More important, trying to overthrow a
recognized government with C.I.A. funds and a hired army - ''covert operations''
is the euphemism - violates U.S. law, the charter of the Organization of
American States, and the very principles the Administration professes to uphold
in Central America.

The Democratic-controlled House, on just such grounds, already has voted to cut
off funds for the contras; the Republican-dominated Senate soon will debate the
matter, with the Reagan Administration likely to persuade a majority to continue
support of the F.D.N. and its guerrillas.

Why is the Administration so determined to oust the Sandinistas or to ''prevent
consolidation'' of their Government, as a recent official statement put it? The
Nicaraguan Foreign Minister offered his audience what might be called the view
from Managua:

Washington is not really motivated, he suggested, by either of its expressed
concerns - that the Sandinistas are shipping arms to Salvadoran guerrillas, and
that as a Marxist government they will ''export their revolution'' to other
countries in the region. Nicaragua does not have the power to do so, Father
d'Escoto said; besides, he insisted, a revolution can't be exported ''like
coffee or cotton.'' But ''a good example spreads,'' he noted; and he went on to
say that what the Reagan Administration really fears is that Nicaragua, having
overthrown a U.S.-supported dictator through a ''national insurrection,'' will
now be able ''against great odds'' to meet the aspirations of its people. That,
he said, would cause other nations in Latin America to ''look on with hope'' and
show them ''that you can free yourself.'' Thus, in his view, the Reagan
Administration had ''come to the conclusion that Nicaragua mustn't be allowed to
get away with its revolution.'' Its aim is ''to teach a lesson to other
countries: Don't try it, it won't work.'' A listener raised the question whether
the Administration was not, instead, doing the bidding of ''the
multinationals.'' But Father d'Escoto replied that his Government had had no
real problems with the business community or ''the corporaions,'' and repeated
that it believed the source of the trouble was the Administration's ''fixed
ideological position that looks on a revolution as necessarily bad.'' This view
obviously is to some extent self-serving; but it's nevertheless enlightening for
norteamericanos to have such a glimpse of how things look from the other side.
And in light of The Post's report on the C.I.A.'s impatience with its contra
surrogates, attention should be paid to Father d'Escoto's warning as to where
Administration policy may lead.  ''It has to be clear'' to officials in
Washington, he said, that the contra war ''doesn't get them anywhere.'' So
they'll increase the pressure, he predicted, first using the army and air force
of Honduras, then ''inevitably'' U.S. troops, too.  But even if Washington sent
''500,000 as in Vietnam,'' the Foreign Minister vowed, ''they won't obtain their
goal,'' because the resulting struggle would not be conventional, but a
guerrilla war in which ''every Nicaraguan, including my 84-year-old mother, will
fight.'' Such a war, he suggested, would embroil the U.S. for years and destroy
respect for it in Latin America and elsewhere in the third world. And every
American, he said, ''not for love of Nicaragua but for love of your own country
. . . should be interested in helping the United States not to make a mistake
that would be a source of embarassment and shame for years to come . . . .''
Considering the source, some Americans won't like that advice. But all would do
well to ponder it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 3, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam Says 97,000 Have Been Resettled

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 109 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 2


The Vietnamese authorities have resettled 97,000 people from the cities and
densely populated plains in so-called new economic zones over the past nine
months, the state-run Vietnam News Agency said.

The majority were resettled on state rubber or coffee plantations in the central
highlands and at industrial plants north and northeast of Ho Chi Minh City, the
agency said in a dispatch seen today in Bangkok.

Vietnam's Communist Government organized the project in 1976 with the stated aim
of reducing urban overcrowding and reclaiming war-ravaged farmland. Vietnamese
refugees have said that there is widespread opposition to the resettlement.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 3, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

A U.S. TURNING POINT?

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 990 words


News

 Analysis

WASHINGTON, Oct. 2 - The Congressional vote to keep American marines in Lebanon
for 18 more months may be a turning point in post-Vietnam foreign policy, with
implications extending beyond an endorsement of President Reagan's policy in
Lebanon.  Now, for the first time since the American withdrawal from Vietnam,
both houses of Congress have given their assent to keeping American troops in a
hostile situation, however limited their role. This suggests that Congress, if
not the nation at large, has begun to shed its post-Vietnam reluctance to see
American forces used abroad in pursuit of foreign policy objectives.

For what began on Capitol Hill early in September as a drive to establish
constitutional precedents to restrain the President is now being interpreted by
many members of Congress as well as the White House as an endorsement of
assertive actions already taken by President Reagan in Lebanon.

No Support for Combat The debate in the Senate and the House of Representatives
last week indicated that President Reagan would not have received a vote of
confidence had he been seeking Congressional approval to put American forces
into Central America or to have them engage in offensive combat anywhere in the
world.

Many members in both houses emphasized that they were persuaded to go along with
the Lebanon resolution, however reluctantly, because they supported the
President's broad objectives in the Middle East, a region where Congress has
long perceived vital American interests to be at stake, whereas many members
differ with his objectives in Central America.

One clear indication of the difference with which Congress views those two
situations came in the strong support given to the Lebanon resolution by young
liberal Democrats in the House like Stephen J. Solarz of Brooklyn, Michael D.
Barnes of Maryland and Howard Wolpe of Michigan. Among others, they have long
been in the forefront in criticizing the President on Central America.

An Unspoken Factor

For this group, as well as many others, Israel was an unspoken factor in the
vote, though the Israeli Embassy and pro-Israeli groups did not make an active
lobbying effort.

Vietnam was a much more visible and dynamic element in the debate and in the
decision Congress made. Throughout the proceedings, the central issue was how
the nation should read and apply the lessons of Vietnam. There was sharp
disagreement over what those lessons were and whether the nation should be
forewarned and inhibited by the Vietnam experience or should shake off ''the
Vietnam syndrome'' and move into a new era.

''What we did in Vietnam,'' said Senator Sam Nunn, Democrat of Georgia, ''we
went in without knowing what we were doing, and the mission kept expanding and
expanding without sufficient forces to carry it out. The resolution before us is
the most clear expression in advance I've ever seen of a repeat of that
mistake.''

'Did Not Paralyze'

The rebuttal argument, from Representative Howard L. Berman, Democrat of
California, a liberal, was that the time had come for the United States to show
its willingness to use force in Lebanon in the cause of peace and to
''demonstrate that Vietnam did not paralyze the United States for all time.''

That argument was powerfully reinforced by the contentions of the House Speaker,
Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. of Massachusetts, and Senator Howard H. Baker Jr.,
Republican of Tennessee, the majority leader, that by trying to limit the size,
mission and duration of the Marine contingent in Lebanon, Congress was now
taking action to prevent another Vietnam.

''I believe this resolution clearly limits the scope and role of the United
States forces in Lebanon so that the danger of a Vietnam-type escalation is
avoided,'' the Speaker told a hushed chamber Wednesday. ''This resolution is not
a 'blank check' as some have asserted.''

A Rationale for Support

For many members, the commitment of the two leaders to a bargain struck with
President Reagan two weeks ago provided enough political cover and rationale to
support the resolution. Many accepted the leadership's contention that once the
President signed the Lebanon resolution, it would establish a landmark precedent
strengthening the hand of Congress in future foreign crises.

But whether Congress has established effective legislative restraints on
President Reagan is now a matter of dispute not only between Capitol Hill and
the White House but within Congress as well.

For the last three weeks the Administration has refused to be pinned down to
accepting any limits under the 1973 War Powers Act. When President Reagan wrote
to the leaders last Tuesday pledging to seek Congressional authority for ''any
substantial expansion in the number or role'' of the marines in Lebanon, he tied
that to the Lebanon Emergency Assistance Act for fiscal 1983, which ends today,
and not to the earlier legislation invoked by Congress.

The Credibility Issue

For some, the underlying issue was President Reagan's credibility. Uncertainty
over the President's future course caused all but two Senate Democrats to vote
against the measure. But Speaker O'Neill told the House, I believe the President
when he says he has no plans to change the peacekeeping role of our marines.''

It will probably be months before the issue is settled in practice. Opponents of
the Lebanon resolution say it lacks legal force, but supporters contend that as
a practical political matter, President Reagan will have to exercise restraint
because Congress has pressed the issue.

''In a legal sense, it does not limit the President,'' said Representative Les
Aspin, Democrat of Wisconsin, a moderate who voted for the measure. ''But as a
practical political matter, it does have some limitations. He could decided to
buck Congress, but he would pay a price.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 4, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 505 words


Mating Game Labor's Love Unlost

Starting about 1968, the Democratic Party became too liberal for labor. Vietnam
protests, social change and rule reforms led one A.F.L.-C.I.O. official morosely
to dismiss the party as a bunch of kooks, crazies and feminists. A flood of
union members defected in 1972 to vote for Richard Nixon and then again in 1980
to give Ronald Reagan much of his winning margin.

Times have changed, so has the Democratic Party - and so has labor. Unemployment
persists and President Reagan has cut deeply into social programs. New party
rules have restored influence to party elders. And by deciding to endorse a
candidate before the primaries the A.F.L.-C.I.O. has demonstrated that it, also,
is eager to reclaim influence. Too eager, conventional wisdom suggests. But on
this subject, conventional wisdom has a twisted genealogy.

''Stupid'' was the first-stage label, following labor's May 1982 decision to
endorse early. The front-runners then were Edward Kennedy and Walter Mondale,
both longtime friends of labor, and to force a choice, the critics said, would
needlessly split the movement wide open.

''Empty'' was the word for the second stage, after Senator Kennedy quit the race
last December. By conventional wisdom, Mr. Mondale was then labor's obvious
choice, so obvious that a formal endorsement wouldn't mean anything.

''Harmful'' was the third-stage term. As the actual endorsement drew near,
people argued that labor's imprimatur would risk burdening Mr.  Mondale with a
yoke of sordid special interest.  That sounds more like sour grapes than wisdom,
conventional or otherwise. Would any of the other candidates have turned down
labor's endorsement? Not a chance, and anyone who doubts that need only observe
how hard they campaigned for NOW's endorsement (see below).  There are other
possible risks. What if John Glenn or another candidate should win the
nomination? Wouldn't he be sore, even vindictive? Not unless he were intensely
interested in losing in November 1984. He would devoutly wish labor's support,
notably the apparatus by which it communicates with 14.7 million members.  By
endorsing Mr. Mondale, doesn't labor's leadership get too far in front of its
battalions? More than one poll shows that the rank and file marginally prefers
Senator Glenn. But there's little risk of serious alienation. Supporters of one
aren't likely to think of the other as a kook or a crazy.  There was another,
more realistic risk involved in the endorsement issue. For labor's leaders to
have waited to endorse would have risked, once again, being irrelevant. And for
them not to endorse at all risked fragmentation. Individual unions were poised
to confer endorsements. The National Education Association did just that on
Friday.  One way or the other, labor was going to dive into the primary
campaign. The only question was, would it be organized? Answer: yes. Democratic
politics is back in the mainstream and labor is back in Democratic politics.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 4, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FRENCH SAVANT, AGED 78, SUMS UP A SEESAW LIFE

BYLINE: By JOHN VINOCUR

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1145 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Oct. 3


At 78 years of age, Raymond Aron, the scholar and political analyst, has made a
career out of being flagrantly honest and outrageously intelligent. As much as
he is a model of reason, he is also a master of distance, the cold answer, the
indulgent question not asked.

The traits have not always found favor or made Mr. Aron an easy crony to those
in power, but they run through his memoirs, whose publication has become the
French intellectual event of the autumn.

The powerful, Mr. Aron insists, consulted him very infrequently over the last 50
years, and he sought them out just as little in the business of explaining who
runs things and how. Mostly, he says, if anyone wanted to know what he thought,
it was there in a newspaper or magazine article, or in a book.

President John F. Kennedy, Mr. Aron explains, once ran into him in the halls of
the White House as Arthur Schlesinger Jr. was leading him somewhere. It was
shortly after the Bay of Pigs and the President asked Mr. Aron, ''What should we
do about Cuba?'' The answer was, ''Nothing.'' Then there was a pause. ''I quoted
him something from Machiavelli which more or less says: 'If you have an occasion
to destroy your enemy, then do it. If not, wait.' ''

Lebanon? 'Avoid the Worst'

The response may not have been regarded as satisfactory. ''Listen,'' Mr. Aron
said the other day, talking about giving answers that people do not much like
hearing, ''the American believes that when there's a problem, there's always a
solution.''

This came out very softly, politely, as if he wanted it understood that faith in
the total availability of remedies was a youthful foible, not necessarily fatal.
But trying to be nice, he added, ''Of course, there are cases where there are
solutions.'' Lebanon? a visitor asked, hoping to tune in the oracular. ''For the
moment,'' said Mr. Aron, true to his reputation, ''there is no solution. Just
keep talking. Avoid the worst.''

In spite of the world's consistently bad behavior, this is a nice time for Mr.
Aron. Not so much because of the success of the book itself, criticized as
considerably less interesting than others of his works, as because of the
reassessments of his thinking that have accompanied it. There is no way Mr. Aron
could mind headlines in the newspaper literary supplements like the one in Le
Quotidien de Paris last week that read, ''Aron: Our Tocqueville?''

It is probably Mr. Aron's second or third incarnation as a sage in his own
country. A writer who could hardly be described as a man of the left, Mr. Aron
has been revered or reviled by the French intelligentsia in relation to its
changing feelings about Marxism. Grasping what Stalin was up to in the 1950's
and early 60's, it also embraced Raymond Aron. But after the student upheaval of
1968, and his denunciation by Jean-Paul Sartre, Mr. Aron carried for many the
mark of the right, someone so determinedly levelheaded that he seemed to accept
the world, its injustice, its cruelty, as an eternal given.

A Handshake From Sartre

Now the movement is in the other direction. Prof. Pierre Hassner, a former
student of Mr. Aron's, dates the change back about five or six years to the
emergence of the anti-Marxist Nouveaux Philosophes, Solzhenitsyn's writing, and
the disillusionment of the romantic left.

By 1980, much of the old Marxist appetite of French intellectuals, after the
Chinese Cultural Revolution, Pol Pot and Vietnam's boat people, just
disappeared. But Raymond Aron was still there; even Mr. Sartre, his old
classmate and friend, who decided in the 60's that Mr. Aron was an intellectual
royalist, unworthy of holding a university chair, shook his hand. These days,
Mr. Aron has been re-elevated to a perch of such pre-eminent intelligence that a
historian like Emmanuel Le Roy-Ladurie, a favorite of President Francois
Mitterrand, can write, ''Let it please the heavens that our left - I mean the
politicians in power and not all the silent intellectuals - listen to this good
teacher.''

He is bent now, but into an elegant curve, as if his body itself had taken an
interrogative shape. The eyes are blue and the hands quite steady. Both work
economically as Mr. Aron talks - the eyes shutting for a moment to suggest he
thinks less of a political figure than he feels the politician's reputation can
shoulder, the hands, a wave of fingers really, marking paragraphs, chapter
headings in the conversation.

The writer talks mainly about the subjects that have been passionate ones for
him over the decades. There is France and Mr. Mitterrand (''he really doesn't
intrigue me much''), who Mr. Aron believes has no chance of winning the
legislative elections in 1986 if he continues his austerity policies beyond next
year. There is Israel, living, he goes on, in a ''poisoned'' situation, one that
in 20 years will create a new country with as many Jews as Arabs, a two- class
society divided like that of ancient city-states. ''It can last,'' he insists,
''but it's poison.''

'Great Weakness' of U.S.

West Germany today, he thinks, ''no longer frightens with its power, but because
of the possibility of its capitulation to Soviet Russia.'' Once, the West
Germans' prime interest was their alliance with the United States, but now, Mr.
Aron argues, ''their psychological half-reunification'' with East Germany makes
them think as much about how not to indispose the Russians as not to upset the
Americans.

As for the United States itself, he offers a bit of reworked Nietzsche, talking
about the ''fall in its will to power.''

''The great weakness of the United States today is the absence of the will to
power and the fatigue of the people of the United States to carry the imperial
burden, the white man's burden. When 150 military advisers are going to be sent
to El Salvador, it becomes a major issue in Congress. I don't know whether
Reagan's policy is good or bad but I have the feeling that the current weakness
of the United States in relation to the Soviet Union is the fall in its will to
power.''

His own interest in power - Mr. Aron admits to having had a couple of twinges in
that direction - has always been tempered by his quite ferocious need to say
what he thinks. The United States has its own political habits, but in France,
the idea of Raymond Aron in government never would have worked, he says. There
was once a lunch with Valery Giscard d'Estaing and talk about another but no
follow-up.  Looking marvelously indignant, Mr. Aron professes to be floored by
the notion that Max Gallo, a good novelist, could become spokesman for the
Mitterrand Government. ''An intellectual should be forbidden from doing things
like that,'' he says. Now the look is more playful than judgmental. ''Always
agreeing with the Government, never saying the other guy is right: how could I
have taken a job as absurd as that?.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Raymond Aron

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 4, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TV: 13-PART HISTORY OF VIETNAM WAR ON PBS

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1367 words


THE Vietnam War swept over millions of people, altered history, and became the
longest and most misunderstood war that Americans ever fought. The contradiction
is that even as it was fought, it was studied, analyzed and reported, although
when it was over it still seemed draped in ambiguities. ''Vietnam: A Television
History'' does not clarify all the ambiguities, and in its way it even deepens
them. The documentary series, a landmark in television journalism, tries to tell
us what things were, not what we might have liked them to be.

The 13-part series, produced for public television by WGBH-TV in Boston, begins
tonight at 9 o'clock on WNET-TV, Channel 13. The first episode, ''Roots of a
War,'' traces the history of Vietnam through the end of World War II. Tomorrow
night the second episode, ''The First Vietnam War,'' examines the eight-year
battle the French lost to Ho Chi Minh's Vietminh. The subsequent 11 episodes,
roughly chronological, end with the fall of Saigon on April 30, 1975. They will
be shown on Tuesday nights at 9, through Dec. 20.

The series uses television film from the Vietnam era, much of it from ABC News,
as well as footage from film archives around the world, including Vietnam. The
heart of the journalism, however, is in the interviews - of participants,
exponents, and sometimes the merely peripheral. The narration, used mostly to
bridge film seqences, is unobtrusive throughout.

Meanwhile, there are the images, many of them familiar. Vietnam was the first
television war, of course, carried into our living rooms on the evening news.
Again we see the body bags, the armed men in rice paddies, the puffs of smoke,
the distant detonations. Much is repellently beautiful. Phosphorous bombs, seen
from above, throw out clouds of tentacles. Napalm is scarlet against Vietnam's
emerald green.

In nearly all of this, the series is determinedly even-handed. Vietnam produced
a war for polemicists of all persuasions, but the series, delicately balanced,
tries hard not to reach conclusions. On the other hand, some conclusions are
simply implicit in the reporting. The foremost one is that virtually all the
American assumptions about Vietnam were wrong.

The episodes tonight and tomorrow night, for example, establish that Vietnam,
blooded by 2,000 years, was a warrior nation. It was also xenophobic. Communism
had shallower roots than nationalism. The Vietnamese were survivors,
intransigent in even the worst disasters. On tomorrow night's episode, Gen.
Jean-Julien Fonde recalls a conversation with Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap in 1946:

'' 'Listen,' Giap said, 'politics comes before economics. The destruction is not
important. The deaths - one million Vietnamese deaths - are not important. The
French will die, too.' ''

How one regards that statement, as the faith of a patriot, or of a psycopath, is
incidental. The hard fact that emerges on television is that North Vietnam could
not be defeated because it would not be defeated. ''In war we have to win
absolutely,'' General Giap says in a later episode. He calls it the first
principle, the only abiding one, of Vietnamese strategy.

Contrast that with a statement by Lyndon B. Johnson. In a speech in 1965, he
offered North Vietnam a vast redevelopment project on the Mekong River in return
for an end to the war. ''Old Ho can't turn that down,'' Bill Moyers, then one of
his aides, recalls him saying. Mr. Moyers observes that Mr. Johnson seemed to
think he was dealing with George Meany.

In the documentary, President Johnson emerges as a centrist, more concerned with
his Great Society than with making war, more opposed to the hawks' determination
to intensify the war than it sometimes seemed. Certainly he did not deserve the
demonstrators' chant, ''Hey, hey, L.B.J. How many kids did you kill today?'' The
documentary implies that the peace movement, unsupported by most Americans, had
little affect on the conduct of the war. Indeed, by attacking Hubert H.
Humphrey, it probably elected Richard M. Nixon. This seems to have been its most
significant contribution to American history.


In a curious way, the documentary also suggests that American hawks and doves
were right and wrong in equal measure. The hawks were right in saying that only
the most massive firepower, constantly applied, could win the war; even so, they
underestimated Vietnamese tenacity, and they were wrong about monolithic
Communism. In Southeast Asia, it was splintered.

The doves, meanwhile, were right about withdrawing from Vietnam. In the absence
of an all-out war, there was no hope of victory, anyway. The doves, however,
were wrong about Communist intentions and Communist morality. After the war, the
Vietnamese Communists detained 50,000 to 100,000 of their countrymen in ''re-
education'' camps, invaded Cambodia, and at home persecuted their own ethnic
Chinese minority. The prophecy that Frances FitzGerald made in ''Fire in the
Lake'' - ''that the moment has arrived for the narrow flame of revolution to
cleanse the lake of Vietnamese society from the corruption and disorder of the
American war'' - is unlikely to come to pass. ''Fire in the Lake,'' however, won
a Pulitzer Prize.

The documentary finds that North Vietnam, which denied throughout the 1960's
that it was sending troops into South Vietnam, had infiltrated soldiers as early
as 1959. In fact, a history published in Hanoi in 1980 said that North Vietnam
had armed men in South Vietnam as early as 1957. This is not to suggest that the
documentary is not thorough in its reporting, but rather that, even in 13 hours
of television, it is impossible to say everything about Vietnam.

However, there are weaknesses in the reportorial technique. For instance, in the
interviews, we do not hear the questions the subjects are asked, only their
responses. There seems to be no cross-examination. Truth, in a sense, depends on
the discretion of the film editors - on what they leave in and what they take
out.

A somber Henry A. Kissinger, for example, chides President Nixon for ''failing
to find the language of respect and compassion'' with which he might have
addressed antiwar demonstrators after four young people were killed at Kent
State University. In his memoirs, however, Mr. Nixon said that Mr. Kissinger
''took a particularly hard line'' toward demonstrators then, and warned him that
''we had to make it clear that our foreign policy was not made by street
protests.''

Similarly, in ''Years of Survival,'' his memoirs, Mr. Kissinger suggested that
North Vietnam's acceptance of a cease-fire agreement in October 1972, was
something of a triumph. ''North Vietnam,'' he wrote, ''accepted what it had
heretofore adamantly rejected: the continued existence of the Saigon
Government.''

The documentary indicates, however, that North Vietnam agreed only after Mr.
Kissinger had made major concessions, none of them comforting to Saigon. There
is a secondary question that the documentary might also have pursued. Some war
historians have suggested that in October 1970 North Vietnam would have accepted
the same terms that Mr. Kissinger proposed two years later. One wishes he had
been asked about that.


Meanwhile, much of ''Vietnam: A Television History'' shows carnage, the horrors
of cluster, fragmentation and napalm bombs. There are endless pictures of broken
and bloodied bodies, most of them the victims of American firepower. On the
other hand, for this viewer the dreadful images ran together, with the victims
of Communist and American weaponry seen as one. For this viewer, the single
saddest picture was of a Cambodian soldier lying on a cot with his 10-month-old
child. Both had their left arms sheared off. I do not remember whether the
Communist side or the American side was responsible, but it is unlikely that it
matters.

But it is a point in the United States' favor that most, although certainly not
all, of the Americans who are interviewed seem to be weighted by conscience.
They seem to be still grappling with the implications of their roles in the war.
Their old North Vietnamese opponents, however, seem untroubled. The ambiguities,
apparently, are still felt only on the American side.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Ho Chi Minh

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 5, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NOT-SO-BELOVED INDUCTION CENTER IS GUTTED

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 472 words


Unloved but keenly remembered, the old U.S. Army Building in lower Manhattan is
a sidewalk demolition spectacle.

According to plans filed with the city, most of the exterior of the building -
two floors of rough-hewn granite and six of Victorian brickwork - will be
retained, and an 11-story structure will rise over them. According to the
Buildings Department, the workers had no permit for any work. A stop- work order
was issued Monday and ignored, and a second was issued yesterday.

In the building's sight, knots of veterans recall the fears and frustrations
that were once rolled up in ''going down to Whitehall Street.''

''We felt like cattle in the slaughterhouse,'' said Lee Calautti, who was called
to the former induction center in 1961. ''There were nothing but lines, lines
for everything.''

Sculpture Over Archway

Mr. Calautti paused at the archway at 39 Whitehall Street to look at the central
court, stripped of everything but columns and floors, illuminated by windows and
a skylight.

Not that the untold thousands of nervous young men would have noticed it, but a
distinctive feature of the archway is missing - a sculptural massing of cannons
and cannonballs, with banners, a breastplate and a liberty cap, the hat worn by
French Revolutionaries. According to those who have been watching the
demolition, that fell to the jackhammers last Friday.

Memories swept over Mr. Calautti and Ronald Devenuti, a fellow data-processing
consultant. They were much the same memories, though the two were inducted nine
years apart.

''I had to go up a lot of stairs - I almost fainted,'' said Mr. Calautti, who
entered the Marine Corps but did not see active duty.

Mr. Devenuti said, ''That's when you found out the tests were for the Marines,
not the Salvation Army.'' Mr. Devenuti went through the maze in 1952 but missed
serving in Korea by a few weeks.

Except for three years at the height of World War II, the building was New
York's induction center from its completion in 1886 until 1972, weathering many
demonstrations during the Vietnam War. It has been empty since and is not a city
landmark.

Helen Trager worked in the building beginning in World War II, in the public-
relations office, and is still with the Army, in a midtown office. ''You tried
not to think that you were inducting 18-year-old men to go to war,'' she said.
''I'd see boys I went to school with going through. Later, strangers would stop
me in the street and say, 'You're the one that got me into the Army.' I guess I
made an impression.''

The building, according to the plans, is to be converted into a health club by
Fred Manocherian. His office said yesterday that he was out of town.

Mr. Devenuti, when asked how he felt about seeing the structure stripped, said,
''I feel no animosity toward the building.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Army Induction Center

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 6, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

A SALVADORAN REBEL LEADER SAYS U.S. DOES NOT WANT PEACE

BYLINE: By RICHARD J. MEISLIN

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 626 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY, Oct. 5


A leader of the Salvadoran insurgents says that the United States is not sincere
in its efforts to negotiate peace in El Salvador and is instead trying to
regionalize the conflict throughout Central America.

The Salvadoran, Jose Mario Lopez, cited as examples the re-establishment last
weekend of a military pact called the Central America Defense Council and
threats by Nicaraguan rebels to bomb Mexican ships supplying oil to Nicaragua.

Both of these moves, he said, ''undoubtedly'' came at the behest of the United
States.

Mr. Lopez said the Salvadoran rebels were prepared to offer guarantees that
their participation in a Salvadoran government would not pose a threat to the
security of the United States.

Sinking Into Another Vietnam'

In an interview here Tuesday, the 45- year-old guerrilla leader said the United
States would be unable to achieve its military goals without sending American
troops to Central America, and he said the United States was ''sinking, with
each additional step, into another Vietnam.''

The decision to reactivate the defense council came Sunday after a meeting of
the defense ministers of Guatemala, El Salvador and Honduras. The meeting was
attended by Lieut. Gen John F. Gorman, head of the United States Southern
Command.

In a communique, the military leaders said they would ''jointly strengthen the
isthmus' armies, using force, both to defend democracy and protect
development.'' In its overall tone, the communique appeared to offer little
comfort to Nicaragua, which would not be a member of the reconstituted council.

The head of Panama's National Guard, Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega, was quoted
Tuesday as having said that Panama would be a member. Costa Rica, which has no
armed forces, declined to participate.

Threats Against Mexican Tankers

The threats to bomb Mexican oil tankers from the Nicaraguan Democratic Force,
the guerrilla army that is based in Honduras and backed by the Central
Intelligence Agency.

The United States has been urging Mexico to cut off oil supplies to Nicaragua.
An American official here said the embassy had no information that the threats
voiced by the Nicaraguan insurgents had originated with the United States.

Mexican officials have vowed to keep shipping oil to Nicaragua, which they do
for Central American countries under special credit arrangements in a compact
with Venezuela.

Mr. Lopez, a former professor of political science, viewed these actions, along
with the continuing United States military maneuvers in Honduras, as ominous
signs.

He reiterated previous statements by rebel leaders that the guerrillas would
prefer a negotiated settlement, but he said of United States efforts to insure
democratic rule in El Salvador:

''Quite frankly, I don't think it is sincere although I could be mistaken. I
don't believe the United States does not have the capacity to eliminate the
death squads, to control the oligarchy. Why doesn't it do it? Because it doesn't
have the will.''

He said that the Reagan Administration ''continues to deceive the American
people'' into believing that the Salvadoran rebels and Nicaragua could be
defeated without the direct involvement of United States troops.

He said the Salvadoran rebels were being blocked by the Reagan Administration in
their efforts to bring their view to the American public. The Government
recently denied a visa to Ruben Zamora, a Salvadoran opposition leader.

''It is only the people of the United States who can put the brakes on their
Government,'' he said. ''Unfortunately, we lack access to the people of the
United States to tell them we are not enemies of the United States, that it is a
lie that we are a threat to the security of the United States.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 6, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Air Force Indicates a Delay In First Agent Orange Study

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 147 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 5


The Air Force said today it had run into technical problems in analyzing data on
the health of about 1,200 men who sprayed the herbicide Agent Orange over
Vietnam's jungles. As a result, the service said, it could not disclose the
results of the study, expected this month, until next year.

An announcement on a Pentagon bulletin board gave no hint whether unusual health
problems had been detected. ''Technical problems associated with the study were
more numerous and complex than had been anticipated,'' the notice said. ''In
addition, there was significantly higher participation than was expected,
resulting in delays in reporting of data.''

The study will be the Government's first word on whether airmen who sprayed the
herbicide, which contained traces of dioxin, have suffered more health
difficulties than a comparable group of men not exposed to Agent Orange.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 6, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MARTIN F. HERZ IS DEAD AT 66; EDUCATOR AND FORMER ENVOY

SECTION: Section D; Page 23, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 406 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 5


Martin F. Herz, director of Georgetown University's Institute for the Study of
Diplomacy and former American Ambassador to Bulgaria, died of cancer today at
Georgetown University Hospital. He was 66 years old.

Mr. Herz was a Foreign Service officer for over 30 years, and held an important
post in Vietnam during the height of American involvement in the Indochina War.
He served as minister counselor for political affairs at the United States
Embassy in Saigon from shortly after the Tet offensive in 1968 until just before
the invasion of Cambodia in 1970.

Before his assignment to Saigon, he served in the State Department as country
director for Laos and Cambodia. After his return to Washington in 1970 he became
the senior Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization
Affairs and held that post until 1974.

He was appointed Ambassador to Bulgaria in 1974 by President Gerald R. Ford, and
served in Sofia until 1977, when he became a senior research fellow at the
Ethics and Public Policy Center in Washington.

Author of Six Books

From 1978 until his death, Mr. Herz was the director of Georgetown's Institute
for the Study of Diplomacy. He wrote six books and contributed many articles to
professional journals, magazines and newspapers. Among his books are ''The
Prestige Press and the Christmas Bombing, 1970''; ''Images and Reality in
Vietnam'' and ''215 Days in the Life of an American Ambassador,'' based on his
experiences in Bulgaria.

Mr. Herz joined the Foreign Service in 1946, and in his first 20 years served in
American embassies in Vienna, Paris, Phnom Penh, Tokyo and Teheran. While in
Iran from 1963 to 1967, Mr. Herz drafted a report titled ''Some Intangible
Factors in Iranian Politics,'' which pointed to the instability of the regime of
Shah Mohammed Riza Pahlevi.

He was born in New York City in 1917, the son of Gustave L. and Edith
Flammerschein Herz. He attended Oxford University and received a Bachelor of
Science degree from Columbia University in 1937. During World War II, Mr. Herz
served in the Army, rising from the rank of private to major. He received the
Purple Heart and the Bronze Star for action at Anzio Beach in Italy in 1943.

He is survived by his wife, Dr. Elisabeth Kremenak Herz, and a brother, Stephen
V. Hart of San Francisco. A memorial service will be held Friday, Oct. 14, at
12:15 P.M. in Dahlgren Chapel at Georgetown University.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 7, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

The Television War (R)

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 307 words


How does the first television war stand up as a rerun? Public television's ''
Vietnam'' assumes that Americans still care enough to tune in for 13 prime-time
hours, the first two this week. It's a worthy risk. Vietnam is much different
than it was the first time around, on the evening news, but it remains
compelling and disturbing.

What makes it so is the testimony of surviving witnesses, still struggling years
later to make sense of the senseless, and to justify their part in this longest
and messiest of modern wars. It is as if Napoleon's generals were put on the
stand to explain Waterloo.

Here, on camera, are the actors who played crucial roles: Ho Chi Minh's
lieutenants, the last Vietnamese emperor, Bao Dai, and the Allied officers,
British and American, who restored French power in Indochina.

To see and hear these aging witnesses may not ''explain'' the war's origins, but
it retrieves from limbo the passions that moved nations to fight and brings
humanity to what would otherwise be reduced to footnotes. Television's
superiority to print is its power to vivify.  As history, however, the series
seems an illustrated rough draft, and fallible as well. Determined to let
witnesses speak, ''Vietnam's'' makers decline to edit or amplify. Thus the
second program ends with a retired American official asserting that ''we didn't
sign'' and so couldn't violate the 1954 Geneva accords partitioning Vietnam.
That leaves a misleading impression. As Stanley Karnow correctly writes in his
book growing out of the programs, the Eisenhower Administration ''reluctantly
pledged to abide by the Geneva Agreement.'' Having so much influenced the
outcome of the war, television even better than print can keep its memory alive.
It is the stimulus supreme, though often enough the curiosity it whets sends the
viewer back to print.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 7, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

HOUSE VOTES WATER PROJECTS BILL AS OBJECTIONS ARE OINKED

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 677 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 6


With one opponent oinking, grunting and sporting a novelty pig snout, the House
today approved a $119 million spending bill for water development projects,
rejecting arguments that the measure was Congressional pork barrel spending at
its worst.

The bill, passed by voice vote and sent to the Senate, was the second spending
measure approved by the House in the last two days. On Wednesday, the House, 363
to 30, approved and sent to the Senate a $444 million supplementary spending
bill.

The water projects bill approved today was passed despite the fact that the
House Appropriations Committee short-circuited usual Congressional procedure and
included projects that Congress had not previously authorized.

''They had their schnozzles right in the trough,'' said Representative Silvio O.
Conte, Republican of Massachusetts, one of the bill's most vocal opponents. But
he said Congressmen also voted for the measure to protect money for other
favorite projects in their districts.

''They live in fear of that committee, that they're not going to get their
project,'' Mr. Conte said, referring to the Appropriations Committee.

Money for 43 Projects

Mr. Conte predicted the bill's passage at a news conference while the debate was
in progress. He wore a pink pig snout with floppy pig ears, saying he had
planned to wear the novelty item on the House floor but was dissuaded by
members. He did, however, punctuate his formal debate against the bill on the
floor with oinks and grunts.

The bill provides money to start construction of 43 new water development
projects, such as harbor improvements, flood control projects and new barge
locks. Four of the projects would be built by the Interior Department's Bureau
of Reclamation while the other 39 would be built by the Army Corps of Engineers.

Opposition to the bill focused on the fact that 20 of the 43 projects had not
received Congressional authorization.

Under ordinary procedure, such projects go through a two-step process. An
authorization committee first considers the merits of the project and approves a
spending ceiling in one bill. This bill does not actually provide money. That
comes in the second step, when the Appropriations Committee, in a separate bill,
allocates available money to projects that have been authorized.

Special Waiver Received

In this case, an authorization bill for 180 water development projects is
awaiting floor action. But the Appropriations Committee got a special waiver to
move its spending bill ahead of the authorization bill.

Leaders of the Appropriations subcommittee in charge of water projects defended
their action.

Representative John T. Myers of Indiana, the panel's ranking Republican, said,
''These are very high priority items that simply cannot wait for another year or
two years to get started.''

But opponents said this was not true of most of the projects. Representative Bob
Edgar, Democrat of Pennsylvania, offered an amendment to cut the 20 unauthorized
projects from the bill. It was defeated by a vote of 271 to 133.

Veterans to Get Benefits

Most of the money provided in the supplemental bill approved Wednesday, $317.5
million, is for several veterans' benefit programs. Of that, $57.4 million is
set aside for the fiscal year 1984 portion of a Congressional mandated $75
million study by the Centers for Disease Control on the health impact of the
defoliant Agent Orange on soldiers of the Vietnam era.

Also included in the measure is a $69,800 payment to Kathryn McDonald, the widow
of Representative Larry McDonald, the Georgia Democrat who was a passenger on
the South Korean airliner that was shot down by a Soviet fighter plane.

The payment, equal to a Congressman's annual salary, is customarily made to the
spouse of a member of Congress who dies while in office.

The bill also appropriated $42 million to pay for the relocation of homes,
businesses and churches from Centralia, Pa., because of an underground fire that
has been burning for 21 years in an abandoned coal mine beneath the town.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 7, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TERENCE CARDINAL COOKE: A CALM VOICE IN AN AGE OF UPHEAVAL

BYLINE: By KENNETH A. BRIGGS

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 3492 words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


Cardinal Terence Cooke rose to a great height in the Roman Catholic Church
without losing the simplicity and soul of a village priest.

He was the seventh archbishop of New York, named to that high ecclesiastical
post in 1968 by Pope Paul VI. A year later, he was summoned to Rome to receive
the red hat of a cardinal at the unusually young age of 48.

As the successor to Francis Cardinal Spellman, Cooke guided the archdiocese
through upheavals touched off by shifting forces in both the church and the
surrounding society. Unlike his more commanding predecessor, Cardinal Cooke
exercised his authority with reserve and a distaste for public conflict. Though
handpicked by Spellman to take over one of the world's most prominent Roman
Catholic archdioceses, he took a far less combative stance than his mentor,
shying from Spellman's bold exercise of personal and political power. By
comparison, Cardinal Cooke was a mild-mannered, expertly managerial priest who
worked largely through the machinery of the archdiocese to carry out church
programs. ''He has shown great awareness of the complexities of the
archdiocese,'' Monsignor James M. Connolly, head of the archdiocesan personnel
board, said in a recent interview. ''He has been able to listen to all sides. He
has had no fear of listening.'' On some subjects, most notably his steadfast
opposition to abortion, Cooke was a national spokesman for the church. He also
fought for improved welfare benefits in his role as leader of New York state's
bishops. But on most matters he was a somewhat peripheral figure within the
National Conference of Catholic Bishops. He was a genial pastor who exulted in
mingling with his people. He golfed with President Nixon, presented debutantes
and heard the tribulations of the dispossessed.

Aides say his spirit of hope and joy, traits that resounded in his words and
actions, remained with him through the last difficult days of his life after he
learned of his terminal illness. During his leadership of 1.8 million Catholics,
Cooke was hailed as a superb administrator but was sometimes criticized for
failing to state a broad vision for the archdiocese. But he excelled at keeping
the archdiocese's 900 separate corporate entities on solid footing through some
difficult times. As he took the helm, the changes of the Second Vatican Council
were shaking the church, the sexual revolution was challenging Catholic moral
teaching and the city was about to plunge into a fiscal crisis. The Cardinal
responded with a series of steps that shored up archdiocesan finances and broke
new ground. Two of his initiatives became models for the church across the
nation: an inner-city scholarship program to help poor minority students attend
Catholic schools, and an interparish finance project to shore up poorer
parishes. An uproar over the St. Patrick's Day parade this year placed the Cooke
in the kind of highly visible, sensitive position that he liked to avoid. The
crisis was precipitated by the parade committee's selection of a backer of the
Irish Republican Army as grand marshal. The Cardinal's loyalties were torn
between his aversion to the violent tactics of the IRA and his love of the
parade's religious and folk tradition. Characteristically, he found a
compromise, refusing to offer the customary archbishop's salute to the grand
marshal from the steps of St. Patrick's Cathedral but later emerging on the
steps to observe the parade.

Tireless Work With The Poor As a prelate whose heart was never far from his work
with the needy, he campaigned tirelessly for charitable causes related to health
care, social service and education. His travels to meetings and his pastoral
visits took him constantly across the 4,717 square miles of the archdiocese, an
area stretching from Staten Island, through Manhattan and the Bronx to seven
upstate counties. A major shift in Catholic population took place during his
reign. As the result of migration from the city of many middle-class Catholics,
the majority of Cooke's constituents came to be located in the suburbs for the
first time in the history of the archdiocese. Priests serving the 412 parishes
under his care often praised him for permitting a diversity of approaches to
pastoral work.

''He managed to provide a context within which a lot of viewpoints could be at
home,'' said the Rev. Philip Murnion, the archdiocesan parish researcher.
''People could pursue a variety of interests.'' Many who encountered the
Cardinal were surprised by his height, more than six feet, and the ease with
which he could effortlessly move through crowds, bestowing greetings and
blessings along the way. His aides were astounded by his memory for names and
fragments of church business. He was in the tradition of the shepherd caring for
his flock, and his personal gifts aided that mission. By temperment, he was
gentle and warm, solicitous of others and not given to chiding or anger in the
presence of those who disagreed with him.He had an understated quality of charm,
abetted by his extraordinary ability to listen carefully to those to whom he
turned for advice. ''My job, first and foremost, is to be a shepherd and servant
of God's people,'' he once said. ''I have no other desire or purpose in life.''
In an age of ecumenism, the Cooke followed more closely the older tradition of
the archbishop as caretaker of his own domain. Though open to some interfaith
activities, he was primarily parochial and felt at home in his own archdiocese
tending to its business. His participation on the national and international
levels of the church were limited and generally had little impact. But he loved
New York and spent his whole life in the service of the archdiocese.

Marking the 175th anniversary of the founding of the archdiocesae in April, he
bouyantly told a noontime congregation in the state's oldest parish, St.
Peter's: It all began here, so far as the church of New York is concerned.
Thank the Lord for all the blessings of these 175 years.

On the day of his installation in April 1968, he spoke of moderation and the
need for reconciliation.

''Let us improve the institutions and structures that have served us so well,
making them glow with a rekindled spirit of love,'' he said. ''Let us avoid that
iconoclasm which would tear down the past before moving ahead in the present to
build a future.''

Turning to social stresses, he continued: ''In a spirit of love, we must
approach the problems of poverty and racial tension. I pledge the spiritual and
material resources of this archdiocese to uplift the poor, especially the
disadvantataged in our ghettos.''

The problems he faced were monumental. Church finances were strained to the
breaking point because of the mounting costs of running a huge system of
schools, hospitals and welfare programs.

New York City's fiscal collapse added to the crisis by slicing funds the city
provided to help the church run these institutions.

''No archbishop ever had to face external problems as great as Cardinal Cooke
did,'' said Msgr. Eugene V. Clark, who served as the archdiocesan spokesman for
several years. ''He had to cope with 200 board meetings a year, inflation was
the enemy and the church couldn't move fast enough to catch up. He had to face
that kind of thing. He spent a vast amount of time finding ways to keep
afloat.''

Those who looked to him for religious guidance found a leader of deep
spirituality. Others who stood outside religion often said they saw him as a
living exemplar of the beliefs he preached.

He was elevated to the seat of the archdiocese, at a portentous time for the
Roman Catholic church in the United States.

The Second Vatican Council had completed its vast changes in church doctrine and
practice in 1965. The difficult task of putting those changes into effect was at
hand. As Cooke took over, the process of transition was already generating
tension and confusion.

At the same time, racial unrest and opposition to the Vietnam War were creating
havoc on a national scale. That message was brought home in dramatic fashion.

On April 4, 1968, the day of Cooke's installation as archbishop, the Rev. Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. was slain in Memphis, touching off another wave of racial
clashes.

The church became the setting for clashes between liberals and conservatives
over both sets of issues.

Some priests and parishioners believed a strongly prophetic voice was needed at
the helm of the archdiocese to push it in sharply new directions. They were
skeptical that Cooke could fill that role. But others were impressed by his
conciliatory manner, which aimed at consensus and avoided collisions. As he
became engrossed in the myriad duties of running the archdiocese, he won solid
backing. He grew in stature as a manager and a superior with a calming influence
who listened to everyone carefully.

Although he rarely satisfied liberal demands for him to speak out in favor of
social causes such as disarmament, Cooke gave others broad leeway to do so.

On the other hand, while some conservatives urged him to crack down harder on
experiments with the liturgy, he left much of the decision on such matters to
the local parishes, where conservatives could play a strong role. Whether
addressing cultural, political or church issues, Cooke was more an expediter of
established church teaching than an innovator testing the boundaries of a dogma
or a rule. His inclination was to hold his own view in abeyance until an idea
had won the approval of the highest authorities at the Vatican.When Rome had
denounced racism, for example, he felt free to call it a ''sickness'' and urge
for an end to discrimination. By contrast, he was hesistant to condemn nuclear
weapons wholeheartedly, as some of his fellow bishops had, largely because the
pope had not gone that far himself.

A related factor was that Cooke, as military vicar, cared greatly for the
welfare of Catholics in the armed forces.

Some priests remained unhappy with Cooke's conservatism.Last year a group of
priests and nuns publicly criticized Cooke for stating that atomic weapons were
''tolerable'' for the purpose of deterrence and arguing that a limited nuclear
war could be fought. The Cardinal had made the statement in a letter to Catholic
military chaplains. In their protest, the priests and nuns disassociated
themselves from that view in favor of a more total renunciation of nuclear arms.

In the face of many obstacles, Cooke helped reshape the archdiocese according to
the dictates of Vatican II and the pressures under which the modern church must
exist. At the time of his installation, parishes were still well attended and
there were ample numbers of priests and nuns to serve them. In many ways, the
church seemed to be at the height of its strength.

Much of the stability was illusory, however. Powerful forces that no archbishop
could control were racking the church.

Priests and nuns, unhappy with mandatory celibacy or the church's stands on
various social issues, would resign in astonishing numbers.

Some lay people would balk at certain of the changes ordered by Vatican II.
Others would drop out in protest of the encyclical forbidding artificial birth
control.

Furthermore, the financial underpinnings of the archdiocese had become shaky,
requiring fast and effective remedies.

That was the situation faced by Cooke after his formal investiture at St.
Patrick's Cathedral.  Cooke had been known as a longtime chancery official but
his appointment to the top post stunned many church officials. Most had expected
the choice to be Archbishop John J. Maguire or someone from the outside the
archdiocese.

But from a practical standpoint the selection made eminent sense. During the
previous decade, Cooke had been moved rapidly up the promotional ladder of the
archdiocese by Spellman. He began in 1957 as Spellman's personal secretary and
quickly passed through a succession of chancery assignments culminating in his
ordination as an auxiliary bishop with the title vicar general.

Cardinal Spellmen had taken interest in him both personally. For many years, the
younger man lived in the Cardinal's residence and the two dined and traveled
together. Cardinal Spellman had pressed Pope Paul VI to name the Auxiliary
Bishop as his successor.

When the Pope followed this suggestion and made the appointment-three months
after the Cardinals death in December 1967 - the new Archbishop was quick to
express his indebtedness to his mentor

'Awesome Responsibility'

''Here I am with this sudden, awesome responsibility,'' he said shortly after
his appointment, ''only too aware of my weaknesses, struggling with my faults.
Referring to Spellman, he said: ''I'll need his vision and his judgment.'' He
recalled a particular piece of advice from his mentor. ''You can't say yes to
everything,'' Spellman had said. ''When you do say yes, say it quickly. But
always take a half hour to say no, so you can understand the other fellow's side
too.'' In his conversations, Cooke often remembered that counsel along with a
maxim he had received from the other leading influence in forming his outlook,
his father. Michael Cooke, a devoutly spiritual man, once told his son,
''Whatever you do, do it with all your heart.''

A Journey From Obscurity

His own lif in the church was a journey from obscurity to one of the church's
most visible and powerful seats.

He was born on March 1, 1921, the son of Irish immigrants, Michael and Margaret
Gannon Cooke. His father was a chauffeur who for a time whisked the actor John
Barrymore about town and later worked in construction. Mr. and Mrs. Cooke lived
in a tenement on the Upper West Side. Shortly after Terence was baptized, the
family moved to the Bronx and later to West Nyack. His elementary schooling took
place under the Benedictine order.

His mother died when he was 9, leaving his father with Terence, an older
brother, Joseph, and a younger sister, Katherine.

Soon an aunt, Mary Gannon, moved into the Cooke home to assist with the
child-rearing. Though the family's resources were meager, the elder Cooke
managed to eke out funds for violin lessons for his musically attuned son,
initiating him into a lifelong love.

During his years at Cathedral High School, he decided to enter the priesthood.
He went on to Cathedral College and St. Joseph's Seminary, later becoming the
first graduate of the seminary to become archbishop.

Cardinal Spellman ordained him a priest on Dec. 1, 1945, and he took his first
assignment as an assistant at St. Athanasius parish in the South Bronx. His
two-year stay there provided him with his only experience as a full-time parish
priest.

In 1947, he entered Catholic Univeristy in Washington to earn a Master of Social
Work degree and did further graduate work at the University of Chicago. He
returned to New York in 1949, and for the next five years served as a youth
worker for Catholic Charities. At the same time, he taught at the Fordham School
of Social Work and assisted at St. Jude Church in Manhattan.

While at Catholic charities, he showed a skill at fund-raising that caught the
attention of Spellman. The result was his assignment to St. Joseph's Seminary as
bursar from 1954 to 1956.

Thereafter, beginning with his appointment as Spellman's secretary, his star
ascended swiftly. He became vice chancellor and chancellor, then auxiliary
bishop and vicar general.

All the while, he gained vast expertise in the workings of the archdiocese. From
1958, he supervised all constructon in the archdiocese and as vicar general he
personally supervised 175 parishes in Manhattan and the Bronx. He built a
reputation for efficiency, extreme dedication and a genuine sense of
likeableness. Those who worked with him say that by nature he did not seek power
or privilege, and would have been content as a parish priest.

The Cardinal's era saw a striking shift in the administration of the church.
Before Vatican II, church structures were notably hierarhical in both
organization and day-to-day governance. The Council, however, rewrote the
underlying principles.

From that point on, the church was to be run on a conciliar basis. The whole
''people of God,'' as the church was defined by Vatican II, was to share in the
authority. Bishops were to consult with their flocks, consider their views and
grant them influence on decisions. This was a style of church leadership that
came much easier to Cooke than to his predecessor.

Although he shared much of Spellman's theological traditionalism, Cooke was far
more relaxed about opening the decision-making process and decentralizing power
in the archdiocese.

He had been trained as a social worker to engage in group decisions, and that
background availed him well in the formidable effort to recast the archdiocese
along somewhat more democratic lines. Soon after he took over, a group of
priests challenged him to institute several changes, including the establishment
of a diocesan council and the issuing of yearly financial disclosures by the
archdiocese. These and many other requests were met as Cooke, showed his
willingness to comply fully with the spirit and the law of Vatican II. Cooke
reshaped much of the archdiocesan operation in accordance with the Council's
intent.

Terms were set for pastors of parishes, a personnel board was founded to help
deploy the clergy and diocesan-wide studies made recommendations on schools and
parish financing. Out of these studies came two markedly different programs. One
was an interparish financing arrangement whereby affluent parishes shared
resources with struggling ones. The other was a major scholarship program that
helped increase enrollment of minority children in Catholic schools. Diocesan
officials proudly point to the fact that during Cooke's tenure none of the seven
Catholic schools in Harlem were closed. At the height of the protests against
the Vietnam War, the difference between Cooke and his predecessor was vividly
illustrated. Spellman had called for the a ''victory'' by United States military
forces. Cooke, pressed for a response, called in 1972 for a speedy end to the
war while praising American motives. At a St. Patrick's ordination service for
Jesuits in 1971, two candidates demanded that Cooke speak out against the war
and resign as military vicar. They refused to come forward to signify their
obedience to the archbishop. After one protester grabbed the microphone to voice
these demands, a Jesuit superior moved to banish the disruptors from the church.
But the Cooke interceded. Moving to the microphone, he explained that he worked
for peace every day in quite different ways from those of the dissenters,
including his duties as Military Vicar. He invited both men to come forward. One
did, but the other still refused. To the holdout, Cooke said quietly, ''Peace to
you, especially, my friend.'' Since the Cardinal's installation, the numbers of
Catholics in the archdiocese declined from 2 million to 1.8 million, largely
because of the migration of many Catholics to New Jersey and Long Island. But as
the number of Irish and Italian Catholics fell, the number of Hispanic Catholics
rose. At least a third of the Catholics in the archdiocese are now Hispanic, and
their need for pastoral care was very much in the forefront of the Cardinal's
thinking

Cardinal Spellman had begun a program to train priests in Spanish to meet these
needs. Cardinal Cooke took over the project and expanded it. In June, after the
Supreme Court struck down local legislative restrictions on abortion, Cooke
decried the decision. ''When our most basic institutions condone such violent
disregard for life and for family rights, ''the value and nobility of every
human life and every human family are dealt a lethal blow,'' he said. By custom,
the archbishop of New York is titular head of New York state's bishops and, by
canon law, he is military vicar.

The Cardinal took a somewhat guarded stand of opposition to the bishops'
pastoral letter on nuclear weapons, which took three drafts and nearly three
years to complete. Personally aligned with a more conservative stance on
defense, he found some provisions of the letter's strong rejection of nuclear
war to his dislike. Although he accepted the general outlines of the completed
letter, he also moved quickly to assure his military constituents that the
bishops explicitly appreciated their service in the nation's defense. ''Your
profession is peace,'' he wrote to them in May. ''Your ministry is peace. As you
respond to the challenge of peace, you do so with the appreciation,
understanding, support and prayers of your church.''

Despite the many problems facing the church, the Cardinal never showed signs
that his boundless hopes for a better future had faltered, He remained
enthusiastic about the church and spoke confidently about its ability to renew
itself to meet the challenges of the times.



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Cardinal Cooke after his first communion; photo of Cardinal
Cooke with Pope John Paul II; photo of Cardinal Cooke with Francis Cardinal
Spellman in 1964

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 7, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TERENCE CARDINAL COOKE: A CALM VOICE IN AN AGE OF UPHEAVAL

BYLINE: By KENNETH A. BRIGGS

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 3494 words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


Cardinal Terence Cooke rose to a great height in the Roman Catholic Church
without losing the simplicity and soul of a village priest.

He was the seventh archbishop of New York, named to that high ecclesiastical
post in 1968 by Pope Paul VI. A year later, he was summoned to Rome to receive
the red hat of a cardinal at the unusually young age of 48.

As the successor to Francis Cardinal Spellman, Cooke guided the archdiocese
through upheavals touched off by shifting forces in both the church and the
surrounding society. Unlike his more commanding predecessor, Cardinal Cooke
exercised his authority with reserve and a distaste for public conflict. Though
handpicked by Spellman to take over one of the world's most prominent Roman
Catholic archdioceses, he took a far less combative stance than his mentor,
shying from Spellman's bold exercise of personal and political power. By
comparison, Cardinal Cooke was a mild-mannered, expertly managerial priest who
worked largely through the machinery of the archdiocese to carry out church
programs. ''He has shown great awareness of the complexities of the
archdiocese,'' Monsignor James M. Connolly, head of the archdiocesan personnel
board, said in a recent interview. ''He has been able to listen to all sides. He
has had no fear of listening.'' On some subjects, most notably his steadfast
opposition to abortion, Cooke was a national spokesman for the church. He also
fought for improved welfare benefits in his role as leader of New York state's
bishops. But on most matters he was a somewhat peripheral figure within the
National Conference of Catholic Bishops. He was a genial pastor who exulted in
mingling with his people. He golfed with President Nixon, presented debutantes
and heard the tribulations of the dispossessed.

Aides say his spirit of hope and joy, traits that resounded in his words and
actions, remained with him through the last difficult days of his life after he
learned of his terminal illness. During his leadership of 1.8 million Catholics,
Cooke was hailed as a superb administrator but was sometimes criticized for
failing to state a broad vision for the archdiocese. But he excelled at keeping
the archdiocese's 900 separate corporate entities on solid footing through some
difficult times. As he took the helm, the changes of the Second Vatican Council
were shaking the church, the sexual revolution was challenging Catholic moral
teaching and the city was about to plunge into a fiscal crisis. The Cardinal
responded with a series of steps that shored up archdiocesan finances and broke
new ground. Two of his initiatives became models for the church across the
nation: an inner-city scholarship program to help poor minority students attend
Catholic schools, and an interparish finance project to shore up poorer
parishes. An uproar over the St. Patrick's Day parade this year placed the Cooke
in the kind of highly visible, sensitive position that he liked to avoid. The
crisis was precipitated by the parade committee's selection of a backer of the
Irish Republican Army as grand marshal. The Cardinal's loyalties were torn
between his aversion to the violent tactics of the IRA and his love of the
parade's religious and folk tradition. Characteristically, he found a
compromise, refusing to offer the customary archbishop's salute to the grand
marshal from the steps of St. Patrick's Cathedral but later emerging on the
steps to observe the parade.

Tireless Work With The Poor As a prelate whose heart was never far from his work
with the needy, he campaigned tirelessly for charitable causes related to health
care, social service and education. His travels to meetings and his pastoral
visits took him constantly across the 4,717 square miles of the archdiocese, an
area stretching from Staten Island, through Manhattan and the Bronx to seven
upstate counties. A major shift in Catholic population took place during his
reign. As the result of migration from the city of many middle-class Catholics,
the majority of Cooke's constituents came to be located in the suburbs for the
first time in the history of the archdiocese. Priests serving the 412 parishes
under his care often praised him for permitting a diversity of approaches to
pastoral work.

''He managed to provide a context within which a lot of viewpoints could be at
home,'' said the Rev. Philip Murnion, the archdiocesan parish researcher.
''People could pursue a variety of interests.'' Many who encountered the
Cardinal were surprised by his height, more than six feet, and the ease with
which he could effortlessly move through crowds, bestowing greetings and
blessings along the way. His aides were astounded by his memory for names and
fragments of church business. He was in the tradition of the shepherd caring for
his flock, and his personal gifts aided that mission. By temperament, he was
gentle and warm, solicitous of others and not given to chiding or anger in the
presence of those who disagreed with him.He had an understated quality of charm,
abetted by his extraordinary ability to listen carefully to those to whom he
turned for advice. ''My job, first and foremost, is to be a shepherd and servant
of God's people,'' he once said. ''I have no other desire or purpose in life.''
In an age of ecumenism, the Cooke followed more closely the older tradition of
the archbishop as caretaker of his own domain. Though open to some interfaith
activities, he was primarily parochial and felt at home in his own archdiocese
tending to its business. His participation on the national and international
levels of the church were limited and generally had little impact. But he loved
New York and spent his whole life in the service of the archdiocese.

Marking the 175th anniversary of the founding of the archdiocesae in April, he
bouyantly told a noontime congregation in the state's oldest parish, St.
Peter's: It all began here, so far as the church of New York is concerned.
Thank the Lord for all the blessings of these 175 years.

On the day of his installation in April 1968, he spoke of moderation and the
need for reconciliation.

''Let us improve the institutions and structures that have served us so well,
making them glow with a rekindled spirit of love,'' he said. ''Let us avoid that
iconoclasm which would tear down the past before moving ahead in the present to
build a future.''

Turning to social stresses, he continued: ''In a spirit of love, we must
approach the problems of poverty and racial tension. I pledge the spiritual and
material resources of this archdiocese to uplift the poor, especially the
disadvantataged in our ghettos.''

The problems he faced were monumental. Church finances were strained to the
breaking point because of the mounting costs of running a huge system of
schools, hospitals and welfare programs.

New York City's fiscal collapse added to the crisis by slicing funds the city
provided to help the church run these institutions.

''No archbishop ever had to face external problems as great as Cardinal Cooke
did,'' said Msgr. Eugene V. Clark, who served as the archdiocesan spokesman for
several years. ''He had to cope with 200 board meetings a year, inflation was
the enemy and the church couldn't move fast enough to catch up. He had to face
that kind of thing. He spent a vast amount of time finding ways to keep
afloat.''

Those who looked to him for religious guidance found a leader of deep
spirituality. Others who stood outside religion often said they saw him as a
living exemplar of the beliefs he preached.

He was elevated to the seat of the archdiocese, at a portentous time for the
Roman Catholic church in the United States.

The Second Vatican Council had completed its vast changes in church doctrine and
practice in 1965. The difficult task of putting those changes into effect was at
hand. As Cooke took over, the process of transition was already generating
tension and confusion.

At the same time, racial unrest and opposition to the Vietnam War were creating
havoc on a national scale. That message was brought home in dramatic fashion.

On April 4, 1968, the day of Cooke's installation as archbishop, the Rev. Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. was slain in Memphis, touching off another wave of racial
clashes.

The church became the setting for clashes between liberals and conservatives
over both sets of issues.

Some priests and parishioners believed a strongly prophetic voice was needed at
the helm of the archdiocese to push it in sharply new directions. They were
skeptical that Cooke could fill that role. But others were impressed by his
conciliatory manner, which aimed at consensus and avoided collisions. As he
became engrossed in the myriad duties of running the archdiocese, he won solid
backing. He grew in stature as a manager and a superior with a calming influence
who listened to everyone carefully.

Although he rarely satisfied liberal demands for him to speak out in favor of
social causes such as disarmament, Cooke gave others broad leeway to do so.

On the other hand, while some conservatives urged him to crack down harder on
experiments with the liturgy, he left much of the decision on such matters to
the local parishes, where conservatives could play a strong role. Whether
addressing cultural, political or church issues, Cooke was more an expediter of
established church teaching than an innovator testing the boundaries of a dogma
or a rule. His inclination was to hold his own view in abeyance until an idea
had won the approval of the highest authorities at the Vatican.When Rome had
denounced racism, for example, he felt free to call it a ''sickness'' and urge
for an end to discrimination. By contrast, he was hesistant to condemn nuclear
weapons wholeheartedly, as some of his fellow bishops had, largely because the
pope had not gone that far himself.

A related factor was that Cooke, as military vicar, cared greatly for the
welfare of Catholics in the armed forces.

Some priests remained unhappy with Cooke's conservatism.Last year a group of
priests and nuns publicly criticized Cooke for stating that atomic weapons were
''tolerable'' for the purpose of deterrence and arguing that a limited nuclear
war could be fought. The Cardinal had made the statement in a letter to Catholic
military chaplains. In their protest, the priests and nuns disassociated
themselves from that view in favor of a more total renunciation of nuclear arms.

In the face of many obstacles, Cooke helped reshape the archdiocese according to
the dictates of Vatican II and the pressures under which the modern church must
exist. At the time of his installation, parishes were still well attended and
there were ample numbers of priests and nuns to serve them. In many ways, the
church seemed to be at the height of its strength.

Much of the stability was illusory, however. Powerful forces that no archbishop
could control were racking the church.

Priests and nuns, unhappy with mandatory celibacy or the church's stands on
various social issues, would resign in astonishing numbers.

Some lay people would balk at certain of the changes ordered by Vatican II.
Others would drop out in protest of the encyclical forbidding artificial birth
control.

Furthermore, the financial underpinnings of the archdiocese had become shaky,
requiring fast and effective remedies.

That was the situation faced by Cooke after his formal investiture at St.
Patrick's Cathedral.  Cooke had been known as a longtime chancery official but
his appointment to the top post stunned many church officials. Most had expected
the choice to be Archbishop John J. Maguire or someone from the outside the
archdiocese.

But from a practical standpoint the selection made eminent sense. During the
previous decade, Cooke had been moved rapidly up the promotional ladder of the
archdiocese by Spellman. He began in 1957 as Spellman's personal secretary and
quickly passed through a succession of chancery assignments culminating in his
ordination as an auxiliary bishop with the title vicar general.

Cardinal Spellmen had taken interest in him both professionally and personally.
For many years, the younger man lived in the Cardinal's residence and the two
dined and traveled together. Cardinal Spellman had pressed Pope Paul VI to name
the Auxiliary Bishop as his successor.  When the pope followed this suggestion
and made the appointment - three months after Spellman's death in December 1967
- Cooke was quick to express his indebtedness to his mentor.

''Here I am with this sudden, awesome responsibility,'' he said shortly after
his appointment, ''only too aware of my weaknesses, struggling with my faults.
Referring to Spellman, he said: ''I'll need his vision and his judgment.'' He
recalled a particular piece of advice from his mentor. ''You can't say yes to
everything,'' Spellman had said. ''When you do say yes, say it quickly. But
always take a half hour to say no, so you can understand the other fellow's side
too.'' In his conversations, Cooke often remembered that counsel along with a
maxim he had received from the other leading influence in forming his outlook,
his father. Michael Cooke, a devoutly spiritual man, once told his son,
''Whatever you do, do it with all your heart.''

A Journey From Obscurity

His own life in the church was a journey from obscurity to one of the church's
most visible and powerful seats.

He was born on March 1, 1921, the son of Irish immigrants, Michael and Margaret
Gannon Cooke. His father was a chauffeur who for a time whisked the actor John
Barrymore about town and later worked in construction. Mr. and Mrs. Cooke lived
in a tenement on the Upper West Side. Shortly after Terence was baptized, the
family moved to the Bronx and later to West Nyack. His elementary schooling took
place under the Benedictine order.

His mother died when he was 9, leaving his father with Terence, an older
brother, Joseph, and a younger sister, Katherine.

Soon an aunt, Mary Gannon, moved into the Cooke home to assist with the
child-rearing. Though the family's resources were meager, the elder Cooke
managed to eke out funds for violin lessons for his musically attuned son,
initiating him into a lifelong love.

During his years at Cathedral High School, he decided to enter the priesthood.
He went on to Cathedral College and St. Joseph's Seminary, later becoming the
first graduate of the seminary to become archbishop.

Cardinal Spellman ordained him a priest on Dec. 1, 1945, and he took his first
assignment as an assistant at St. Athanasius parish in the South Bronx. His
two-year stay there provided him with his only experience as a full-time parish
priest.

In 1947, he entered Catholic Univeristy in Washington to earn a Master of Social
Work degree and did further graduate work at the University of Chicago. He
returned to New York in 1949, and for the next five years served as a youth
worker for Catholic Charities. At the same time, he taught at the Fordham School
of Social Work and assisted at St. Jude Church in Manhattan.

While at Catholic charities, he showed a skill at fund-raising that caught the
attention of Spellman. The result was his assignment to St. Joseph's Seminary as
bursar from 1954 to 1956.

Thereafter, beginning with his appointment as Spellman's secretary, his star
ascended swiftly. He became vice chancellor and chancellor, then auxiliary
bishop and vicar general.

All the while, he gained vast expertise in the workings of the archdiocese. From
1958, he supervised all constructon in the archdiocese and as vicar general he
personally supervised 175 parishes in Manhattan and the Bronx. He built a
reputation for efficiency, extreme dedication and a genuine sense of
likeableness. Those who worked with him say that by nature he did not seek power
or privilege, and would have been content as a parish priest.

The Cardinal's era saw a striking shift in the administration of the church.
Before Vatican II, church structures were notably hierarhical in both
organization and day-to-day governance. The Council, however, rewrote the
underlying principles.

From that point on, the church was to be run on a conciliar basis. The whole
''people of God,'' as the church was defined by Vatican II, was to share in the
authority. Bishops were to consult with their flocks, consider their views and
grant them influence on decisions. This was a style of church leadership that
came much easier to Cooke than to his predecessor.

Although he shared much of Spellman's theological traditionalism, Cooke was far
more relaxed about opening the decision-making process and decentralizing power
in the archdiocese.

He had been trained as a social worker to engage in group decisions, and that
background availed him well in the formidable effort to recast the archdiocese
along somewhat more democratic lines. Soon after he took over, a group of
priests challenged him to institute several changes, including the establishment
of a diocesan council and the issuing of yearly financial disclosures by the
archdiocese. These and many other requests were met as Cooke, showed his
willingness to comply fully with the spirit and the law of Vatican II. Cooke
reshaped much of the archdiocesan operation in accordance with the Council's
intent.

Terms were set for pastors of parishes, a personnel board was founded to help
deploy the clergy and diocesan-wide studies made recommendations on schools and
parish financing. Out of these studies came two markedly different programs. One
was an interparish financing arrangement whereby affluent parishes shared
resources with struggling ones. The other was a major scholarship program that
helped increase enrollment of minority children in Catholic schools. Diocesan
officials proudly point to the fact that during Cooke's tenure none of the seven
Catholic schools in Harlem were closed. At the height of the protests against
the Vietnam War, the difference between Cooke and his predecessor was vividly
illustrated. Spellman had called for the a ''victory'' by United States military
forces. Cooke, pressed for a response, called in 1972 for a speedy end to the
war while praising American motives. At a St. Patrick's ordination service for
Jesuits in 1971, two candidates demanded that Cooke speak out against the war
and resign as military vicar. They refused to come forward to signify their
obedience to the archbishop. After one protester grabbed the microphone to voice
these demands, a Jesuit superior moved to banish the disruptors from the church.
But the Cooke interceded. Moving to the microphone, he explained that he worked
for peace every day in quite different ways from those of the dissenters,
including his duties as Military Vicar. He invited both men to come forward. One
did, but the other still refused. To the holdout, Cooke said quietly, ''Peace to
you, especially, my friend.'' Since the Cardinal's installation, the numbers of
Catholics in the archdiocese declined from 2 million to 1.8 million, largely
because of the migration of many Catholics to New Jersey and Long Island. But as
the number of Irish and Italian Catholics fell, the number of Hispanic Catholics
rose. At least a third of the Catholics in the archdiocese are now Hispanic, and
their need for pastoral care was very much in the forefront of the Cardinal's
thinking

Cardinal Spellman had begun a program to train priests in Spanish to meet these
needs. Cardinal Cooke took over the project and expanded it. In June, after the
Supreme Court struck down local legislative restrictions on abortion, Cooke
decried the decision. ''When our most basic institutions condone such violent
disregard for life and for family rights, ''the value and nobility of every
human life and every human family are dealt a lethal blow,'' he said. By custom,
the archbishop of New York is titular head of New York state's bishops and, by
canon law, he is military vicar.

The Cardinal took a somewhat guarded stand of opposition to the bishops'
pastoral letter on nuclear weapons, which took three drafts and nearly three
years to complete. Personally aligned with a more conservative stance on
defense, he found some provisions of the letter's strong rejection of nuclear
war to his dislike. Although he accepted the general outlines of the completed
letter, he also moved quickly to assure his military constituents that the
bishops explicitly appreciated their service in the nation's defense. ''Your
profession is peace,'' he wrote to them in May. ''Your ministry is peace. As you
respond to the challenge of peace, you do so with the appreciation,
understanding, support and prayers of your church.''

Despite the many problems facing the church, the Cardinal never showed signs
that his boundless hopes for a better future had faltered, He remained
enthusiastic about the church and spoke confidently about its ability to renew
itself to meet the challenges of the times.



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Cardinal Cooke after his first communion; photo of Cardinal
Cooke with Pope John Paul II; photo of Cardinal Cooke with Francis Cardinal
Spellman in 1964

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 372 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             October 9, 1983 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

'STREAMERS' ADAPTED BY ALTMAN; Film Festival

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section 1; PT2; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Pg. 73

LENGTH: 798 words


''Streamers,'' Robert Altman's screen adaptation of David Rabe's tough, bloody,
sorrowful stage play, is a maddening movie. It goes partway toward realizing the
full effect of a stage play as a film, then botches the job by the overabundant
use of film techniques, which dismember what should be an ensemble performance.

''Streamers'' will be shown tonight at 8:30 at Avery Fisher Hall as the official
closing presentation of the 21st New York Film Festival at Lincoln Center.

Mr. Rabe's play, one of the major hits of the 1976-77 New York theater season,
is confined to a single set, a bleak room in an Army barracks where five
soldiers, under the bleary eyes of two boozy old sergeants, are awaiting
assignment to Vietnam. The young men joke, reminisce, get drunk, fight and, in
the way of foreshortened time in the theater, suddenly find themselves in a
brutal life- and-death confrontation none of them could have predicted, or
prevented.

Much of the power of the play is generated by this limited playing area, which
is another expression of trapped lives. Mr. Altman has not attempted to disguise
the theatrical origins of the film by moving outside this room.

As he did with ''Come Back to the Five and Dime, Jimmy Dean, Jimmy Dean,'' the
director seems to relish the challenges offered by these physical limitations.
Yet, also as in ''Jimmy Dean,'' he then makes what turn out to be all the wrong
decisions in an effort to transform the play into a movie.

It's not possible to shoot such a film entirely from a fixed position in a
middle distance, something equivalent to a seat in the auditorium of a
legitimate theater. However, it also doesn't work to split up the overall view
of the action in an endless succession of medium and tight close- ups, as Mr.
Altman does. These have the effect of putting each actor into his own
clear-plastic envelope, unless he's sharing the film frame with someone else.

I find it somewhat amusing that when ''Streamers'' was shown at this year's
Venice Film Festival, its six principal actors were given a joint award for
their ensemble performing, which is just what the movie doesn't offer.

The actors are good but Mr. Altman's camera, which has an elephantine presence
of its own, upstages them. Each time an actor launches into a big, bravura
monologue, the camera begins to move in on him, ponderously, with the awesome
momentum of the Queen Elizabth 2 approaching her berth. One forgets the camera
is supposed to be recording a performance for fear that it is going to run over
the actor.

These things have the further unfortunate effect of calling attention to the
highly literary quality of the script. Nobody in the theater ever pretends that
what we're watching is reality. Movies, whether they intend to or not, evoke
reality. Thus, much of Mr. Rabe's quite stunning dialogue, so startling on the
stage, comes out sounding like much too much typewriting. Even though the film,
which follows the stage script closely, has been cut, it seems three hours
longer to watch.

Of the actors, Michael Wright, as Carlyle, a bad-mouthing, streetwise black,
comes off least intimidated by the camera. It's a great role and when Mr. Wright
is on the screen the film has a vital life of its own. Mitchell Lichtenstein
plays Richie, the homosexual soldier, so broadly that the question of whether or
not Richie ''is'' or ''isn't,'' which is supposed to be the trigger for the
melodrama, doesn't exist in the movie.

Matthew Modine is good as Billy, the straight soldier terrified of what Richie
may represent; David Alan Grier is Roger, the middle-class black soldier, and
Albert Macklin plays the young soldier who, at the beginning of the film, is
busy slitting one wrist, in this way to win a discharge. Guy Boyd and George
Dzundza play the two drunken sergeants very well, but because of the way the
film is shaped, each seems to be on screen too long.

''Streamers'' is not a movie. It's not a piece of theater. It's something less
than either one.

The Cast
STREAMERS, directed by Robert Altman; screenplay by David Rabe; photography by
Pierre Mignot; edited by Norman Smith; produced by Mr. Altman and Nick J.
Mileti; released by United Artists Classics. At Alice Tully Hall, as part of the
21st New York Film Festival; presented by the Film Society of Lincoln Center in
cooperation with the Motion Picture Association of America. Running time: 118
minutes. This film has no rating.

Billy . . . . . Matthew Modine
Carlyle . . . . . Michael Wright
Richie . . . . . Mitchell Lichtenstein
Roger . . . . . David Alan Grier
Rooney . . . . . Guy Boyd
Cokes . . . . . George Dzundza
Martin . . . . . Albert Macklin
Pfc. Bush . . . . . B. J. Cleveland
Lt. Townsend . . . . . Bill Allen
M.P. Lieutenant . . . . . Paul Lazar
M.P. Sergeant Kilick . . . . . Phil Ward

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 9, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

YEAR-END SPENDING BY MILITARY QUESTIONED

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 31, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 473 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 8


Sixteen senators say they cannot believe the Pentagon can wisely spend $4.2
billion in one day, and they want an investigation into the Defense Department's
buying spree on the last day of the 1983 fiscal year.

''Year-end spending sprees have been found in past investigations by the
Congress and others to have resulted in exactly the sort of wasteful,
unnecessary and even frivolous spending which needs to be eliminated,'' 11 of
the senators said in a letter sent Thursday to Defense Secretary Caspar W.
Weinberger.

In another letter, six senators asked that contracts awarded on that day be held
up for 30 days.

234 Contracts Awarded

On Sept. 30, the final day of the fiscal year, the Pentagon announced 234
contracts worth $4.2 billion. People who follow Pentagon matters said it was the
largest single day of such spending since the end of the Vietnam War.

Normally, the Pentagon announces two dozen to four dozen contracts daily. For
example, 40 contracts worth $777 million were let on the previous Friday, Sept.
23.

Unless a department is specifically authorized to spend money after the fiscal
year ends, any leftover funds revert to the Treasury.

Mr. Weinberger said last week on the ABC News program ''Good Morning, America''
that the spending was ''to fulfill the contracts that have been under
negotiation and in the normal course come up for allocation and award at any
particular time.''

Spending According to Plan

''The fact that it happens to be the last month of the fiscal year is what gets
the attention,'' he said.

''None of the spending was done in order to make sure we didn't have anything
left. Spending was done entirely in accordance with a plan that is a very large
plan and the very size of our spending is dictated by the fact that we did fall
seriously behind in the 1970's and we have a great deal to do as quickly as we
can. It's very expensive.''

The letter to Mr. Weinberger was signed by Senators Jeff Bingaman, Democrat of
New Mexico; John C. Stennis, Democrat of Mississippi; Sam Nunn, Democrat of
Georgia; Gary Hart, Democrat of Colorado; William S. Cohen, Republican of Maine;
Carl Levin, Democrat of Michigan; Pete Wilson, Republican of California; Nancy
Landon Kassebaum, Republican of Kansas; Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa;
Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, and David Pryor, Democrat of
Arkansas.

A separate investigation was asked of Joseph Sherick, the Pentagon's inspector
general, in a letter signed by Senators Bingaman, Cohen, Warren B. Rudman,
Republican of New Hampshire, and John C. Danforth, Republican of Missouri.

Six Senators asked that the contracts be held up for 30 days, including Senators
Rudman, Hart, Pryor, Grassley, William Proxmire, Democrat of Wisconsin and Mark
Andrews, Republican of North Dakota.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 9, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT'S NEW ON THE CORPORATE BOOK SHELF;
AN EXECUTIVE'S IRANIAN ADVENTURE

BYLINE: By Edwin McDowell

SECTION: Section 3; Page 15, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 881 words


On Wings of Eagles by Ken Follett. William Morrow & Co., N.Y. 444 pages, $16.95.

In the early 1970's the Shah of Iran hired the Electronic Data Systems
Corporation of Dallas to organize a computerized social security system for the
nation's 32 million people. By late 1978, however, the Shah was still in power
but his days were numbered and the bankrupt country, in the throes of mob
violence and near-anarchy, owed EDS more than $4 million.

In December of that year, EDS hurriedly evacuated most of its 131 American
employees and their 220 dependents. But the Iranians arrested two company
executives who remained behind after the evacuation, put them in a heavily
guarded prison in Teheran and demanded $12.8 million bail. The two languished
for more than six weeks without any charges being brought against them, until
they were freed in a daring rescue mounted by EDS executives.

The operation involved forged United States military identity cards, misused
American passports, a two- day flight in two Range Rovers across the Iranian
desert and an illegal border crossing. Indeed, the book - No. 3 on The New York
Times best-seller list this week - reads more like a traditional Ken Follett
thriller (''Eye of the Needle,'' ''The Man From St. Petersburg'') than a work of
nonfiction. (It is, in fact, the author's first nonfiction book after more than
a dozen novels.)

At the center of the book stands H. Ross Perot, the Annapolis graduate from
Texarkana, Tex., who quit his job as a computer salesman for I.B.M. and with
$1,000 in savings started EDS in 1962 to sell computer softwear. Before long he
became rich, not just rich but Texas Rich: He owned the majority stock in EDS
which was worth several hundred million dollars, he was sole owner of the Petrus
Oil and Gas Company, which had reserves worth hundreds of millions of dollars,
and he owned tons of Texas real estate. Depending on how you counted it, Mr.
Follett says, Mr. Perot's worth ''was certainly more than $500 million and
probably less than a billion.''

Americans best knew Mr. Perot for having chartered two airplanes in 1969 and
trying to fly into Hanoi with 75 tons of Christmas dinners and gifts for
American P.O.W.'s in North Vietnam. The attempt was unsuccessful, but the
publicity resulted in improved treatment of the P.O.W.'s. It also eventually led
to his meeting Arthur ''Bull'' Simons, the legendary Army colonel who had led
the team of commandos that raided the Son Tay prison camp outside Hanoi in 1970.

When the State Department proved unable to help free EDS employees, Mr. Perot -
feeling personally responsible for the fate of the two men - turned to the
retired officer to lead a rescue team of EDS employees into Iran to bring them
out.

Mr. Follett writes of the 15 volunteers, ''In their business suits, white
shirts, and sober ties, with their short haircuts and clean-shaven faces and
well-fed bodies, they looked like what they were: ordinary American business
executives.'' Two were blacks, most were in their 30's and many were Vietnam
veterans. Colonel Simons called them the most intelligent group he ever worked
with, and he equally praised the speed with which the equipment he requested was
delivered.

The rescue combined courage and luck with Mr. Perot's unswerving commitment. He
chartered planes, hired pilots, and otherwise spent millions of dollars on the
operation. He even flew to Teheran during the disorder to visit his employees in
Gasr Prison, and later took up his vigil in Turkey so he could be there when the
rescue team came out of Iran.

Mr. Perot emerges from the book in an admirable but not adoring light. Mr.
Follett depicts him as singleminded, as sometimes running roughshod over
people's feelings and as occasionally petty. If an employee who had won a
company award decided to leave EDS, for example, Mr. Perot wanted to erase his
name from the engraved plaque. One member of the rescue team, who since parted
company with EDS, is quoted as saying he suspected that Mr. Perot ''wanted to
own his men body and soul. That was why ex-military people got on well at EDS:
They were comfortable with discipline and used to a 24-hour-a-day job.''

Moreover, the book can hardly be considered a blueprint for corporate strategy
in somewhat similar circumstances. While one can rejoice in hindsight that Ross
Perot did not adopt his strategy from a business school textbook, he also is
clearly not bound by the constraints that would inhibit a large public
corporation - or even the United States Government, 52 of whose employees spent
more than a year in captivity when militant Iranians overran the United States
Embassy in Teheran on Nov. 4, 1979, nine months after the EDS captives made it
to freedom.

Moreover, EDS's lawyer was certainly right when he argued with Mr. Perot that
the proposed operation was illegal under international law, that it was risky
for the rescue team and it was risky for the company. Should the rescuers be
captured and executed, he said, their widows could sue EDS and bankrupt the
company.

But those arguments sound churlish in view of the happy outcome, and in view of
a book that is meant to be read not as a textbook but as an adventure story of
commitment and courage. In that respect it succeeds admirably.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of H. Ross Perot with Lt. Col. 'Bull' Simons

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 9, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE CHINESE NOSTALGIA FOR A 'PEOPLE'S WAR' IS FADING

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 888 words

DATELINE: PEKING


For years, Chinese defense strategy revolved around the late Chairman Mao's
dictum of a victorious ''people's war.'' By such logic, even well-armed
aggressors were no match for a guerrilla fighter whose heart was ideologically
pure. The notion had some basis in the long civil war that swept the Communists
to power in 1949, but it has since been overtaken by modern realities like the
deployment of Soviet nuclear missiles along China's northern border.

At the latest round of Chinese-Soviet consultations that opened last week in
Peking, the Chinese have been pressing for the Soviet Union to reduce its
concentration of troops and missiles along the border as one of the
preconditions for more normal relations. The value so far of the protracted
talks, which got under way a year ago, is that they promise some relaxation of
tensions with the Soviet Union while China tries to modernize its industry,
agriculture, science and defense.

The low priority given defense has precluded the 4.2- million-man armed forces
from catching up on weaponry, which remains badly outdated by Soviet or American
standards. But there has been a more perceptible shift in Chinese military
thought, which encompasses a more realistic assessment of modern warfare,
greater attention to technological training and more interest in foreign arms
and tactics.

Chinese ''volunteers'' in the Korean War were stunned by the scope of American
firepower they faced. But the lesson got lost in the subsequent Maoist rhetoric
of the 1966-1976 Cultural Revolution, when the slogan was to ''put politics in
command.'' In the short but bloody invasion of Vietnam in 1979, the army's
frontal assaults contributed to casualties that Western estimates have placed as
high as 20,000 men.  The old concept of the people's war was to draw the invader
hundreds of miles into China and mire him in a demoralizing guerrilla struggle.
But such a strategy in Manchuria, the most likely Soviet invasion route, would
mean yielding a vital region containing 70 percent of China's defense industries
as well ash its largest oilfield and an extensive grainbelt. The Soviet Union
could also neutralize Manchuria with nuclear or chemical weapons rather than
occupy it.

The preoccupation with a people's war has given way to a three-tiered concept of
positional, mobile and guerrilla defense. An aggressor would have to fight past
well- entrenched units, including artillery deployed on the high ground. If he
broke through these lines, he would be hit by mobile reserves of armored units
and possibly paratroopers, though the Chinese air force has barely enough
aircraft to drop two battalions of its three airborne divisions.

Finally, guerrillas would harass the enemy. ''If a war breaks out, we will
mobilize the masses of people to swamp the enemy in the ocean of a people's
war,'' said The People's Daily. But it added that this concept ''should be
enriched under modern conditions.''

The armed forces chief of staff Yang Dezhi, writing in the Liberation Army daily
newspaper last July, disclosed that the stress on training had shifted ''from
anti- infantry to anti-tank warfare, from single services to combined units and
from soldiers to officers.''

There has been a stronger emphasis on discipline and training, particularly in
the officer corps, which must be the first to master advanced weapons and
communications. As of this year, officers are no longer being promoted from the
ranks but must have formal military education.

Resistance to Education

Some career soldiers have resisted the idea of education, which the Maoists
despised as intellectual foppery. Earlier this year, the air force commander,
Zhang Tingfa, warned subordinates that ''it is an erroneous, muddled idea to
look down on technical cadres and hold that one can fight a battle and engage in
construction whether or not one is educated or has acquired technical
knowledge.''

China's achievements in armaments have ranged from exploding an atomic bomb in
1964 to launching a long-range missile in 1979 and firing a rocket from a
submarine last year. More prosaic weapons are mostly copies of what the Soviet
Union gave China more than two decades ago. In one example, anti-tank weapons
must be fired at such close range as to make the mission virtually suicidal for
the crews.

Defense Minister Zhang Aiping maintains it is not possible or practical for
China to look to the West because it can't afford to buy arms. Some diplomats
here see this largely as a pretext for aquiring Western technology that would
allow manufacture in China and maintain an image of self-reliance and
nonalignment. Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger reportedly found the
Chinese more interested in weapons they could acquire from the United States
than Mr. Zhang has let on.

Contacts with the Soviet Union like the current consultations may give China
enough time to forge its armed forces into what party chief Hu Yaobang called at
last year's 12th party congress ''a great wall of steel guarding our socialist
motherland.'' Some officials acknowledge privately they no longer fear an
imminent invasion from the north and are more concerned about maintaining a
military credibility along the southern border with Vietnam and India while the
army waits its turn in the modernization campaign.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Chinese soldiers drilling in Peking

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 9, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS MASS MARKET Mass market paperbacks are soft-cover books
sold at newsstands, variety stores and supermarkets, as well as in bookstores.
This listing is based on computer-processed reports from bookstores and
representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 outlets across the United
States.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 44, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 721 words


1

THE VALLEY OF HORSES, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $3.95.) A fictional saga of
human survival at the dawn of civilization.

2

MASTER OF THE GAME, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $3.95.) The secret behind a
woman business tycoon's rise to power: fiction.

3

ACCEPTABLE LOSSES, by Irwin Shaw. (Avon, $3.95.) A New York literary agent's
life is threatened by a mysterious stranger: fiction.  4

SECOND HEAVEN, by Judith Guest. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Love in various forms heals
three battered people: fiction.

5

TOUCH THE DEVIL, by Jack Higgins. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Tracking down a K.G.B.
agent who has stolen NATO secrets: fiction.

6

DIFFERENT SEASONS, by Stephen King. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Four novellas with
mainly nonhorror themes by a modern master of horror.

7

THE CLAN OF THE CAVE BEAR, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $3.95.) The beginning of
the saga continued in ''The Valley of Horses.''

8

MAX, by Howard Fast. (Dell, $3.95.) The birth of the film industry in New York
at the turn of the century: fiction.

9

THE 13TH VALLEY, by John M. Del Vecchio. (Bantam, $3.95.) The war in Vietnam:
fiction.

10

DRAGON ON A PEDESTAL , by Piers Anthony. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $2.95.) Seventh
volume of a saga about the fabulous land of Xanth: fiction.

11

SPELLBINDER, by Harold Robbins. (Pocket, $3.95.) The rise of a television
evangelist: fiction.

12

A CRY IN THE NIGHT, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Dell, $3.95.) A newly rewed woman is
hauntd by her past: fiction.

13

THE SKULL BENEATH THE SKIN, by P. D. James. (Warner, $3.95.) The mysterious
death of an actress in a castle off the Dorset coast: fiction.

14

CLOAK OF DARKNESS, by Helen MacInnes. (Fawcett, $3.95.) A counter-terrorist
agent finds himself on an assassination list: fiction.

15

GOODBYE, MICKEY MOUSE, by Len Deighton. (Ballantine, $3.95.) Two World War II
fighter pilots in love and combat: fiction.

 TRADE Trade paperbacks are soft-cover books usually sold in bookstores and at
an average price higher than mass market paperbacks. This listing is based on
computer-processed reports from about 2,000 bookstores in every region of the
United States .

1

THE COLOR PURPLE, by Alice Walker. (Pocket/Washington Square Press, $5.95.)
Black men and women in the South: fiction.

2

THURSTON HOUSE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $7.95.) Three generations of a wealthy
San Francisco family: fiction.

3

LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo F. Buscaglia. (Fawcett, $5.95.) Inspirational
talks by a California professor.

4

COLOR ME BEAUTIFUL, by Carole Jackson. (Ballantine, $8.95.) Beauty tips for
women.

5

GARFIELD SITS AROUND THE HOUSE, by Jim Davis. (Ballantine, $4.95.) The further
adventures of a fat cat: cartoon humor.

6

LIFE EXTENSION, by Durk Pearson and Sandy Shaw. (Warner, $10.95.) How to add
years to your life and life to your years.

7

BLOOM COUNTY, by Berke Breathed. (Little, Brown, $6.95.) Cartoon strips
featuring some very odd characters.

8

WHAT COLOR IS YOUR PARACHUTE?  by Richard Nelson Bolles. (Ten Speed Press,
$7.95.) Guide for job hunters and career changers.

9

WILD CONCERTO, by Anne Mather. (Harlequin/World Wide, $4.95.) A brilliant
pianist plays the heartstrings of a beautiful English woman: fiction.

10

MISS MANNERS' GUIDE TO EXCRUCIATINGLY CORRECT BEHAVIOR, by Judith Martin.
(Warner, $10.95.) Etiquette prescribed by an amusingly bossy lady.

11

LINDA EVANS BEAUTY AND EXERCISE BOOK, by Linda Evans. (Simon & Schuster/Wallaby,
$9.95.) How-to by the television personality.

12

THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $4.95.) Philosophical humor.

13

MORE ITEMS FROM OUR CATALOG, by Alfred Gingold. (Avon, 4.95.)

 A second spoof of the L. L. Bean catalogue.

14

THE RAPTURE, by Hal Lindsey. (Bantam, $6.95.) Predictions about an approaching
global event based on an interpretation of the Bible.

15

FIT OR FAT?  by Covert Bailey. (Houghton Mifflin, $4.50.) Exercises for fitness.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 9, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FREE AND CLEAR

BYLINE: By Wendy Lesser; Wendy Lesser is editor of The Threepenny Review.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 15, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 889 words


WATCH TIME FLY By Laura Furman.  184 pp. New York: The Viking Press. $14.95.

THE territory covered in Laura Furman's short stories is already familiar to us
from the work of other New Yorker writers like Ann Beattie and Elizabeth
Tallent. Miss Furman writes about the Vietnam-influenced generation of passively
waiting lost souls, young women and men more concerned with relationships than
with careers, basically urban characters who are nonetheless willing to immerse
themselves in gardening, home repair and other rural/suburban pursuits. Yet Miss
Furman is a more subtle writer than her topics would suggest, largely because of
her restrained style. The stories in ''Watch Time Fly'' are deceptively simple;
they illustrate the way in which masterful skill can disguise itself as an
innocent lack of literary self-consciousness.

New York City is a strong presence in all 10 of these tales. Even the stories
set in upstate New York or in London are about characters who are escaping, in
one way or another, from Manhattan. And the effect of New York's bustling
environment is, paradoxically, to reduce the urgency of time's passage. Faced
with overwhelming activity on the part of hurried millions, Miss Furman's
characters respond by slowing down to a virtual halt. They sit and wait for some
external fate to overtake them.

Mike, the central character of ''Free and Clear,'' is typical of the enormously
ineffectual males who slide through Miss Furman's fiction. ''People in New York
knew him as amiable enough, content to float or rise with no more volition than
a helium balloon.'' Staying by himself at an upstate farm inherited from his
grandparents, he can't even decide whether to invite his latest girlfriend up
for a visit: ''He wanted to write a song about Mary and D.C. married for fifty
years, and his parents for thirty, and he couldn't imagine a weekend with a
girl.''

Nor are the men the only passive ones (though they are, for the most part, more
demanding in their insistence on the comforts of passivity). A sad character
named Arlene goes ''from job to job, licking envelopes, typing addresses, taking
shorthand as if there were no tomorrow.'' And of the title story's central
character, Miss Furman remarks: ''Anna couldn't help imagining her life as an
egg that was cracking very slowly - sooner or later a creature would emerge from
the shell. The coming change was now only an inner conviction, a shape observed
too closely to be discerned.''

Such summary statements are typical of Miss Furman's technique. In ''Listening
to Married Friends,'' for instance, Arla's brief thoughts about the couple she
is visiting convey a large truth about marriage: ''She was puzzled by what she
had heard but she knew that exchanges between couples didn't mean only what they
seemed to. They were part of a larger dialogue, and Arla knew she never heard
the whole of it.'' Structurally, this story resembles many others in the book. A
single woman is confronted with evidence of her own failure (or refusal) to be
part of a couple. The evidence may come in the form of a pair of married
friends, a former lover, a casual acquaintance or a current, rapidly
disintegrating relationship - sometimes all at once - and the effect is usually
to jar the woman into a realization of her own solitariness. For Miss Furman's
characters, awareness does not necessarily bring amelioration; sometimes it is
just a way of settling further into a rut.

PERHAPS because they have so much trouble attaching themselves to other people,
Miss Furman's men and women become particularly attached to things. These
possessions may be as large as a country house or a piece of land, as small as a
set of pre-Columbian beads or a sliver of birch bark taken from one of the trees
on Robert Frost's New England property. In the title story, the crucial object
is an exquisite jewel-studded watch, so tiny it ''might have been created for a
very small woman or a large doll.'' Even more explicitly than the other objects
in Miss Furman's stories, the watch becomes a vessel for the main character's
displaced feelings about lost love, unlived life, exclusion from events. When
she drops it from her kitchen window into an alley and recalls an old riddle -
''Why did the moron throw the clock out the window?'' - the answer, voiced in
the story's (and in the book's) title, comes to stand for all the various kinds
of waiting that define the lives of Miss Furman's characters.

On the dust jacket of ''Watch Time Fly'' is a Jacques Henri Lartigue photograph
of a woman (her apron suggests a cook or housemaid) throwing a large ball into
the air and waiting for it to come down into her arms. Against a dense
background of well-manicured trees, bushes and grass, this woman - a
''civilized'' character in a tamed wilderness - is a perfect representation of
Miss Furman's fiction. The woman is suspended in time, waiting for an inevitable
event (the ball's descent) that will nonetheless never occur in the world of
this photo. Like Lartigue's photographic style, Miss Furman's facility with
words turns the mundane into the slightly eerie, the cliche of common experience
into the bizarrely particular tale. And like Lartigue, Miss Furman manages to
combine apparent artlessness with a moving and very sophisticated esthetic
sensibility.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 9, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EXECUTIVE CAMPAIGN HEATS UP IN SUFFOLK

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINERIP

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 1, Column 5; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1583 words


IN the race for Suffolk County Executive, if you want a man who is opposed to
the opening of the Shoreham nuclear power plant, who has distanced himself from
the Island's business establishment and gained the support of the area's
strongest unions, you will have to vote Republican.

And if, on the other hand, you want a man who accepts the opening of Shoreham,
who has won the support of the business establishment, who has alienated key
union leaders and who attacks county government spending, you will have to vote
Democratic.

None of this is a misprint. It is Suffolk County politics. A month from the
general election, the Republican incumbent, Peter F. Cohalan, a Reagan supporter
who considers himself a mainstream Republican, often sounds like a liberal
Democrat on the key local issues.

And State Assemblyman Patrick G. Halpin, the Democratic challenger, whose career
has always been closely tied to the Island's more liberal Democrats, often
sounds more like a conservative Republican on campaign issues.

''It is bizarre,'' Mr. Halpin said.

''That's Suffolk County politics for you,'' Mr. Cohalan said.


More than anything else, the Long Island Lighting Company's highly
controversial, nearly completed $3.4 billion nuclear power plant has been at the
center of this campaign from day one. Shoreham has become to Suffolk County
politics what Vietnam was to national politics 15 years ago. You are either for
it or against it - there is no middle ground.

Mr. Halpin got a dose of this last June, on the very day he announced his
candidacy. He had not made up his mind on Shoreham yet, he told reporters, and
then he tried to go on to other things such as the Southwest Sewer District and
the need for day-care centers, which, he said, would be key issues in the race.
The reporters consistently and aggressively turned their questions back to
Shoreham.

Throughout the summer those questions followed him, and not just from reporters
- from community leaders, from fellow politicians, from business officials and
from environmentalists. People weren't satisfied when Mr. Halpin told them he
was looking for a middle ground; or that it was ''virtually impossible'' to
evacuate the Island safely if there were a nuclear accident; or that he was
waiting for the Governor's commission on Shoreham to finish studying the issue.

Mr. Cohalan had gone through the same pressures until he came off the fence last
February and announced that he did not feel the Island could be safely evacuated
and so Shoreham should not open.

But for Mr. Halpin, the pressure was that much worse because his opponent had
already taken a position.

By mid-September Mr. Halpin decided he could not wait for the Governor's
commission any longer and called a news conference, saying that he believed
Shoreham's opening was inevitable and it was a waste of county money to continue
fighting it. Mr. Halpin said a lot of other things about Shoreham that day that
might seem extreme in a different context and a different time. He said he
didn't trust Lilco to operate the plant and that the New York State Power
Authority should take it over; he said, as a sign of good faith, that if elected
County Executive, he would move from Lindenhurst to a home located within the
immediate evacuation radius of the plant.

But that has all been overshadowed. In people's minds, Mr. Halpin is the one in
favor of Shoreham; Mr. Cohalan is the one against it.


When Mr. Halpin jumped off the fence and took a stand on Shoreham, a lot of
other people who had been waiting jumped, too - many to the opposite side.

Wayne Prospect, the Democratic County Legislator from Dix Hills, was one. When
they were in the County Legislature together, Mr. Prospect and Mr. Halpin worked
side by side on several issues, including the bottle bill and the early
proposals on Shoreham.

Now Mr. Prospect says: ''Pat Halpin's idea of leadership is to walk through
Suffolk County waving the white flag of surrender on Shoreham. That position
makes him unworthy and unsuited for County Executive.''

And this week, Tom Twomey, the Riverhead attorney, and other Democratic party
committee leaders from the county who are opposed to Shoreham, are meeting to
discuss forming a ''Democrats against Halpin'' group.

On the other side, the Long Island Association, the Island's chamber of
commerce, which traditionally backs Republican candidates, has been dead set
against Mr. Cohalan for his Shoreham stand. ''Cohalan's position on Shoreham has
been totally negative and irresponsible,'' said Jack Wydler, chairman of the
association's political action committee. ''I don't want it - that's all he
says.''

Mr. Wydler said he expected his committee would soon be giving funds to Mr.
Halpin.


There have, of course, been other issues in the race, although in those cases
the differences in the two candidates' positions are often less clear. Both have
good reputations on the environment. Mr. Halpin was a key leader in getting the
Suffolk County bottle bill passed, and that legislation, in turn, became a model
for the new state law. Mr. Cohalan has continued his predecessor John Klein's
widely praised farm preservation program. It is not unusual for either, while on
the political stump, to make passionate defenses of clean ground water - an
issue that seems esoteric to outsiders, but is close to Suffolk residents'
hearts.

County Democratic Party regulars had hoped the financing problems with the
Southwest Sewer District would be a strong issue to use against Mr. Cohalan, but
it does not seem to have captured much attention so far.

Mr. Halpin has also criticized the County Executive's negotiated settlement with
the Civil Service Employees Association earlier this year as exorbitant and a
way for Mr. Cohalan to buy election support.

Mr. Halpin's position has won him support from the L.I.A., but cost him with the
unions. The C.S.E.A., the Suffolk police union and the Communication Workers of
America have all endorsed Mr. Cohalan.

The communication workers represented a particularly painful loss for Mr. Halpin
- they were considered very influential in turning out votes for Mr. Cuomo in
the gubernatorial primary.


Every politician chooses the issues he will not to be controversial on. For Mr.
Halpin in the Assembly this year, it has been the death penalty - which he
supported - and a homosexual rights act, which he opposed. ''I come from a very
conservative area,'' he said. ''There are certain issues where I've chosen to
reflect the will of my constituency.''

Mr. Cohalan has been unusually quiet on the bass bill sponsored by Mr. Halpin in
the Assembly and signed into law by the Governor. It was a law that attracted
wide attention, alienating commercial fishermen on the East End while delighting
recreational fishermen.

''No one asked me to become involved,'' Mr. Cohalan said. ''I really didn't have
enough information on it.''

Superimposed on the strange Suffolk County political picture are the national
politicans who fly in for a few hours to support one candidate or another. At
times, the match-ups seem a bit odd. Senator Edward M. Kennedy, one of the
strongest liberals in the Senate, is scheduled to pay a visit for Mr. Halpin on
Oct. 17.

And Vice President George Bush, a conservative, is due in for Mr. Cohalan this
week.

Mr. Cohalan was asked if the Vice President's visit was a way to assure
mainstream Suffolk Republicans that their County Executive was still a good,
solid bedrock Republican. ''It can't hurt,'' Mr. Cohalan said.


Both men are considered very able, hard-working campaigners who thrive on good,
old fashion handshakes.

They treat the small gatherings as seriously as the large. One day last week Mr.
Cohalan stood in front of the Shoreham nuclear plant with seven women and their
seven babies, while Nora Bredes, executive coordinator of the Shoreham Opponents
Coalition, announced that for the first time ever the group was endorsing a
candidate, Mr. Cohalan.

And that same day Mr. Halpin spent more than two hours with 15 members of the
Hauppauge Industrial Association answering their very different questions about
Shoreham.

Mr. Halpin acknowledges that he is still the underdog in the race. He expects to
raise $225,000, while Mr. Cohalan is aiming for $350,000.

Now that the Legislature is recessed, Mr. Halpin, who holds no other job, says
he puts in 15 hours a day campaigning. ''Basically, I'll go wherever there's a
gathering of people. I need the name recognition.'' During one recent day he
visited a Head Start Center in Patchogue, two taxpayers' associations, and two
bingo games - one at a church and one at a temple.


Each candidate has accused the other of turning the election into a referendum
on Shoreham, but that is probably an underestimation of the voters. Shoreham
affects all voters dramatically in the pocketbook. Depending on which study is
to be believed and depending on whether the plant opens or not, electric bills
on the Island are expected to go up between 56 and 76 percent in the next few
years.

Shoreham is a $3.4 billion plant in a county with a $900 million annual budget.
People pay approximately as much on their utility bills as they do for county
taxes each year.

''There is no middle ground on Shoreham,'' Mr. Prospect said. ''Either the
nuclear plant opens or it doesn't.''

Both Mr. Cohalan and Mr. Halpin agree that in a month a lot more will be known
about just which side Suffolk residents are on.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of candidates for Suffolk County Executive (Page 24)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 10, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
WHATEVER IS, IS RIGHT

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 813 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Oct. 9


The power of television to make us think about the world has never been
displayed as impressively as in the current PBS series ''Vietnam: A Television
History.'' It is journalism without certainties, without stridency. Its detached
professionalism, approaching art, leaves us to the draw the conclusions.

A disaster of missed opportunities: That is one way for Americans to see the
years that preceded our massive military involvement in Vietnam. When Ho Chi
Minh declared a republic in 1945 he paraphrased the American Declaration of
Independence; U.S. intelligence people were on good terms with him. Roosevelt
seemed to oppose the restoration of French colonial rule. But he died, and a
British force helped the French back to power in Vietnam.

Or again in 1954, when the Geneva Conference brought France's role to a muddled
end, the United States might still have decided to live with Ho's Communist
republic. But John Foster Dulles dismissed Ho as a Chinese ''puppet.'' And he
began the fateful effort to build up a separate South Vietnam as a bulwark
against Chinese Communism.

If only Roosevelt had lived, we think. Or if only a few people in Washington had
understood the reality of French colonialism and hence the power of Ho Chi
Minh's nationalism. Or if only John Foster Dulles and his successors as
Secretary of State had been less invincibly ignorant about the ancient animosity
between Vietnam and China.

But there is another way of looking at those events. It is far more disturbing
than the view that accident or ignorance kept the United States from accepting
Ho Chi Minh's legitimacy in 1945 or 1954.

The other possibility is that postwar American governments have simply tended to
be hostile to revolution: so hostile that we have found it hard to accept the
reality of successful revolutions. After all, American administrations pretended
for nearly 25 years, until Richard Nixon ended the fantasy, that we could wish
away the People's Republic of China.

The Chinese example certainly makes one doubt that accidents of personality or
timing can account for such profound missteps in history. If other Americans had
been in office in 1949, would this country have adjusted more rationally to the
victory of Mao Zedong? There would have been differences, but I think the fear
of communism - undifferentiated communism - would have dictated the same basic
result.  A lot of Americans still think of themselves and their country as the
true heirs of Jefferson, the revolutionary who said ''the mass of mankind was
not born with saddles on their backs for a favored few booted and spurred, ready
to ride them legitimately by the grace of God.'' But it is a fact that over the
last 35 years the United States has often resisted fundamental change in the
power structure of third world societies, and refused to accept change when it
came.  If we consider that possible element in Vietnam, then there is a chilling
contemporary relevance to the story. For again and again these days the United
States confronts revolutionary situations and has to decide where its interest
lies.  The Philippines is a current example. When President Reagan canceled his
visit, the crowds demonstrating against President Ferdinand Marcos turned
pro-American. But is the United States really for an end to the Marcos regime?
Should it be?  The view that the U.S. should stand unyieldingly behind the
status quo was stated with unusual candor the other day by The Wall Street
Journal. In an editorial about the Philippines, it dismissed ''pundits who have
told us that we can ride the tiger of revolution by dumping this or that
inconvenient ally.'' In fact, it said, ''The revolution is never going to be on
our side.'' Never? It is true that managing revolutionary transitions from
outside is a tricky business, and history - Iran, for example - gives us no
reason for confidence in our ability to do so. But the view that revolution is
never good for the United States would condemn us to unending support of the
most poisonous regimes, and to self-defeating rejection of accomplished change.
We have followed such a course in Central America, with grim results for the
region and for us. We stuck with the status quo for years, through coups and
oppression. We supported a grisly dictator in Nicaragua, and now we are making
war on the regime that overthrew him. Every time we turn the screw we are
getting closer to involvement in a deeper regional conflict.  The point is not
that revolutionary governments are angels. Far from it. The point, rather, is
the futility of resisting reality. American interests would have been far better
served in Vietnam and China by living with those Communist governments from the
start. There is still time, barely, to understand that change in Central America
need not threaten U.S. security - unless we go on blindly resisting it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 10, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

If It's Friday, It's Managua

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 546 words


The Kissinger Commission's numbing itinerary to Central America - six countries
in six days - leaves little time for digesting information, let alone food.
Nonetheless, it's a useful trip. The whirling voyage of its 12 commissioners
contrasts tellingly with the passivity of American diplomacy, which drifts with
the same lack of choice and purpose that caused Mr. Reagan to summon the aid of
Henry Kissinger in July.

Not that this drift seems to disturb the Administration. Central America, by its
lights, seems ''stable.'' Without committing combat troops, Washington has kept
dominoes from tumbling. Its surrogates bog Nicaragua in a costly war and deny
power to leftist guerrillas in El Salvador. Heading into an election, Mr. Reagan
wants Central America to stay where it is - off the front burner.

But even a flying visit should demonstrate what's wrong with this policy, or
lack of it. In the name of promoting respect for international law and
frontiers, the United States is underwriting an illegal war against Nicaragua's
Sandinistas. The Kissinger team will be landing at the same Managua airport that
was bombed a few weeks ago by a plane supplied, it now appears, by the C.I.A.

And in El Salvador, the itinerant panel will be protected by the same security
forces that menace the democratic cause the commissioners aim to promote. So
flagrant is the current rampage by rightist death squads that it provoked an
angry denunciation by the State Department. With understandable despair, State
blames the Salvadoran Government for not curbing the terror. Surely the blame
also extends to the blank-check aid by which Americans dissipate their leverage.

Similarly confused was the denial of a visa to the Salvadoran opposition leader
who a month before had been sought out by Mr. Reagan's personal envoy. The
pretext for barring Ruben Zamora was that he had somehow condoned violence -
though no one invoked that standard against Roberto d'Aubuisson, the
right-winger who spoke of ''exterminating'' leftists.  Word and deed are also at
variance in Washington's response to the truce proposals of the Contadora
mediators - Venezuela, Colombia, Mexico and Panama. The Administration says it
supports their effort but declines to say what realistic terms it expects to
attain with leftist forces. Those terms will somehow have to square opposition
to guerrillas who want to shoot their way into power in Salvador with support
for rebels who attempt to do the same in Nicaragua.  What most concerns Mr.
Reagan in Central America? Hostile bases and foreign advisers? Democracy and
respect for human rights? The sanctity of frontiers and nonintervention? The
Administration has managed the implausible: It can be quoted on both sides of
every principle currently at stake in Central America. Its game is to yield
nothing and let everyone guess what is meant by selective favors to rebels and
governments, dictators and democrats, forces of law and repression.  When his
commission was formed, Mr. Kissinger looked back wisely at the bitter years of
debate over Vietnam. It was imperative, he said, to avoid ''the same kind of
uncertainty about objectives and about what was attainable that characterized so
much of that period.'' Wise words for a valuable voyage.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 10, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CONGRESS;
HISPANIC CAUCUS IS FLEXING ITS MUSCLE

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 948 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 9


For years, the small band of Hispanic members of Congress were outsiders on
Capitol Hill, bit players in the national political drama who were expected to
deliver votes, not lines. Few colleagues knew much about them.

''I'm continually amazed by the ignorance of members of Congress,'' said Edward
R. Roybal, a California Democrat who is of Mexican ancestry. ''Few of these guys
have ever been out where there are any Spanish people.''

Now that is changing. President Reagan and the Republicans have been assiduously
courting Hispanic voters, and last week the Hispanic Caucus in the House played
a major role in derailing legislation that would revise the immigration laws.

In announcing that he was blocking the bill for this year, Speaker of the House
Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. said, ''It has to be acceptable to the Hispanic Caucus.''

Mr. O'Neill's statement evoked cheers from Representative Robert Garcia, the
Bronx Democrat who is chairman of the caucus. ''It gives me a sense that we're
finally here,'' he said. ''We're part of the system.''

Not everybody on Capitol Hill is so delighted with Mr. O'Neill's decision. To
many lawmakers, it reflects the growing ''balkanization'' of Congress and of the
electorate as a whole.

More and more groups, they argue, have the power to halt legislation but lack
the ability to pass anything constructive. As a result, Congress sometimes seems
paralyzed in the face of critical problems.

''There may be danger,'' said Representative Jim Wright of Texas, the Democrats'
majority leader, ''in the tendency of increasing numbers of people to think of
themselves and their special interests first, and only second in terms of the
national interests of the country.''

One of Smaller Caucuses

With nine members, the Hispanic Caucus is still one of the smaller ones in
Congress. The Black Caucus, for instance, has 21 members, and the Caucus on
Women's Issues has about 100, including 22 women.

But the numbers do not necessarily reflect the political power of
constituencies. It is estimated that at least 25 Congressional districts have a
population that is 25 percent or more Hispanic, and most of them are in key
electoral states such as New York, California and Texas.

The earliest lawmakers of Hispanic ancestry came to Congress from New Mexico,
and the first one to win election from another state was Representative Henry B.
Gonzalez, a Democrat who captured a seat in San Antonio in 1961. Representative
Roybal arrived in Washington the next year, and the Californian remembers that
when he first broached the idea of a Hispanic caucus, ''no one seemed interested
in participating.''

After the caucus was formed in 1976, it concentrated its early efforts on
defending programs for bilingual education and voting materials. Then the 1980
census showed a growing number of Hispanic voters, and redistricting in several
Sun Belt states created new opportunities for Hispanic candidates. Four Hispanic
newcomers were elected to Congress in 1982, increasing the number to nine, plus
two nonvoting delegates from Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands.

The freshmen increased not only the voting strength of the caucus, but also its
political sophistication and aggressiveness. Representative Bill Richardson, for
instance, had served as a Senate staff member in Washington and a Democratic
Party official in New Mexico, and Representative Esteban Edward Torres, a
California Democrat, was a longtime union organizer who had served on President
Carter's staff.

''We are products of the Sixties, of the Vietnam War period,'' said Mr. Torres,
who also worked with Cesar Chavez, the leader of the United Farm Workers union.
''We want greater visibility and a greater voice, and we're more combative than
the older members.''

Moreover, the newcomers have interests that go far beyond the traditional
minority concerns of jobs and social services. For instance, Representative
Solomon P. Ortiz, a Texas Democrat, sits on the Armed Services Committee, and
Mr. Torres is on the banking panel.

Like many lawmakers with identifiable ethnic origins, the Hispanic Congressmen
have discovered that they have a second constituency, people of Hispanic descent
around the country who look to them for guidance. Mr. Torres says he is beseiged
by Hispanic bankers and businessmen from such places as Seattle and East
Chicago, Ind.

Animosities Pushed Aside

While Mr. Garcia, who is of Puerto Rican ancestry, is the only caucus member who
does not trace his roots to Mexico, groups originating in Cuba and other Latin
countries are increasingly active politically. Such national divisions have
hindered Hispanic unity in the past, but the immigration issue so galvinized
Hispanic Americans that many of these lingering animosities have been pushed
aside.

The primary Hispanic objection to the legislation was that it would make it
illegal to hire undocumented aliens. It was felt that any job-seeker who looked
Hispanic might face discrimination from an employer who would rather not take
the chance of committing an infraction.

Speaker O'Neill, who clings to his own ethnic background, had instinctive
sympathy for the complaints of the Hispanic members. In agreeing to block the
bill, he repeated their arguments that it could lead to system under which
people would have to wear ''dog tags'' for identification.

But the caucus members know that their victory could be short-lived and that
their future credibility could depend on whether they help craft a compromise on
the immigration issue. As Mr. Richardson put it, ''We can't be viewed as
obstructionists, and if we don't come up with an alternative, we will have
failed.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Robert Garcia, Edward R. Roybal

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 10, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AMID CHANGE, GLITTER REMAINS

BYLINE: By IRA BERKOW

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 6; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 2097 words


''WHEN I was a boy growing up in Zeeland, Michigan,'' said Jim Kaat, who will be
45 next month, ''the World Series was always exciting. It was that time of year.
The Fall Classic. You got out of school early, and listened to the games on the
radio. Time sort of stood still for baseball.

''Then you grow up, and you look at it through different eyes. But for me it
still hasn't lost that special quality. It's still the World Series.''

Kaat grew up to pitch in two World Series, as did Tom Seaver.

But one of Seaver's fondest memories remains of one afternoon when he was a boy
of 15 in Fresno, Calif., and conveniently under the weather during a World
Series game. Of course he had to stay home from school. His illness is not
uncommon among schoolboys, and the term usually applied is World Series Fever.

For the Seaver fever, the best antidote was watching the game on television - it
was the seventh game of the 1960 World Series. And when Bill Mazeroski of
Pittsburgh hit the game-winning home run, Seaver forgot his ailment and joyously
bounded outside to celebrate, in his pajamas.

For Carlton Fisk of the White Sox, however, the World Series was not as lustrous
to him as a boy as it would be when he grew up, and, with the Red Sox, hit one
of the most dramatic home runs in Series history. The homer, a drive in the 12th
inning over the left-field wall in Fenway Park, beat the Reds in the sixth game
of the 1975 Series.

Fisk grew up in Charlestown, N.H., population 1,285. He said the only two
out-of-town TV stations they got - one from Poland Springs, Me., the other from
Burlington, Vt. - did not carry the Series. ''And I had chores to do, anyway,''
said Fisk. ''And then I'd play basketball in my grandfather's barn. Basketball
was what I fantasized about then. But in 1967 I came back from the Army and the
Red Sox were in that great pennant drive and all of New England was going crazy.
That's when I got caught up in the Series, too.''

For millions of others who may or may not have played in a Series, time did
stand still for baseball in October, and it still does. For them, the World
Series remains special.

The 1983 Series, opening Tuesday night at Baltimore between the Orioles and
Phillies, seems no different in that respect.

Some things have changed: the games are played later in October than they once
were, and there are night games now, and the players wear batting helmets and
not just cloth caps as they did in Babe Ruth's day.

But the excitement seems generally to remain: the two league champions meeting
for the championship of what many still call ''the national pastime''; the
pageantry, from the bunting hung around the stands to the marching bands; and
the national focus, with thousands of reporters from newspapers, magazines and
radio and TV typing and talking their way into millions of homes.


Kaat, who retired last season after a record of 24 years pitching in the big
leagues, will be at the Series this year as a television reporter for ''Good
Morning, America.''

He recently recalled the first Series he played in. It was 1965, and he pitched
for the Twins against the Dodgers.

''I locked up with Sandy Koufax in three games of that Series,'' said Kaat. ''I
guess there wasn't that much television then and I hadn't really seen Koufax
pitch much. And now here he was in person. And I watched him. It was amazing. He
threw so hard, and insisted on having his catcher set a target! Most power
pitchers just try to throw in the strike zone. He was going for the 'x' that
marks the spot. I remember sitting on the bench and saying to Johnny Sain, our
pitching coach, 'I'm like a fan watching this guy pitch - and I'm trying to beat
him!' ''

Kaat did beat Koufax the first game, and then lost the next two as Koufax
pitched a pair of shutouts.

''We were helpless against Koufax in the last two games,'' said Kaat. ''It was a
mismatch.''

The following year, the Dodgers again were in the Series, this time facing
Baltimore. Jim Russo, the Orioles scout, followed the Dodgers for 22 games, and
noticed something about Koufax, holder of regular-season and World Series
strikeout records.

''His fastball started off in the strike zone,'' said Russo, ''but it had such a
rise to it that when it got over the plate it was a ball.'' Before the Series,
Russo, holding a stack of white note cards, told the assembled Orioles team
about his discovery.

''I told them that the National League hitters swing at it,'' said Russo. ''I
said, 'Please don't help him' - I really said please - 'He's good enough. He
doesn't need the help. You have to discipline yourselves.' And they did. Koufax
pitched the second game, and we beat him. And he only struck out two batters. We
won in four straight games. Sandy didn't pitch again. If he had, he might have
adjusted, but I'm glad we never found out.''

For Russo, one of the most stunning single baseball moments came in that Series.

''We had never been in a Series before, and you just can't imagine the
tension,'' he said. ''You could feel how heavy it was, and the players seemed to
be walking with it on their backs.

''Then in the first inning of the game, Frank Robinson homered into the
left-field stands off Don Drysdale. Frank was a player who knew how to win, a
great clutch player. And with that one swing of his the tension was lifted.
Brooks Robinson came up next and hit a homer to the same place, only deeper. And
we were flying.''


For many, like Russo, there are moments that stand out in the World Series, some
that would become part of the American folklore, some even memorialized in
motion pictures.

One of those was in the seventh inning of the seventh game of the 1926 World
Series when 39-year-old Grover Cleveland Alexander of the Cardinals came out of
the bullpen and, with the bases loaded and his team ahead, 3-2, he struck out
the formidable Tony Lazzeri of the Yankees to preserve the victory and the
championship.

Legend has it that Alexander - played by Ronald Reagan in a Hollywood motion
picture called ''The Winning Team'' - liked a nip now and then and was rather
well-lubricated when he entered the contest.

''Alexander was supposed to have been drunk,'' said Gabe Paul, president of the
Cleveland Indians, ''but I was a 16-year-old boy and I was at the game and
sitting in the bleachers, right by the Cardinal bullpen. And I can tell you
positively, when he went into the game he took that long walk - in those days
relief pitchers didn't ride in cars, they walked - and he didn't sway at all. He
had a shuffle, but he walked a straight line.''

One of the most debated moments in World Series history was at Wrigley Field in
Chicago when Babe Ruth did or did not ''call'' his home run shot in 1932 when
the Yankees played the Cubs. Did he or did he not point to center field and
indicate that that was where he would belt the ball?

Ruth hit it there on that time at bat, but was the call real, or is it simply
the stuff of legends, like Paul Bunyan's blue ox, Babe, the distance of whose
horns measured 42 ax handles and a plug of tobacco?

''I was at that game and saw Ruth point, but he wasn't pointing to the
center-field bleachers,'' said Bill Veeck, the former baseball owner whose
father was then president of the Cubs.

''Ruth and the Cubs had been riding each other,'' said Veeck. ''And one guy he
was particularly mad at was Andy Lotshaw, the team trainer. But it was Lotshaw
who he was pointing at, like 'I'll show you.' Babe did say he was going to hit a
home run, he just didn't say where. And he did hit a homer. That's enough of a
feat for me.''

Sometimes, a small, virtually inconspicuous item becomes a glaring center of
concern because it played a pivotal role on the World Series stage. One such
thing was the pebble that many have thought changed the course of the 1960 World
Series.

''It actually wasn't a pebble,'' recalled Tony Kubek, the Yankee shortstop in
that Series. ''It was a hole in the dirt that did the damage.''

It happened in the eighth inning of the seventh Series game, and the Yankees
were beating the Pirates, 7-4. Bill Virdon hit what appeared to be a double-play
ball to Kubek, but the ball hit the hole and bounced crazily and stuck him in
the throat. The runners were safe, Kubek had to be removed from the game, and
the Pirates would go on to win the game, with Mazeroski hitting the Series-
clinching homer in the bottom of the ninth.

Casey Stengel, who had managed the Yankees to 10 pennants and 7 world
championships in 12 years, was dismissed after that Series.

''I think what got Casey fired was not that we lost the Series, but how,'' said
Kubek. ''Casey didn't start Whitey Ford in the first or second games. Whitey
only got two starts in the Series, and pitched two shutouts. Casey never
explained his decision. It was strange, and obviously the owners thought so,
too.''


Once, baseball had little competition as the center for the sports fan's major
interest. And the World Series essentially the only game in town.

Now, seasons overlap - hockey and football are being played at the same time.
And there are such events as the Super Bowl and the National Basketball
Association championship that are relatively new in national importance.

''But I still think that the Series is the only game in town,'' said Bill Veeck.
''Despite the great con job by the other sports - especially football. It's
still the sport of our youth and it means more to us than any other. When we get
older we appreciate it more, its beauty and simplicity, and yet its complexity -
it's a kind of chess game played on a green diamond.''

Gabe Paul agreed, and added, ''Baseball lost some popularity during the Vietnam
War years and a little after. It seemed that people were drifting more toward
sports with more action - maybe more violence. But then people began to come
back to baseball, and you can tell by the ratings on television and the
attendance in the parks, it's as popular as it ever was.''

The historian Bruce Catton wrote that baseball ''is an unchanging pageant and a
ritualized drama, as completely formalized as the Spanish bullfight, and
although it is wholly urbanized it still speaks of the small town and the simple
rural era that lived lived before the automobile came in to blight the
landscape.

''One reason for this is that in a land of unending change, baseball changes
very little.''

The first World Series was played in 1903, in the age when the automobile was
still perceived as a strange and remarkable contraption.

Freddy Parent Sr. played shortstop for the Boston Red Sox in that Series. Boston
beat Pittsburgh and his rival shortstop, the estimable Honus Wagner, five games
to three.

In 1970, Parent was living in a nursing home in Sanford, Me., the last survivor
to play in that first World Series. He lived there until his death in 1972.

He was called for an interview on the eve of the Reds-Orioles Series that year.

It was difficult for him to hear on the telephone, so his nurse, a Mrs.
Woodsome, fielded the questions and related Parent's replies.

Do you still enjoy baseball, Mr. Parent?

''You're damn right,'' he said. ''But I am bothered with the football programs
and also the basketball programs. I am bothered a lot on that account.''

Was interest as great for the World Series then as it is now?

''It must have been. They had to make special ground rules for a two- base hit
that went into the crowd because the crowd broke down the fences and the gates
in Boston. They didn't do as bad as that in Pittsburgh because they were
losing.''

In 1911, at age 35, Parent became a coach under Jack Dunn for the old Baltimore
Orioles. In 1914, they had a rookie pitcher named Babe Ruth.

''I coached Babe more than anybody else at that time,'' he said. ''I remember he
was pitching in the late innings of a close game and there was two outs and the
bases loaded and a dangerous left-handed hitter was up. He got two strikes on
him. I ran out and told Babe to waste a pitch.

''The next pitch he throws right down the middle. Oh gee, a triple. Babe comes
in and I said, 'What happened?' He said, 'I threw it waist high, didn't I?' I
talked to him later when he was in the big leagues and I asked him how his
'waist' pitch was. He didn't like that very much.''

And Freddy Parent, at age 95, still hadn't lost his zest for baseball or the
World Series.

''He watches the games on television and sits on the edge of his chair and makes
comments,'' Mrs. Woodsome said. ''And when something very interesting happens he
taps his cane on the floor.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Grover Cleveland Alexander in 1926; photo of Yankees' Bobby
Richardson and Tony Kubek ; photo of fans running onto field in First World
Series, 1903,Boston; photos of Babe Ruth, Pee Wee Reese, Carlton Fisk, Sandy
Koufax

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TITAN OF SENATE STILL GIVES COUNCEL

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1082 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 10


He laughs and calls himself ''an old fogey.'' At his cluttered desk, he squints
at a sheet of paper and starts to read and mumbles: ''I don't have my best
glasses for reading. Getting old and blind, lucky to be here.''

''I was 78 in April,'' says J. W. Fulbright. ''Don't you think I justify calling
myself an old fogey?''

If young Congressmen still invite him to Capitol Hill for lunch, if foreign
diplomats still visit his small office in downtown Washington, Mr. Fulbright
professes amazement. ''I guess people want to hear an old man reflect about the
past,'' he says.

Not quite. Although he left Congress on the last day of 1974 after 30 years in
the Senate, Mr. Fulbright remains the same shrewdly observant foreign policy
specialist that made him for 15 years one of the most powerful chairmen of the
Foreign Relations Committee and a dominant intellectual force in Congress.

He is gloomy about relations with the Soviet Union in the aftermath of the
Korean Airline tragedy, and says with sadness, even dismay, that United States
foreign policy remains perenially stamped by a ''macho'' and ''John Wayne
approach.''

'We Feel We're the Good Guys'

''We are such a young country,'' he says, slumping in his chair and placing a
cigarette in the center of his lips. ''We feel we're the good guys. Every
contest with the Russians we've got to win. There's no thought that you
compromise. We have this football mentality. Win, win, win.''

In retrospect, he says, Dwight D. Eisenhower was probably the most effective
President in the last 30 years, Richard M. Nixon should be praised for
struggling vainly to reach some accommodation with the Russians and Lyndon B.
Johnson was equally tragic and fascinating.

''He had great personal power, great dedication to the job and I think of him as
very tragic,'' said Mr. Fulbright, seated in his office two blocks from the
White House at the law firm of Hogan & Hartson.

''There was a shyness about Johnson that was unexpected,'' said Mr. Fulbright.
''He was very sensitive that he had little formal education, little experience
outside American politics. I was with him once when he was Vice President and we
went to a NATO meeting in Paris. He had never been to Paris before. He was very
shy, very conscious of the fact that he didn't speak French. He didn't want to
go out. He asked my wife to shop for his wife.''

It was Mr. Fulbright's break with Lyndon Johnson in 1965 over the Vietnam War,
while the Arkansas Democrat was chairman of the Foreign Relations committee,
that remains probably the most publicized moment of the Senator's long
Congressional career. But there were other moments that made Mr. Fulbright one
of the Senate's titans.

Memorable Roles in Senate As the first Rhodes Scholar to serve in the Senate,
Mr. Fulbright was the man who introduced the Congressional resolution that led
to the creation of the United Nations. He spurred the exchanges of students
between the United States and nations abroad in what is called Fulbright
scholarships. He was an early and forceful opponent of McCarthyism.

On a more controversial note, Mr. Fulbright's consistent opposition to Israel's
policies once led former Prime Minister Golda Meir to say that he had never said
a good word about Israel. And Mr. Fulbright himself has been embarrassed by his
past opposition in the 1950's to legislation supporting civil rights.

Following his primary loss in 1974 to Dale L. Bumpers, Mr. Fulbright joined his
current law firm. ''I'm an adornment here,'' he says, smiling. ''I'm an old man
of counsel.''

Plane flights abroad disagree with him now, and he spends the bulk of his time
reading, lecturing, speaking to associates in the firm and lifting the telephone
to chat with his network of friends and former Fulbright students in Washington
and abroad.

What depresses him, he says, is the sorry state of United States-Soviet
relations. ''There is a kind of paranoia on our part about the Russians, about
communism,'' he says. ''I remember talking to Khrushchev when he came here. He
pointed to a mole on his face. He said, 'I may not like this mole, but I've
learned to live with it.' ''

Khrushchev Lesson Recalled

''What Khrushchev was actually saying to me was, in effect, that the United
States may not like the Russians but we have to recognize their legitimacy,''
said Mr. Fulbright. ''And we seem unable to do that. We seem unable to
understand their history and culture. We have this tremendous lack of knowledge
about them, about why they're so sensitive about their borders, so difficult to
deal with.''

''We refuse to accept the idea that we can't dominate them,'' Mr. Fulbright
said.

Asked which President he respected most, Mr. Fulbright replied: ''My respect for
Eisenhower grows almost daily. There wasn't this machismo factor like Kennedy
and Johnson and Reagan. He refused, over great pressures from Dulles and Nixon
and others, to go into Dienbienphu in Vietnam. He did not get us entangled in
these foreign ventures. The country was economically strong. Heunderstood
foreign policy.''

Mr. Nixon, the former Senator said, deserves credit for trying to move towards a
normalization process in the early 1970's with the Soviet leader, Leonid I.
Brezhnev, but ''hawks'' in Congress, led by the late Senator, Henry M. Jackson,
Democrat of Washington, undermined chances of detente. It was Mr. Jackson who
rallied Senate forces to block most-favored-nation trade status for the Soviet
Union until the Communists permitted easier Jewish emigration.

Selection of Presidents

Mr. Fulbright said it was ''absurd'' the way the United States selected
Presidents, compared with European democracies where leaders rose through ranks
and developed experience within a parliamentary system.

''Here we bring in two Presidents - Carter and Reagan - with no experience in
the Federal Government,'' he said. ''The way we pick our President is the
aberration of modern time, the current one fresh out of Hollywood. Absurd! Why
even these small countries in Europe like Norway or Holland or Denmark, even
these countries have more experience in foreign relations.''

''Of course these countries were all occupied by foreign armies,'' he said.
''They know what war is like. This is the only country not occupied by a hostile
army, except in the South, where I come from. Maybe that's why it all looks a
little different for me that it does the Yankees.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of J.W. Fulbright

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ONLY 7 WOMEN HAVE WON NOBELS IN SCIENCE

BYLINE: By WALTER SULLIVAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 3; Science Desk

LENGTH: 566 words


UNTIL Barbara McClintock received the Nobel Prize in chemistry yesterday, only
six women had become Nobel laureates in science among more than 350 winners
since the prizes were inaugurated in 1901.

Social scientists studying the role of women in science said yesterday they were
not greatly surprised by this low percentage because, until recently, so few
women had become scientists. But they said they expected an increase in the
number of women who win the prize because of the dramatic influx of women into
science.

Of the six women who had received Nobel science prizes, Marie Curie won the
prize twice. In 1903 she shared the physics prize with A. Henri Becquerel for
research on radioactivity and in 1911 she won the chemistry prize for her
discoveries of radium and polonium. In 1935 her daughter, Ir ene, and
son-in-law, Frederic Joliot-Curie, won the chemistry prize for synthesis of new
radioactive elements.

In 1947 Gerty T. Cori and her husband, Carl F. Cori, Czech-born researchers
working in the United States, shared the medicine prize for their research on
animal starch metabolism. In 1963 Maria Goeppert Mayer, a Polish-born researcher
in the United States, was one of three recipients for their work in nuclear
physics.  The next year Dorothy C. Hodgkin of Britain won the chemistry prize
for determining molecular structures of penicillin and other substances. Until
yesterday the last woman to win a science prize was Rosalyn S. Yalow, a New
Yorker, who shared the 1977 prize in physiology and medicine for research on
hormone function.

Jonathan R. Cole, director of the Center for Social Sciences at Columbia
University, and his colleague, Harriet Zuckerman, have undertaken an extensive
study of the role of women in science. Dr. Cole said yesterday that in the last
10 to 15 years there had been a ''dramatic'' rise in the number of women
entering scientific careers.

In part, he attributes this to a new perception that such careers are compatible
with married life. It is difficult, he added, to determine to what extent
lessening discrimination against women has played a role.

Once factor in the increasing percentage of women among American scientists, he
said, may be a diversion of men away from academic careers in search of
better-paying jobs. Furthermore, he added, in the Vietnam War, many young men
were drawn toward science to avoid the draft, which is no longer the case.

Dr. Cole said there was no significant evidence to support the arguments of some
people that genetic factors distinguishing the sexes played a role in creating
an imbalance in the number of men and women in science.

In the 1920's, Dr. Zuckerman said yesterday, more women pursued scientific
careers than in the 1950's and 1960's, when only 5 percent of those in physics
were women. Dr. Cole said those in astronomy were slightly more numerous, 8 to 9
percent, whereas in such fields as botany and anatomy the figure was as high as
20 percent.  These were fields given little recognition by the Nobel Prizes and
their specialists were ''sheltered from visibility,'' which may have helped open
the doors for women. Some sociologists, said Dr. Zuckerman, have speculated that
women have been more welcome in new or marginal fields, where the population
density has been low and the subject material has not been ''hot'' enough to
attract pushy and ambitious men.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EMIL MAZEY, LEADER OF AUTO WORKERS, IS DEAD OF CANCER

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 31, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 222 words

DATELINE: DETROIT, Oct. 10


Emil Mazey, who was secretary-treasurer of the United Automobile Workers for 33
years, has died of cancer, the union said today. He was 70 years old.

Mr. Mazey, who held the U.A.W.'s second highest post from 1947 until his
retirement in 1980, died Sunday at Metropolitan Hospital. In 1970, he served
briefly as head of the union on the sudden death in an airplane crash of Walter
P. Reuther, the pioneer U.A.W. leader.

Mr. Mazey was a native of Regina, Saskatchewan, and moved to Detroit with his
family when he was 2. He became involved in the labor movement in the early
1930's as an organizer in the Unemployed Citizens League here.



Dismissed Because of Activity

He was dismissed from at least two companies because of union activities in the
1930's.

He helped organize workers at Ford Motor Company's Rouge complex in 1941 and led
Kohler Company workers in Wisconsin in a 12-year labor dispute that ended in
1965.

Later in his career he worked with other union leaders to organize a series of
rallies in opposition to the war in Vietnam. This led to an exchange of harsh
words between Mr. Mazey and George Meany, the head of the A.F.L.- C.I.O., who
supported American involvement in Southeast Asia.

Mr. Mazey is survived by his wife, Charlotte, of Grosse Pointe Park; a son,
Larry, and two grandchildren.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 12, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE ONLY SOLUTION TO THE CAMBODIAN TRAGEDY

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 463 words


To the Editor:


Elizabeth Becker's Sept. 27 Op-Ed article, ''Cambodian Solution,'' deserves
praise for its originality. It raises legitimate concerns about the question
while providing a very specific solution to the Cambodian drama. However, Miss
Becker's ideas must be dismissed as unrealistic and wishful thinking.

One of the article's major flaws is that she seems to take at face value
Vietnam's claim that its 150,000 to 180,000 troops are in Cambodia to protect
the Cambodian people. The truth is that Vietnam is in Cambodia to colonize it
and make it another of its provinces as evidenced by the recent introduction of
some 400,000 to 600,000 new settlers on top of Vietnam's occupation force and
several other thousands of civilian ''advisers'' assigned to work at various
levels of the Heng Samrin regime.

Other evidence that the Vietnamese are in Cambodia to stay lies in the fact
that, having failed to rally the population to their side through deception and
ruse, they now resort to violence and intimidation.  Indeed, only recently,
during a visit to the Khmer People's National Liberation Front (K.P.N.L.F.)
liberated zones, I listened to accounts of atrocities and torture by Vietnamese
troops as recounted by civilians fleeing Vietnamese-controlled areas.  Many
villagers suspected of having failed in their loyalty to the Heng Samrin regime
or of collaborating with the resistance had plastic bags pulled over their heads
and were allowed to suffocate. Others were placed in empty gasoline barrels and
burned. Still others had their fingers and ears severed by bayonets because they
refused to confess their ''crimes'' to interrogators.  We at the K.P.N.L.F.
believe that the only way to solve the Cambodian tragedy is by strictly
implementing the declaration on Cambodia adopted by the International Conference
on Kampuchea, sponsored by the United Nations in July 1981, and by strictly
adhering to the four U.N. resolutions calling for an immediate cease-fire by all
parties, a total withdrawal of all ''foreign'' troops from Cambodia and an
internationally supervised general election to allow the Cambodian people to
exercise their right to self-determination.

As for the ties linking Vietnam and the Cambodia of the future, only the
Cambodian people themselves could decide as to the kind of relationship the two
countries and peoples will have with each other.

Until the Cambodians can once again speak freely for themselves, pressure must
be applied on Vietnam, a member of the United Nations, by that world body and
individually by member states to force Vietnam to sit down at the negotiating
table.
PENN NHACH, Ambassador, (K.P.N.L.F.) and Deputy Permanent Representative of
Democratic Kampuchea to the U.N., New York, Sept. 28, 1983

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER TO THE EDITOR

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 12, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PENTAGON;
New Breed Of Military Reformer...

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1131 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 11


An Under Secretary of Defense calls them ''the new breed of military reformers''
and says that resisting them poses a problems similar to ''being against
motherhood.''

The official, Richard D. DeLauer, chief of Pentagon research and engineering,
was referring to a group of generally conservative members of Congress, many of
them Republicans, who have become increasingly critical of the way the Defense
Department spends money and of what it gets for the money.

One private lobbyist on military affairs, remarking on the informal coalition
and its relationship with the Secretary of Defense, said, ''They have been
biting Cap Weinberger on the ankle all year.'' The legislators have put forth a
range of legislation meant to change the way the Defense Department has usually
done business, despite sometimes strenuous opposition by the Pentagon and
concern by major weapons builders.

Composition of Coalition

In the Senate, some of the most active and effective members of the new breed
have been Nancy Landon Kassebaum of Kansas, Charles E. Grassley of Iowa and Mark
Andrews of North Dakota, all Republicans. A Senate staff employee jokingly calls
them ''the Great Plains Rebels,'' and the Senators seem to enjoy the
description.

The coalition as a whole is not so overwhelmingly Middle Western in character.
In the House, two leading figures are Representative Jim Courter of New Jersey
and Representative Denny Smith of Oregon, both Republicans. Senators William V.
Roth Jr., Republican of Delaware, and David Pryor, Democrat of Arkansas, have
also been active on some issues.

Of those seven people, only Mr. Courter is a member of one of the Armed Services
Committees, although Mr. Smith was a Vietnam War fighter pilot who flew 180
combat missions. Most of the larger coalition were ''Reagan Republicans'' and
supporters of a strong military establishment. But scandals about overpriced
spare parts, defective weapons and underestimated costs have seemed to
disillusion them. Being brushed off by Pentagon officials only made them more
stiff-necked, some of them said.

Skeptics on B1-B Bomber

Already this year members of the group have guided to passage legislation to
create an independent agency to test and evaluate weapons and military equipment
and legislation that will force the Pentagon to ''reprice'' the B-1B strategic
bomber program.

The testing law might force the armed services to cancel some weapon programs
that fail to meet design specifications, instead of looking for expensive
modifications or changing the rules of the tests, as is now often the case.

The Congressional skeptics do not believe that Defense Department contentions
that it can procure 100 B1- B bombers for $20.5 billion are realistic. Some of
them, such as Senator Grassley, think the entire five-year military plan may be
''underfunded'' by about 35 percent. The repricing law is forcing an examination
by cost analysts who are not part of the bomber program. If it turned out that
the Pentagon really has been ''low balling'' the bomber by understating the
initial cost, it would be an acute, and possibly politically damaging,
embarrassment for the Defense Department.

Senator Grassley and Repesentative Smith last week introduced a bill that would
gradually force the Defense Department to significantly increase the amount of
contracts let after public advertising and unrestrained competitive bidding.
They call it a ''creeping capitalism'' bill.  Only about 6 percent of Pentagon
contracts are now let in that manner.

Senator Andrews, with a group of co-sponsors, is putting forward a bill that
would force the Pentagon to obtain warranties or formal guarantees from military
contractors selling weapons to the United States. Senator Andrews, who is a
farmer, likes to say that if he could not get a manufacturer's warranty on his
tractor he could not get a bank loan to buy it, and that if the same company
that makes and guarantees a tractor transmission also makes a tank transmission
it ought to be able to guarantee the tank machinery.

Mr. DeLauer and Secretary Weinberger, as well as lower-level officials, have
strong, almost passionate, reservations about such measures. He said that more
conventional ''military reformers'' of the past had focused on such matters as
weapons design and strategy.

'Group Has Got a New Agenda'

''That wasn't so tough to handle,'' the Under Secretary said. ''But this new
group has got a new agenda, an agenda which nobody can be against because it is
motherhood. Even the staunch Defense Department supporters in Congress say, 'I
can't support you, they are talking about efficiency and eliminating waste.' The
problem is that some of it is superficial and some of it won't work.''

One confirmation of Mr. DeLauer's opinion about the political allure of the
group's agenda is that the independent testing bill was passed in the Senate by
a vote of 91 to 5 and by acclamation in the House. The amendment to force a
re-estimate of B1-B prices pass easily.

Earlier this year, Senators Grassley and Kassebaum won a fight with the Pentagon
and the chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, John Tower, Republican
of Texas, over whether a middle-level Pentagon analyst, Franklin C. Spinney,
should be permitted to testify to Congress about a study indicating that the
price of future military budgets had been seriously underestimated, .

Senator Grassley had gone to the Pentagon to see Mr. Spinney, but was forced to
cool his heels for a period and then went away unsatisfied.

''Why, my attitude would probably have been a little different,'' Senator
Grassley said in an interview, ''and they wouldn't have had so much bad
publicity if they had let Chuck Spinney tell me in the privacy of my office
those things he eventually said before eight TV cameras.''

'We Must Have Knowledge'

''Knowledge is power,'' added the Senator, ''and if we are going to do our job
on the Budget Committee, we must have knowledge.''

Senators Kassebaum and Grassley expressed the belief that Pentagon resistance to
change risked destroying a ''national consensus'' that he said began to emerge
in 1979 that military spending should be substantially increased. Senator
Kassebaum said, ''My argument to the Defense Department has been, 'You are going
to lose this consensus if you don't try to help us spend this money in a better
way.' They risk losing everything.''

The new breed faces fewer risks. Iowa ranks 47th in military spending among the
states, and has a frugal history on military budgets. Senator Grassley has gone
up almost 20 points to 65 percent approval in one Iowa poll, according to a Des
Moines paper. A North Dakota paper has awarded Senator Andrews something called
the ''Attaboy award.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of government officials

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 14, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE EDITORIAL NOTEBOOK;
Wobblies, Yippies and Youth

BYLINE: JACK ROSENTHAL

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 554 words


Watching the Democratic candidates at the recent New York Presidential forum, I
found myself thinking, ''John Glenn really does look like Eisenhower.'' At that
moment, my daughter, almost 16, asked, ''Is John Glenn the one who looks like
Johnny Carson?''

Johnny Carson? She had a point. The silver-domed star of the ''Tonight'' show
does resemble the silver-domed former astronaut. But it was not a comparison I
would ever have thought to make. To my middle-aged sensibility, the image of the
television comedian will forever be impish and restless, that of the Ohio
Senator solid and deliberate.

My daughter's generation, however, does not carry around remembered images of
the young comedian or the young hero. They are only present-day celebrities to
this large generation of potential new voters. Next year, something like 15
million young people, now aged 17 to 21, will be eligible to vote for President
for the first time. Their voting participation rate will be low, but even so,
about five million of them will vote. How different is their political outlook?
How much do political perspectives change from one Presidential campaign to the
next?

A person probably has to be 8 or 9 How a New Generation Of 15 Million Sees the
World years old to be much aware of public events. Hence if you're about to turn
18, your earliest personal political memory might well be Richard Nixon's
departure from office. Things that happened before are two-dimensional
artifacts. Eisenhower is about as remote as Coolidge. The Yippies are about as
relevant as the Wobblies.  The New York Times/CBS News polls show that such
differences of perspective matter. For instance, when people aged 18 to 24 are
asked if they'd rather watch an important football game or baseball game, almost
70 percent answer football. Only 45 percent of the rest of us say football.
Another difference sounds paradoxical. The Times/CBS poll shows that more people
in the 18-to-24-year-old component describe themselves as liberal - and also as
conservative - than do older people. How can that be?  For one thing, the
younger group is more extreme; fewer of them call themselves moderates. A second
explanation is offered by Mark Penn of Penn & Schoen, the political polling
firm: Many young people are in fact more liberal and more conservative than the
rest of the population. They're much more liberal on social issues like civil
rights and women's rights. They're as conservative, or more so, on economic
issues like balancing the budget.

The polls offer another paradox, harder to explain. Though the 18-to-
24-year-olds are more likely than older adults to approve of President Reagan's
performance in office, they also are much more likely to fear he'll get the
country into war.

Still, young adults are considerably more optimistic about the future than older
adults - and decidedly more optimistic than their counterparts of a decade ago.

Won't differences like these evaporate with age? Maybe, but often they are
rooted in experience. The Vietnam War critics of 10 years ago retain their
relative pessimism. Today's young adults are products of a time of tolerance
about racial and women's issues. The tolerant opinions they hold on these issues
are likely portents. Their politics, like their image of celebrities, will be
their own.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 14, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

JUDGE WITHDRAWS FROM SUITS OVER AGENT ORANGE

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 912 words


The judge who since 1979 has been presiding over the multibillion-dollar lawsuit
by Vietnam veterans against manufacturers of the defoliant Agent Orange
unexpectedly withdrew from the case yesterday, citing the ''increasing
pressure'' of other court duties.

The surprise action by Judge George C. Pratt of the United States Court of
Appeals for the Second Circuit raised immediate questions about the future of
the litigation. But a successor was designated and assurances given that a jury
trial remained set for next year.

Chief Judge Jack B. Weinstein of the Federal District Court for the Eastern
District of New York has agreed to replace Judge Pratt in the case, according to
judicial sources. Judge Weinstein, while declining public comment on the report,
said he did not think the complex case would be set back.

''It'll be like a relay race,'' the 62- year-old Judge Weinstein said. ''The
next judge will pick up the baton and run with it without missing a beat.''

Claims by 20,000 Veterans

The litigation, involves assertions by about 20,000 Vietnam veterans around the
country and abroad that they or their later offspring suffered long-term
injuries themselves from exposure to dioxin that the chemicals companies knew
was in the herbicide when they sold it to the Federal Government.

The companies say that the Government knew as much as they did about any
potential dangers. The veterans may not sue the Government.

Judge Pratt's handling of the case was extolled yesterday by both sides. The Dow
Chemical Company, a prime defendant and target of some of his key rulings,
called the judge ''fair-minded'' and said his departure was ''a significant loss
to the case.''

Victor John Yannacone Jr., a leading attorney for the veterans, said Judge Pratt
had earned ''the heartfelt thanks of veterans around the country.''

The withdrawal came after more than a year of presiding on Long Island over the
Agent Orange case while serving at the same time on the Federal appeals panel in
Manhattan. He received the Agent Orange case in April 1979 while he was a
Federal district judge sitting in Westbury.

Status Raised, He Kept Case

With judicial approval, he continued to preside over the case since his
elevation by President Reagan in July 1982 to the 11-member Second Circuit
panel.

The withdrawal of the 55-year-old Judge Pratt stunned the Federal courthouse in
Uniondale, L.I. when it was announced. Sol Schreiber, a ''special master'' Judge
Pratt had appointed to handle depositions and other pretrial litigation, read
aloud a letter the judge had written to Judge Andrew A. Caffrey, chairman of the
Federal Panel on Multijudicial Litigation, in Boston.

''It is with deep regret,'' the judge wrote, ''that I find that the increasing
pressure of work in the Circuit Court makes it impossible for me to continue as
the transferee judge in the Agent Orange litigation. I would appreciate it if
you would have your committee reassign this matter to another judge effective
Tuesday, Oct. 18, 1983.'' Judge Pratt declined to be interviewed about his
decision.

No Warning, Lawyers Say

Attorneys involved in the case said they had been given no warning of the
action. Some said they knew the judge had been bearing an increasingly difficult
burden in keeping up with the Agent Orange case and serving on the appeals
court.

The future of the ''special master'' remained unresolved, but Judge Pratt
instructed Mr. Schreiber, a Manhattan lawyer, to continue his work.

Judge Pratt's withdrawal followed by several weeks a period of some dissension
among the veterans' lawyers. Some attorneys said they were unable to go on
shouldering the costs of representing their clients on a contingency basis. The
lawyers' l management committee was then reorganized under the leadership of
Benton Musselwhite of Houston, Thomas Henderson of Pittsburgh and Steven
Schlegel of Chicago. They represent up to 700 lawyers and their veterans as far
away as Australia who are clients.

Reports of Settlemen Feeler

One lawyer estimated that the defense had cost the chemical companies up to $20
million a year to date. In addition to Dow, based in Midland, Mich., the
defendants are the Monsanto Company of St. Louis; the Diamond Shamrock
Corporation of Dallas; Uniroyal Inc., of Middlebury, Conn., and the T. H.
Agriculture and Nutrition Company of Kansas City, Mo. Five other original
defendants were dropped.

There have been some tentative talks about a possible settlement with Dow,
according to lawyers. One said the veterans' side had approached Dow's attorneys
with a feeler in the area of $50 million. Asked about the report, a Dow
spokesman, Robert Charlton, said that ''we've been approached on a couple of
occasions to identify our interest'' but that ''the discussion never reached the
point of settlement negotiations.''

Judge Pratt has shaped the case in crucial ways while presiding at the same time
over trials and appeals in the Abscam investigation.In December 1980 he ruled
that the veterans could join in a class-action suit against the manufacturers.
He also ruled that the companies in the case could not sue the Government.

In May, Judge Pratt ruled that there was enough evidence that the companies
might have withheld sufficient critical data on the dangers of Agent Orange that
the case could go to trial before a jury. The trial is now expected around the
middle of 1984.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Judge George C. Pratt

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 14, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Publishing: U.S. Show Abroad

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 32, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 713 words

DATELINE: FRANKFURT, Oct. 13


One of the least impressive of the nearly 6,000 exhibits from 77 nations at the
Frankfurt Book Fair is the tiny booth that is being shared by the United States
Information Agency, the Association of American Publishers and the Association
of American University Presses.

Unlike the lavish displays mounted by the British Council, the French Office de
Promotion de l'Edition Fran,caise and those of West Germany and Canada, the
American offering features no striking displays or thematic groupings of books -
indeed, there are very few books visible at all. Instead, there is a computer to
tell what American books are available from various publishers. But when a
foreign publisher inquired Wednesday about the availability of computer books,
the machine chose that moment to go on the blink.

That incident more or less mirrors the recent fortunes of the United States
Information Agency, whose book promotion programs have been sputtering for a
decade or more. While American officials here were embarrassed about the
computer failure, they also count themselves lucky to be here for the first time
since 1975. Moreover, they plan to move on to the Cairo book fair in January, to
New Delhi the following month, then on to Karachi, Pakistan, and elsewhere.

'A Modest Beginning'

''Our presence at these fairs isn't intended to knock anybody flat,'' said Guy
Story Brown, director of the agency's Office of Cultural Centers and Resources.
''This is a very modest beginning, but it has the potential to have very strong
international reverberations.''

What the agency is attempting to do in a modest way is to display American books
to the world and to help foreign publishers and librarians find the proper
publishing company or official when they make inquiries.

Jennifer Creswick, a member of the British Council staff, said, ''We get
thousands of inquires during the week we're in Frankfurt.''

It will be a long time before the United States Information Agency gets that
many, although one recent morning publishers from Nigeria, Spain, Indonesia,
Japan and several Eastern European countries dropped by to ask about publishers,
copyrights or the availability of individual titles. Another morning, four Latin
publishers were gathered around the agency's new Spanish-language booklet, which
lists the many American books that have been translated into Spanish.

Contrast With 1960's

All this is a far cry from the 1960's and early 1970's when the agency had half
a dozen programs aimed at sending American books abroad. It underwrote the cost
of producing low-cost American volumes - more than 12.5 million in 1965 alone -
translated into Japanese, Chinese, Arabic, Greek, Turkish and seven or eight
languages in India. It financed low-cost paperback books in English for students
in Africa, Asia and Latin America, and it distributed millions of books
overseas, most of them donated by book publishers from unsalable overstocks.

All these book programs were directed at promoting American culture. But little
by little the programs were scaled back. This resulted partly from financial
reasons, partly because the controversy and bitterness surrounding the Vietnam
War caused many Americans to question the value of the culture that was to be
exported, and partly because often the information agency bit off more than it
could chew.

In a recent report by Curtis G. Benjamin for the Center for the Book, a part of
the Library of Congress, the author recounts how books published by the agency
piled up in warehouses, how its ''French for Africa'' project failed for lack of
an adequate distribution system and how its donated books program cost too much
to sort and ship. And when the Internal Revenue Service in 1969 allowed
publishers to write off only the manufacturing cost of the books they donated,
instead of the retail value, donations plummeted from several million annually
to about 100,000 in 1981.

There is little chance that the agency would be given free rein to repeat those
grandiose projects even if its directors were so inclined. But after eight years
out in the cold, the agency at least has its foot in the door. Therefore agency
spirits are high here at the moment, dampened only slightly by the failure of
that wayward computer.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 14, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
Shaklee Fills No. 2 Post After a Yearlong Hunt

BYLINE: By Daniel F. Cuff

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 208 words


The Shaklee Corporation, a maker of household and personal-care products based
in San Francisco, has named David M. Chamberlain, a Nabisco executive in Canada,
president and chief operating officer.

Shaklee, which markets its products through an independent sales force of some
two million distributors, began searching for a chief operating officer when J.
Gary Shansby was named chairman and chief executive a year ago.

Mr. Chamberlain said yesterday that Shaklee's business is not totally similar to
what he has been used to. ''But it is a consumer-oriented business and my
experience has been in consumer marketing, as well as general management,'' he
said.

Mr. Chamblerlain, who is 40, is senior vice president and group executive of
Nabisco Brands Ltd. of Canada, a division of Nabisco Brands. Before that, he was
president of Standard Brands Foods of New York, a unit of Standard Brands, which
has now merged with Nabisco.

From 1969 to 1980, Mr. Chamberlain was with the Quaker Oats Company in Chicago.
He was president of its frozen foods division when he left.

Mr. Chamberlain holds an economics degree from the University of Pennsylvania
and an M.B.A. from Harvard. He was an Army first lieutenant and company
commander in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of David Chamberlain

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 15, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CBS IS ORDERED TO GIVE WESTMORELAND ITS NOTES

BYLINE: By PETER KERR

SECTION: Section 1; Page 46, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 471 words


A Federal District Judge yesterday ordered CBS News to supply Gen. William C.
Westmoreland with the notes used to prepare an investigation of how it put
together a documentary that accused the general of conspiring to falsify figures
on enemy troop strength.

The order was the latest development in a case that has raised questions about
the confidentiality of the internal investigations by news organizations, and
whether they can be required to tell a libel plaintiff everything that such an
investigation finds.

An attorney for CBS said the network would ask the judge next week to reconsider
the order and, if that failed, would attempt to appeal.

In the order, Judge Pierre N. Leval of the Federal District Court in Manhattan
said that the notes used in preparing CBS's internal investigation were not
protected by First Amendment privileges. As with the text of the investigation
report, the judge wrote, any constitutional protection of notes and memorandums
had been forfeited by CBS when it issued a press release describing the report
and its conclusions.

Charge of Manipulation

The case concerns a CBS documentary broadcast in January 1982 titled ''The
Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.'' The documentary accused General
Westmoreland of manipulating information about the strength of enemy forces
during the Vietnam War.

The general said that he was libeled by the program and sued CBS for $120
million. He contended that reporters and producers of the documentary had
deliberatly refused to broadcast material that refuted the thesis of conspiracy.

The general, in pretrial motions, sought the text of a CBS internal
investigation of how the documentary had been put together. The network had
argued that the report was an internal document protected by First Amendment
free-press guarantees. Judge Leval rejected that argument. The 59-page report,
prepared by a senior executive producer, Burton Benjamin, was turned over to
General Westmoreland in April.

David Boies, the attorney representing CBS said that his client would argue, as
it had about the text of the report, that it was priviledged material.

Question of Significance

Experts in journalism law who were reached by telephone yesterday said they were
unsure of the significance of of the latest development in the case.

''The significance is that reporters have fought for protection of their notes
for many, many years,'' said James C. Goodale, a lawyer who specializes in First
Amendment issues. ''I think, however, that the situation in this case is
somewhat unique, now that CBS has turned over the Benjamin report.''

Mr. Goodale added that he did not think that CBS being forced to turn over the
notes ''would be catastrophic for the press, but it certainly would not be a
helpful precedent.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 15, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Prince Sees 'Slim Chance' Of Cambodia Accord

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 103 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 14


Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the leader of the anti-Vietnamese Cambodian coalition,
said today that there was a ''slim chance'' of working out a political solution
to the conflict in Cambodia.

''We may one day have the agreement of Vietnam and the Soviet Union to have a
conference, an international conference,'' Prince Sihanouk said, referring to a
proposal that all sides in the Cambodian war meet to work out a political
accord.

The General Assembly is preparing to consider a resolution sponsored by the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations that calls for a withdrawal of Vietnamese
forces from Cambodia.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 15, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CONTROVERSY OVER JANE FONDA COSTS NASA OFFICIAL HIS POST

BYLINE: By JOHN NOBLE WILFORD

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 686 words


The space agency's director of public affairs is leaving his post amid
controversy over the attention given to Jane Fonda, the actress and political
activist, who was an invited guest at a space shuttle launching last June. Both
White House and space officials confirmed yesterday that they had been upset by
the controversy and by remarks made by the director that were considered
favorable to Miss Fonda.

Brian Duff, the director, said in a telephone interview that he had asked for a
reassignment. He said he had not been asked to resign but acknowledged that he
had lost ''rapport'' with senior managers at the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration in Washington and that criticism of his statements about Miss
Fonda had ''contributed'' to his problems and his decision to quit.

According to several reports, the White House expressed displeasure over the
presence of Miss Fonda, who is an activist for peace and women's rights, at the
launching of the Challenger mission that included the first American woman
astronaut, Dr. Sally K. Ride. Miss Fonda was one of several hundred prominent
women who were invited and honored at a pre-liftoff reception, but a newspaper
article last June quoted Mr. Duff as saying, ''I'm particularly pleased that
Jane Fonda is coming; she's considered to be a role model by a lot of young
women.''



Job Is Civil Service White House officials confirmed that there was concern over
the matter, saying it had aroused ''Congressional and public criticism.'' The
critics of Miss Fonda said she had been associated with many radical causes and
the Administration should not have given her such a prominent public platform.

Marlin Fitzwater, an Administration spokesman, said the White House had not put
any ''direct'' pressure on NASA to replace Mr. Duff. The director's job is a
Civil Service position. Mr. Duff said he expected to remain with the space
agency.

An item in the Sept. 12 issue of Newsweek magazine said, however, that the White
House was angered by all the news photographs of Miss Fonda and her husband, Tom
Hayden, a California state legislator who was a leader of protests against the
Vietnam War.

In asserting that the White House had no direct hand in Mr. Duff's move, Mr.
Fitzwater said: ''I'm sure the NASA Administrator is aware of the general
reaction by the public, members of Congress and the White House as well'' to the
publicity over Miss Fonda.

The Administrator, James M. Beggs, acknowledged that White House officials
''made it clear they weren't happy'' about the episode, and he added, ''I'll not
deny that I was not happy.''

According to Mr. Duff, Mr. Beggs telephoned him the morning the news article
appeared and ''disagreed with me'' on what was said about Miss Fonda. ''He said
my statement implied that NASA had gone out of the way to invite Miss Fonda,''
Mr. Duff said.

Beggs's View of Situation

Mr. Beggs said the Jane Fonda incident was not the ''main reason'' for his
dispute with Mr. Duff. He said there were philosophical differences over the
operation of agency's public affairs office. Mr. Duff had been appointed to the
job in the Carter Administration.

The Newsweek item also said the White House had ordered the space agency to
limit its launching guest lists to what an unnamed aide said were ''the right
kind of people.'' Mr. Fitzwater said he was unaware of any order for NASA to
change its practices on inviting prominent people, including politicians and
celebrities, to launchings.

Patrick A. Templeton, NASA's associate administrator for external affairs, also
said the agency ''does not have any directive from the White House to change''
its guest policy. He said that the agency draws up its guest lists to include a
''broad representation of people'' and to honor requests from Congress, the
state houses, industrial contractors and the White House. ''That has not
changed,'' he added.

Of the controversy over Miss Fonda, Mr. Templeton said: ''There was concern,
yes, and it was an unfortunate thing. But Brian's change was not precipitated by
any one particular thing.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 15, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

DOW HALTS FIGHT TO SELL HERBICIDE

BYLINE: By JOHN HOLUSHA

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 650 words

DATELINE: DETROIT, Oct. 14


The Dow Chemical Company announced today that it was abandoning its efforts to
have a herbicide that contains dioxin certified as safe for use as an
agricultural chemical. The chemical, 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid, was a
component of Agent Orange, a defoliant used in Vietnam.

Dow, which is based in Midland, Mich., about 100 miles north of here, had been
contending that the chemical, also known as 2,4,5-T, could be used safely,
despite an emergency decision by the Environmental Protection Agency in 1979 to
ban most applications in forests and on croplands.

According to the Federal agency, 2,4,5-T and Silvex, a similar herbicide, are
''unavoidably'' contaminated with 2,3,7,8-TCDD, which is generally considered to
be the most toxic of the many dioxin compounds. TCDD is known to cause cancer
and birth defects in animals and has been linked to a wide variety of disorders
in humans, including a rare form of cancer known as soft-tissue sarcoma.



Company Halts Production

Dow discontinued production of 2,4,5- T shortly after the Federal ban was
imposed in 1979. A Dow spokesman, Terry Witt, said the company had no intention
of resuming production of the herbicide. However, it has been selling the
product from inventories previously accumulated for the applications that were
still permitted.

Mr. Witt said the company was giving up, after more than four years of defending
the product. ''Because of public concern and public misinformation,'' he
explained, ''a resolution of the use of 2,4,5-T as a herbicide was not practical
to accomplish. It had gone beyond scientific resolution into the emotional and
public anxiety area.''

Dow said it had spent more than $10 million to defend the product in hearings
before the environmental agency and in discussions with officials.

Don R. Clay, the agency's acting assistant administrator for pesticides and
toxic substances, praised Dow's decision to withdraw the chemical. ''Dow is to
be commended for its decision and for its corporate statesmanship,'' he said.

Mr. Clay expressed the hope that other companies involved in the 2,4,5-T case,
which number about 60, would follow Dow's example and drop efforts to have the
agent certified as safe.

Dow Stands by Assertions

Despite dropping its case, Dow clung to its assertion that 2,4,5-T, which was
used for 30 years to retard the growth of woody plants, was not harmful. ''The
great weight of scientific evidence confirms that 2,4,5-T can be used safely
without undue risk to people or the environment,'' said Keith R. McKennon, the
company's vice president for agricultural products.

Dioxin, the toxic substance in 2,4,5-T, is considered so dangerous that the
Federal Government evacuated the 800 residents of Times Beach, Mo., and bought
their property when soil in the town was found to be heavily contaminated with
dioxin.

Dow's decision to end the effort to certify 2,4,5-T as safe does not end the
company's involvement with the chemical. It is participating in a study with the
E.P.A. to assess the level of dioxin contamination in and around its Midland
facilities. The study was begun after state health officials issued a report
indicating that there was an unusually high rate of cancer among women living in
the area.

The company is also a defendant in a case brought by a number of Vietnam War
veterans, who have attributed medical problems to exposure to Agent Orange,
which was used as a defoliant in the jungles of Vietnam to deprive the enemy of
cover.



E.P.A. to Seek Ban WASHINGTON, Oct. 14 (AP) - The Environmental Protection
Agency said today it would now seek to ban all sales of 2,4,5-T. Retail concerns
that have the pesticide on their shelves would be permitted to sell of their
stock, officials said.

The ban would take efect 30 days after the publication of a notice, scheduled
for Tuesday.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 16, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A FIRM VOICE IN ITALIAN POLITICS

BYLINE: By JUDY KLEMESRUD

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 58, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 1186 words


In the early 1970's Susanna Agnelli, Suni to her friends, lived in New York,
leading the kind of glamorous, fast- paced life that one might associate with a
very wealthy woman who is a granddaughter of the founder of Fiat.

Miss Agnelli, now 61 years old, was in New York again recently, but this time
her visit was an official one. She is now an Italian Senator who on Aug. 13 was
named Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

A tall, strong-faced, no-nonsense woman, she is the divorced mother of six and
grandmother of nine. She is also the Mayor of Monte Argentario, a coastal resort
region north of Rome, a job she has held since 1974; a past member of the
European Parliament, and the author of a popular weekly advice column in the
magazine Oggi. In the Italian national election last June she was also elected
to the Chamber of Deputies, where she has sat since 1976, by three
constituencies, but she now sits only in the Senate.



'No, It Is Not I'

All this has helped to make her what many people describe as the best-known
female politician in Italy. Such a suggestion makes her shake her head and say,
in her blunt style: ''No, it is not I. It is Mme. Iotti.'' She was referring to
Leonilde Iotti, a Communist Party member who is President of the Chamber of
Deputies. Then she certainly must be the second best-known female politician in
Italy? She replied softly: ''I would say I am, yes.''

Miss Agnelli, who uses her maiden name - she was divorced in 1971 from a lawyer,
Count Urbano Rattazzi - was sitting in an office of the Italian Consulate
General at 690 Park Avenue. She was wearing a red silk dress, a strand of
knotted pearls and a Bulgari watch, and strapped to her left wrist was a small
leather case that looked as if it could hold a pack of cigarettes and that has
become one of her trademarks.

''Everybody asks what it is,'' she said in flawless English. ''I carry my
spectacles in it so I know I'll always have them with me. In Italy people think
it is an antikidnapping device that can beep the police or something.'' She is
security- conscious in a country that has seen much terrorism directed against
officials: She said she employed a bodyguard and traveled in an armored Fiat.

As Under Secretary Miss Agnelli has been assigned responsibilty for two areas:
relations with North and South America, and cultural affairs. She is the first
in the post to be given this dual responsibility, she said. Affiliated with the
small, centrist Republican Party, she is one of 10 female members in the
315-seat Senate (there are 40 among the 630 deputies).

According to Miss Agnelli, more Italian women would be elected to office if they
were not so aggressive. ''I think people tend to get a bit frightened by an
aggressive woman,'' she explained. ''I think the best way of asserting personal
opinions is to be unobtrusive. Speak very little, and possibly in a low voice,
and people will listen to you more.''

Does she consider herself a feminist? ''No,'' she replied. ''I think feminists
always have an aggressive attitude and never have a balanced vision of things.
They always get furious at things like President Reagan's comment about how men
would still be living in caves if it weren't for women. I think that was
probably a compliment on Reagan's part. It was no reason to get furious. You
should get furious when people are demeaning or saying nasty things.''

Still, Miss Agnelli believes that many high-ranking men in Italian politics view
her as ''something of a joke.'' ''I sometimes get the feeling that they think,
'Why the hell have they sent this woman here to discuss this important
business?' '' she said. ''In my own party they like me to run for office because
I get a lot of votes. But when it comes time for something important, like
making an important political speech, they're not about to let a woman do it.''

But she thinks that men in Italy, especially the younger ones, are becoming
''much less macho.'' There is evidence of this, she said, in a number of new
movies in which young men ask their female lovers if they have been faithful to
them and the women tell them no. ''Italian men know they have to be careful
today,'' she said with a smile. ''I think it's good that they understand the
suffering that women have always felt when vice versa happens.''

Discussing the status of Italian women, Miss Agnelli, a Roman Catholic, said she
thought that legalized abortion would not be overturned. She also predicted that
Pope John Paul II would not change his conservative stands on women's issues and
that women would never become priests.

The idea of a career in national politics came to Miss Agnelli after Marion
Javits, wife of former Senator Jacob K. Javits, suggested it a number of times
while she was living in New York.

''Suni never really was a part of fashionable New York,'' Mrs. Javits said the
other day. ''She entertained it, but she never really felt it. Once I got to
know her I felt she had layers of depths and understanding about life and people
and their needs that should be used intelligently. Somewhere deep down, she felt
she needed to serve.''

Miss Agnelli was reluctant to talk about her motivations for going into
politics. She would say only that her first involvement came in 1970 after she
had complained to the City Council in Monte Argentario about illegal housing
construction that she considered ugly besides. She said she was told that
instead of grumbling she should run for office. She did, and was elected to the
Council.

At the time she was considered something of a controversial figure in Italy
because of a magazine article she wrote in 1969 predicting that the United
States would lose the war in Vietnam. A one- time medical and nursing student,
she had visited Vietnam on a nursing mission for the Red Cross.



Things Still to Be Done

Mayoral business is conducted in Monte Argentario on Saturdays, Sundays and
Mondays, and Miss Agnelli has no plans to give up the post now that she is an
Under Secretary. ''I would not want to leave now,'' she said, ''because there
are number of important questions I've been working on.'' They include curbing
those ugly, illegal houses, building a new sewage system and trying to persuade
women to send their children to a new kindergarten rather than to the old,
dilapidated one.

Asked about her relationship with her brother Gianni, who heads Fiat, she smiled
and said, ''We are great friends and always have been.'' She said that he had
supported her in all of her political endeavors and that when she was elected to
the Senate he said he was very proud. Miss Agnelli wrote about him and her five
other brothers and sisters in her 1975 autobiography, ''We Always Wore Sailor
Suits,'' a best seller in Italy.

In her spare time she raises bonsai trees and visits her children, who range in
age from 27 to 37, and her grandchildren. One daughter, Priscilla, is a
photographer in New York.

Miss Agnelli has no plans to marry again, she said, ''because marriage is a
very, very difficult thing, something you do only once in life.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Susanna Agnelli

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 16, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. SEVENTH ARMY UNDERGOES A RENOVATION

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 23, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 610 words


Military

 Analysis



HEIDELBERG, West Germany - The United States Seventh Army, after years of
operating with older equipment, is now being heavily refurbished.  The Seventh
Army, which has its headquarters here, is getting more than 400 new weapons and
support systems, ranging from M-1 Abrams tanks to high technology communications
networks.

Expenditures for modernizing the forces in 1984 will be $239 million more than
in 1982, and spending for maintenance and repair will increase by $91 million
over the same period.

Commanders believe that, with a fully modernized Seventh Army, the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization will be able not only to deter a Soviet invasion of
Western Europe but also to threaten Russian formations 100 miles or more behind
their own firing lines.

Morale Is Reported Higher

The Seventh Army has been in Germany for 38 years. Its present strength is put
at 198,000 men and women. From noncommissioned officers to generals, there is
widespread agreement that morale, training and readiness of the force are higher
than they have been since before the start of the Vietnam War.

One weakness remains. One of the Seventh Army's four divisions, the Eighth
Mechanized Infantry, is still deployed west of the Rhine instead of in new
positions provided by the Bonn Government closer to the frontier with East
Germany.

The reason given at headquarters is that the money for building forward
installations for the division is required for more urgent needs, such as more
storage for ammunition.

The arrival of new trucks, communication systems, weapons and other items is
said to have lifted morale, and re-enlistment rates are reported up as a
consequence.

New Weapons Give NATO Edge

Commanders believe that most earlier operating problems have been eliminated
from the M-1 tank. During the recent Reforger exercises the 11th Armored Cavalry
reported a readiness rate of 98 percent for its M-1's, and other units have
reported rates of 95 percent or better.

The M-1 tank and another new weapon, the Bradley armored fighting vehicle, which
made its debut in Europe last month, are expected to give the Seventh Army a
qualitative edge over Soviet armored divisions.

NATO tank strength will also be enhanced by the deployment of the Leopard II
tank with the West German Army and the Challenger, armed with a 120-millimeter
gun, in the British Army of the Rhine.

Seventh Army headquarters is satisfied that whatever faults plagued the Bradley
in its development and early production stage have been eliminated.

Dual Role Envisioned

They see it in two roles: as a tank destroyer with its TOW missile, an antitank
guided weapon that United States commanders believe to be a match for Soviet
armored personnel carriers with their 25-millimeter guns equipped with thermal
night sights; and as a vehicle for carrying infantrymen into battle. They also
say the Bradley can keep up with the M-1 in battle.

A Multiple Launch Rocket System now reaching the Seventh Army is another
important item of the its modernization.

The number of guns in an artillery battalion has been increased to eight
155-millimeter guns and, with the addition of the rockets, gives the army a
significant increase in firepower.

As part of the introduction of a new divisional organization called Division 86,
the strength of a mechanized infantry division has been increased to about
19,000 men. The number of battalions in a division will be reduced by one but
the firepower of each will be increased. An armored battalion, for example, will
have 58 instead of 54 tanks.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 16, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILM VIEW;
LONGEVITY--THE REAL JAMES BOND MYSTERY

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section 2; Page 21, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1674 words


One of the earliest and staunchest supporters of the James Bond films was Bosley
Crowther, the late film critic of The New York Times, but by 1967 even he was
beginning to suspect that enough was enough. Writing about ''You Only Live
Twice,'' the fifth of the phenomenal series started in 1963 with ''Dr. No,'' Mr.
Crowther said sadly, ''The sex is minimal. But, then, Bond is getting old.''

Two years later, another critic in The Times described ''On Her Majesty's Secret
Service'' as ''the sixth and possibly last installment in the adventures of
007.'' That writer, mourning his own youth in the 1960's when he had been naive
and seduced by the Bond films, decided they were not at all harmless and, in
fact, ''essentially sadistic and cruel.''

Today James Bond is not only alive and benign, but the entire Bond phenomenon
seems to have obtained an extraordinary new lease on life. At the moment there
are two new James Bond films in release, ''Octopussy,'' which opened in June and
stars Roger Moore, and ''Never Say Never Again,'' which opened in New York the
week before last and returns Sean Connery to the role in which he was succeeded
by Mr. Moore in 1973.

In addition, new, best-selling Bond novels continue to be written by John
Gardner under an agreement with the estate of Ian Fleming, who died in 1964.

As attractive as the character of 007 is, and as amusing as most of the films
have been, this longevity is as mysterious to me as it is rare. All that one can
do with any certainty is describe the phenomenon.

There's never been another series of films that have endured with quite the same
elan as the Bond movies. All other films in long-running series have been
B-movies, like the various Charlie Chan and Sherlock Holmes mysteries turned out
in the 1930's and 40's. Only Bond has always traveled first-class.

Some statistics are in order to understand the series' relation to the decades
through which it has passed. Including ''Dr. No,'' there have been 14 Bond
films, seven with Mr. Connery in the Bond role, six with Mr. Moore and one, ''On
Her Majesty's Secret Service'' (1969), with George Lazenby, who departed after
one try.

In 1967 there was also a huge, all-star Bond comedy, ''Casino Royale,'' produced
by Charles Feldman but unrelated to any other other Bond movies. The film
version of ''Casino Royale,'' based on Mr. Fleming's first Bond novel, was
directed by six people, including John Huston, with a cast that included Woody
Allen, as ''Jimmy Bond,'' James's nephew, and an actress billed as ''Jacky
Bisset'' playing a character called ''Miss Goodthighs.''

The first eight Bond films were produced by Albert Broccoli and Harry Saltzman.
When Mr. Saltzman sold his interest in the rights after ''Live and Let Die'' in
1973, Mr. Broccoli carried on alone. Kevin McClory owns the rights to
''Thunderball,'' which he produced with Mr. Connery as the star in a joint
arrangement with Mr. Broccoli and Mr. Saltzman in 1965, and which he has now
rather freely readapted as ''Never Say Never Again.''

To recapitulate the titles of the Bond films and their dates of release: ''Dr.
No,'' 1963; ''From Russia With Love,'' 1964; ''Goldfinger,'' 1964;
''Thunderball,'' 1965; ''You Only Live Twice,'' 1967; ''On Her Majesty's Secret
Service,'' 1969; ''Diamonds Are Forever,'' 1971; ''Live and Let Die,'' 1973;
''The Man with the Golden Gun,'' 1974; ''The Spy Who Loved Me,'' 1977;
''Moonraker,'' 1979; ''For Your Eyes Only,'' 1981; ''Octopussy,'' 1983, and
''Never Say Never Again,'' 1983.

When the film version of ''Dr. No'' came out, it was shortly after President
John F. Kennedy had admitted that the Bond novels were among his favorite
reading matter. Whether accurately or not, the first films made from the Bond
novels came to characterize a number of aspects of the Kennedy Administration
with its reputation for glamour, wit and sophistication, and its real-life drama
and melodrama. Indeed, the President himself could be seen as a kind of Bond
figure, and the 1962 Cuban missile crisis as a real-life Bond situation.

Even so, the series managed to outlive the era with which it was originally
identified, though the films themselves did not radically change in formula:
James Bond, the invincible, sexually omnipotent male, after numerous brushes
with death, often in the form of chases, and after sleeping with a minimum of
two women before finding Miss Right, with whom he also sleeps but without a
clear conscience until the fadeout, saves the world from destruction, often at
the hands of S.P.E.C.T.R.E., a terrorist organization with continuing ties to no
one nation or ideology.

Just as the Cuban missile crisis did not dim the appeal of Bond movies about
nuclear confrontations, the subsequent political assassinations, the Vietnam
build- up, the antiwar demonstrations, Watergate, the oil crises and the wars in
the Middle East have not apparently affected the public's enjoyment of Bond's
make-believe world. Somehow Bond movies seem to sail above all realities without
actually denying them. Neither do the films argue with critics who charge them
with being callous, violent or chauvinist. They neutralize criticism as often as
not by being too witty and good-humored to be taken too seriously.

The Bond films have survived all imitators, including the Our Man Flint and Matt
Helm adventures. They have survived the sexual revolution that, in a casual way,
they once represented in James's perfectly frank enjoyment of casual,
promiscuous sex. Now, however, compared to the heroes of other contemporary
films, James looks to be a practitioner of courtly love.

For all of Bond's

wild-wild ways, no movie containing him has ever gone out with a rating more
racy than PG, which is what ''King Kong'' received. As far as I can remember,
Bond has never used drugs of his own accord, not even marijuana. Further, his
fondness for the extra- dry martini seems almost to be a throwback to the
1930's. Could it be that he has managed to stay hip by being gloriously square?

One of the major reasons for the series' continuing critical success is not a
big secret: Each film costs a fortune to make but virtually every cent of it is
on the screen. The magnificent space-war that is the climax of ''Moonraker'' is
as stylish as anything done by Lucasfilm. The outlandish sets, whether Dr. No's
underwater laboratory or the volcano landing-pad in ''You Only Live Twice,'' are
almost always totally convincing.

The increasing dependence on elaborate physical gags, some of the finest of
which often turn up in pre- credit sequences, does not mark a falling off of the
intelligence of the films. On the contrary, these gags are simply glorifying the
kind of action in which the Bond films traffic. Bond himself is certainly not an
introspective sort. With or without the sometimes heavily facetious quips, he's
a man of action, but random action in movies soon becomes tiresome. Eighty years
ago, movie audiences may have ducked in their seats at the sight of a streetcar
rolling toward them, but they soon collected themselves and demanded more
complicated thrills.

It's to the credit of the people who make these films that the physical gags,
the looks of the films and their soundtracks have continued to become
increasingly spectacular.

Some of the people to be credited include Terence Young, director of ''Dr. No,''
''From Russia With Love'' and ''Thunderball''; Guy Hamilton, director of
''Goldfinger,'' ''Diamonds Are Forever,'' ''Live and Let Die'' and ''The Man
with the Golden Gun''; and Lewis Gilbert, director of ''You Only Live Twice,''
''The Spy Who Loved Me'' and ''Moonraker.''

After seeing ''Never Say Never Again,'' which was directed by Irvin Kershner,
I'm not at all sure the public wants to worry about James Bond's getting old,
though the film very wittily acknowledges that he - and Mr. Connery - are not
quite as young as they once were. Having admitted that fact at the start of the
film, where Bond is at a health farm getting back into the shape that too many
women and too many martinis have denied him, ''Never Say Never Again'' goes on
to show Bond/ Connery performing at the same tireless pace he has displayed in
every previous film.

Though Mr. Moore has done perfectly acceptable work as James Bond since he took
over the role in ''Live and Let Die,'' the character still seems to belong to
Mr. Connery, even though ''Never Say Never Again'' is not quite as splashy an
entertainment as ''Octopussy,'' the Bond/Moore movie.

At times ''Never Say Never Again'' seems almost somber, which is not unpleasant
though it's a contradiction in terms. Bond movies are meant to be escapist, not
introspective, which is a quality that Mr. Connery, who's now a better actor
than ever, brings to the film.

''Never Say Never Again'' also has a terrifically witty villain, Largo, who, as
played by Klaus Maria Brandauer, the star of ''Mephisto,'' is a madman to rank
with Joseph Wiseman's Dr. No, Gert Froebe's Goldfinger and Geoffrey Holder's
Baron Samedi. Appearing in several throw-away scenes is Max von Sydow as
Blofeld, the evil genius who runs S.P.E.C.T.R.E., a role that has been played in
the past by Donald Pleasance and Telly Savalas.

I still don't understand the appeal of the Bond films, though I respond to them
as faithfully as millions of other people. It's not their stories - I can't
remember one plot from another without rereading old reviews. They are
beautifully cast, but at this minute I'm not sure whether Herve Villechaize
appeared in ''The Spy Who Loved Me'' or ''The Man With the Golden Gun.'' The
women in the films are fantastic, but so are the women in Playboy.

It's possible, of course, that the Bond movies, which once seemed so smartly,
wickedly sophisticated, now reassure us by their courtly manners and by the
orderliness of a world in which S.P.E.C.T.R.E., though never permenently
defeated, never triumphs. In an era in which total victory might also mean total
defeat, equilibrium is suddenly most alluring.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 16, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

QUINN AS 'ZORBA': THIS TIME THERE'S MUSIC

BYLINE: By LESLIE BENNETTS

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1925 words


Even on stage, surrounded by massive stone pillars on a Cretan mountainside, he
towers above everyone else, seeming larger than life. When the bouzouki music
begins its slow, siren sound and he starts to dance, it is as if the mountain
itself had begun to move. He is old and grizzled, and his belly sags; but he is
sinuous and feather-light on his feet, and he commands authority like no one
else on stage.

It has been nearly twenty years since Anthony Quinn, born in a barrio in
Chihuahua to a 15-year-old Mexican girl and a half-Irish father, became one of
the world's most famous Greeks. Nikos Kazantzakis's novel, ''Zorba the Greek,''
was made into an Academy Award-winning film in 1964, and Mr. Quinn's portrayal
of Zorba - Rabelaisian in his appetites, unquenchable in his gusto for life,
wise in his peasant's understanding of the basic truths that eluded his
book-learned friend - made him one of the most unforgettable characters ever
created on film.

A 1968 Broadway musical starring Herschel Bernardi and directed by Harold Prince
proved decidedly less memorable. But tonight ''Zorba the Greek'' opens on
Broadway once again, and this time Anthony Quinn is Zorba.

This version features minor changes in the book, two new songs, and an overall
reinterpretation under the direction of Michael Cacoyannis, who also directed
the movie. Mr. Quinn's co-star is another film colleague, Lila Kedrova, who is
making her Broadway debut in the role of Madame Hortense, which won her an
Academy Award.  This ''Zorba'' has been touring the country for the last ten
months, but Mr. Quinn shows no signs of diminished vigor. At 68, he no longer
has to dye his hair gray to get into his character, but he runs up to six miles
in Central Park every day, skipping and dancing and prancing sideways and
backward in addition to running in the forward direction favored by most people
(''I look kind of funny when I run,'' he acknowledges). He consults self-styled
exercise and nutrition experts with enthusiasm (''I never go to doctors, I only
go to quacks,'' he says cheerfully), maintains an avid eye for the charms of the
female form, and slurps up his pasta with Zorba-esque relish. In what he
describes as ''the only concession I made to age,'' Mr. Quinn gave up smoking
four years ago after his doctor told him he had to choose between smoking and
playing tennis; the actor decided he preferred tennis.

''There's physiological age, and then there's psychological age,'' observes Mr.
Quinn. ''I'd say my psychological age is about 42.''

But if the passage of time has failed to slow him down, it has deepened his
conception of Zorba. ''When I was playing a 65-year-old man 20 years ago, I
thought of him as slightly doddering,'' Mr. Quinn says. ''If anything, I'm
trying to play him younger today. And I used to see Hortense as a convenience
for Zorba when I played it then, just something to have around. He was nice to
her because he was getting sex. Now I realize that Zorba was giving to this
woman in a wonderful way. He gives her a whole reason for living - that she's
loved, that she's beautiful. I didn't play that 20 years ago; I was slightly
amused by her craziness, even almost made fun of it. I didn't understand that a
man, just out of the kindness of his heart, can want to give a woman life.''


The turbulent history of the last two decades has also influenced Mr. Quinn's
interpretation of the role, particularly in the scene where Zorba tries to
explain to Niko why he will not kill to avenge another's death. ''Blood would
flow, souls would die, and others would weep as you weep,'' Zorba tells his
friend. ''War, revenge - it's death all the same.''

Mr. Quinn's long, rough-hewn, mobile face grows dark as he says, ''We've been
through Vietnam and all these goddamn wars all around the world, and when I talk
about wars now, I have in my mind Vietnam and Beirut, Israel, Ireland, El
Salvador, Honduras, Chad, Iran, Iraq. It's all insanity, and the passion with
which I say those those lines comes from the reality of the last 20 years.''

Mr. Quinn's own professional situation has changed as well since he first played
Zorba in the movie, and he finds his return to Broadway in a major musical
especially meaningful after a rather lean stretch. ''Twenty years ago I was a
big success, riding the crest of the wave, making a million dollars a picture
and getting nominated for an Academy Award every other year, and suddenly the
dry period came,'' says Mr. Quinn, who has appeared in nearly 200 films and won
Academy Awards for ''Viva Zapata'' and ''Lust for Life.'' ''I hit that age when
it's difficult to cast. We all go through that; it happens to everybody, that
point when you can't play the guy who comes in carrying a gun and cleans up the
the bar any more. I became embarrassed doing the love scenes, embarrassed to be
up there smooching with a 23-year-old girl. I myself was going through some
changes about what kind of parts to play, and the pendulum swung; I started
playing real old men, I guess to find out what age was all about. I was going
through a period of really feeling the age.'' He pauses and grins. ''I found out
it was nonsense, so I came back.''


Indeed, these days Mr. Quinn is full of plans for the future. After he does
Zorba on stage, he is hoping to do a movie sequel. ''We only did half the book
the first time, and even at that we had to cut an hour from the picture, so
there's wonderful stuff that's never been used,'' he says.

Mr. Quinn also wants to return to Broadway next year as Ernest Hemingway in a
play called ''Papa Hemingway,'' written by A. E. Hotchner. Two other characters
he longs to play on stage are Picasso and Tolstoy.

''They all have one thing in common,'' Mr. Quinn explains. ''They are men in
conflict between the body and the soul. The dichotomy between going into your
animalistic tendencies and going into the spiritual is tremendous; that battle
is Faustian. Everyone's wrestled with it. It's the eternal battle. In 'Zorba,'
Kazantzakis characterized beautifully the two viewpoints. Zorba and Niko are
really the same man, schizophrenic. Zorba is the extreme of a man living through
his passions; Niko is afraid of his passions, and only living through his mind.
Kazantzakis was saying, which one is the best path to follow.

''Zorba is like a bull; he goes at everything directly. There's nothing subtle
or devious about Zorba; he's very natural. He says, 'I'm free, I don't need
anybody, I don't owe anyone anything.' If Zorba sees someplace, he goes; he has
no responsibility to anyone but himself. But nobody can be a Zorba in our
society. We are full of responsibilities in America, and that's probably why
Americans love Zorba; every American wishes he could be a Zorba.''

In adddition to their dramatic potential, Mr. Quinn is drawn to such internal
conflicts because they reflect an aspect of his own personalilty. While still a
teen-ager he worked as a preacher with Aimee Semple McPherson, the evangelist,
and more than 40 years later he says, ''I'm a frustrated preacher. Until I was
about 25, I was sure I was going to follow some kind of vocation as a teacher
with spiritual leanings. But the callings of the body were stronger, I guess.''

He has paid a price for that choice. ''When I went to be psychoanalyzed, I found
that the child in me was very disappointed with what had happened to the man,
because he had gone for the obvious symbols of success rather than for the
spirit,'' Mr. Quinn reports. ''But I have no regrets. I think I'm lucky. I was
born with very little talent, but great drive, and I think I did tremendous
things out of drive.''


When Mr. Quinn was born, his half-Mexican father, Frank Quinn, was fighting
alongside Pancho Villa in the Mexican revolution. Later the Quinns became
migrant workers in California, and little Tony worked from the age of 3. He quit
school in the 10th grade and made his living as a boxer, a fruit picker, a taxi
driver, a butcher and a factory worker. Then came a job as a movie extra and
exposure to the world of Hollywood, where he met and fell in love with Cecil B.
DeMille's adopted daughter, Katherine. They married and had five children,
although one son drowned at the age of 3 in W. C. Field's swimming pool.

But in 1961, Mr. Quinn fell in love with an Italian wardrobe mistress on the set
of ''Barabbas'' in Rome. Iolanda Addolori bore him two children and was pregnant
with their third when Mr. Quinn finally divorced his first wife and married her
in 1966.

In recent years the Quinns have lived in a villa near Rome, but now the whole
family has moved back to their New York apartment, and the actor says he intends
to remain here for the foreseeable future. Mr. Quinn waxes euphoric on the
excitement of living in New York, despite a recent experience that might have
daunted a less passionate fan. Accosted by two would-be muggers in Central Park
the other day, Mr. Quinn felt a knife at his back and turned around. ''Oh, Mr.
Quinn, we didn't know it was you!'' exclaimed his assailants, who apologized
profusely and backed off. Mr. Quinn, unperturbed, laughed and continued on his
way.


As the Quinns settle in for a long stay, their rooms fill up with a jumble of
easels and packing crates, many containing the actor's art supplies and tools.
Although he is best known for his acting, Mr. Quinn is equally passionate about
painting and sculpture, and the walls are crammed with his work: big bold
paintings in vivid colors, sculptures of voluptuous female forms in wood and
bronze and marble, abstract wooden pieces painted in exuberant purples and
blacks and hot red-oranges. ''I think I will live as a sculptor longer than I
live as an actor,'' says Mr. Quinn.

At the moment, however, his art work is taking second place to Mr. Quinn's
opening on Broadway. He has been playing Zorba for ten months now, but when
asked whether he ever gets bored with a role, Mr. Quinn looks horrified.
''Never!'' he exclaims, as if the very thought were blasphemous. ''Bored? That's
a word I have never understood. Every day you find a new reason for doing it. I
make new notes about the part every day.'' He smiles, delighted as a child, and
adds, ''I just found a new reading on a line the other day. I've gone through
changes in the role. In the beginning, I was really looking for acceptance,
looking for approval - hoping the audience would accept Zorba after 20 years.
Now I find I want to invest more in the character. Before, I wanted them to like
me in the character. Now I want them to like the character.''

Originally apprehensive about the singing and dancing demands of the role, Mr.
Quinn has come to terms with these as well. ''I make no pretense about being a
singer, no pretense about being a dancer,'' he says. ''The audience has to
understand that they're seeing Zorba. If Zorba was a good singer, he'd be doing
'Some Enchanted Evening' up there. I can't sing; it's an extension of acting to
me.''

The show has been applauded in other cities, but although that doesn't mean it
will be well received by New York critics, Mr. Quinn seems philosophical about
his prospects on Broadway, where he hasn't appeared in many years. ''It's sort
of peculiar, because you're going home and you don't know how your family's
going to greet you,'' he admits with a sly smile. ''But I have no qualms. I've
been away, and now I'm bringing little gifts, little packages for everyone, so
I've done my duty. I have no fear, no apologies.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: caricature of Quinn playing Zorba the Greek

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 16, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS & TRENDS;
DOW GIVES UP ON HERBICIDE

BYLINE: By Wayne Biddle and Margot Slade

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 265 words


After a $10 million fight to continue marketing the dioxin-contaminated
herbicide 2,4,5-T, Dow Chemical Company threw in the towel last week. The
Environmental Protection Agency, commending Dow for its ''corporate
statesmanship,'' took the occasion to announce that it would soon ban the sale
of 2,4,5-T by other manufacturers.

''We are cheered that this product is finally coming off the market, but it is
unfortunate that Dow is making this decision with their pocketbook in mind
rather than the public's health and safety,'' said Jay Feldman of the National
Coalition Against the Misuse of Pesticides. Dow, which stopped making 2,4,5-T in
1979 but continued to sell it to retailers from inventory, insisted that the
substance posed no undue health risk. It is still used extensively on rice
fields to kill aquatic weeds and on rangeland. ''We believe that further
expenditures of Dow and E.P.A. resources are not likely to be productive,'' said
Keith R. McKennon, a Dow vice president.

Don R. Clay, the environmental agency's assistant administrator for pesticides,
expressed hope that other companies that have been pressing the agency to lift
its 1979 restrictions on 2,4,5-T use would now withdraw.  ''Dow's actions
suggest that the incentives to pursue this litigation may not be as great as
they were two and a half years ago,'' he said.

Dow's entanglement with 2,4,5-T will not end with the E.P.A. action. The company
is a defendant in a case brought by Vietnam veterans who claim injury from
exposure to the herbicide Agent Orange - one of whose ingredients was 2,4,5-T.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 16, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN'S CRUCIAL YEAR

BYLINE: By Hedrick Smith

SECTION: Section 6; Page 44, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4914 words


Hedrick Smith is The New York Times's chief Washington Correspondent. By Hedrick
Smith N POLICY TERMS, TIME IS GETTING short for Ronald Reagan. For as 1983 draws
toward a close, he is set to tell us if he intends to seek re-election. But
whether he runs or not, he is already framing the 1984 campaign by the decisions
he has been making lately about Lebanon, Central America, the economy and arms
control, and by the way he is dealing with the Soviet Union, China and the
Middle East. If history is any guide, the latter part of Mr. Reagan's third year
is a time of telltale choices: whether to seek compromise or risk confrontation,
whether to hang tough or ease off, whether to try something new or stand pat.

''It's just about right now when the ground is determined on which the next
election is going to be fought,'' Robert M. Teeter, a respected Republican
pollster, observed last month. The White House senses a last chance for policy
corrections or the launching of initiatives without having these moves look too
blatantly political. ''You'd better get the pieces in line in the third year,''
observes one of the President's men, ''because you don't have time in the fourth
year.''

On the domestic side, President Reagan's general course has been set, but
foreign policy remains a real question mark. In Lebanon, Central America and on
nuclear issues, how does he strike the balance between peace and defense? How
does he deal with unexpected tests such as the Soviet downing early in September
of a Korean airliner?

In many Administrations, a President's third year is a crucial make-or-break
period, and its final months can be an especially volatile season that either
opens up bright prospects or delivers serious jolts, as it has already for Mr.
Reagan this fall.

''We need a major victory somewhere to show we can manage foreign policy,'' said
one Reagan political strategist. ''It's less a matter of any one issue than
generating confidence in the President's competence in foreign affairs.''

ITEM: IN THE WEEK AFTER LABOR DAY, while the nation was basking in Indian
summer, the Pentagon and Central Intelligence Agency warned that both the
American Marines in Beirut and the Lebanese Army were in peril because of
growing Syrian involvement. ''Something's got to be done to stop the
deterioration and to protect our REAGAN JUMP Page 46





 interests,'' the President told his national security and political advisers.
For starters, he secretly ordered the battleship U.S.S. New Jersey moved from
the Pacific Ocean through the Panama Canal to be ready for orders to sail to the
eastern Mediterranean.

All day Sunday, Sept. 11, he immersed himself in Lebanon. Breaking only for
meals, he went over road maps and military positions with his national security
advisers, discussing in great detail just how and when and against whom American
forces should be used.

The result was one of the most pivotal decisions of the Reagan Administration.
Without fanfare or forewarning, the President deepened American involvement in
Lebanon and his own commitment to the survival of the Lebanese Government. He
authorized stationing naval gunships and, if necessary, fighter-bombers offshore
to defend not only the 1,500- man Marine contingent but also Lebanese Army
positions. It was a risky departure from the more cautious and limited
self-defense of the Marines.

This military gambit in the eastern Mediterranean bears a Reagan trademark
likely to linger in the minds of voters next year and of historians in the years
beyond. It echoes the Reagan Administration's earlier show of military force in
Central America. There, too, large ground and naval exercises were staged for
political objectives, to put pressure on Nicaragua.

Together, these episodes mark a more assertive phase in President Reagan's
foreign policy. In the Administration's eyes, each has demonstrated America's
tough determination to check pro-Soviet adventurism in the third world. But a
queasy Congress saw Lebanon as cause to restrain the President's use of force
and tried to restrict the American role even while giving Mr. Reagan another 18
months to use the Marines in Lebanon. Among the public at large, a New York
Times survey indicated that even the late September ceasefire in Lebanon did not
quiet fears of a long and costly American entanglement. By a 2-to-1 margin, the
public saw parallels with the way American involvement began in Vietnam.


ITEM: In the other sudden foreign- policy squall that has hit the Administration
this fall, President Reagan sought to project the opposite image, one of
restraint. When William P.  Clark, his national security adviser, interrupted
Mr. Reagan's California ranch vacation to give him the first sketchy news about
the disappearance of a Korean airliner over Soviet territory, the President
said, ''Bill, if it's confirmed, we've got to protect against overreaction.'' In
the next few days, that counsel was honored in the breach as much as in the
observance, producing new paradoxes in Mr. Reagan's approach to Moscow.

Flying back to Washington, he dismissed the idea of breaking off arms talks with
the Russians. At an urgent White House meeting immediately after he landed,
Treasury Secretary Donald T. Regan ran through a list of possible economic
sanctions, but the President resisted them. Defense Secretary Caspar W.
Weinberger suggested canceling the plans of Secretary of State George P. Shultz
for an imminent meeting with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko in
Madrid. But the President thought Mr. Shultz should confront the Russian.

''If Gromyko shows,'' President Reagan quipped, ''he'll be as popular as the
proverbial skunk at a Sunday- school picnic.''

In public, the President whipped up and rode a wave of public outrage, savaging
Moscow for the ''barbarism'' of downing an unarmed civilian plane. That left a
steep disparity between his emotionally charged rhetoric and the low-keyed
sanctions he eventually approved: closing two offices of Aeroflot, the Soviet
airline; annuling a minor transportation agreement; suspending talks on consular
and cultural exchanges. Moreover, after roasting Moscow for ''brutal'' and
''uncivilized'' behavior, President Reagan made a conciliatory speech at the
United Nations and later, moderating his terms for a strategic-arms agreement,
he offered Moscow ''trade-offs'' in negotiations.

The American right wing was infuriated. ''The President has adopted the rhetoric
of Churchill and the policies of Neville Chamberlain,'' fumed Howard Phillips,
chairman of the Conservative Caucus. Stung, Mr. Reagan retorted: ''Vengeance
isn't the name of the game.''

The White House took political comfort in the approval of many Democrats and
foreign leaders. ''The 'trigger-happy warmonger' kept his cool when the going
got hot,'' observed David R. Gergen, White House communications director. ''He
was supposed to react like a cowboy and he didn't.''


These two contradictory impulses, one toward toughness and the other toward
restraint and partial accommodation, have been characteristic of Ronald Reagan's
third year in office whether he has been dealing with Congress or the Kremlin.

This year, he has been a considerably different leader than the one he sounded
like in 1980 and seemed to be in 1981: more complex, more realistic, less
predictable and less ideological. The third-year Reagan has been a hybrid
Reagan, a pragmatic conservative as often as a dogmatic one.

All year, unhappy right wingers have chanted, ''Let Reagan be Reagan.'' But the
truth is there are two Reagans. One, giving vent to his feelings, can taunt the
United Nations by suggesting it try six months a year in Moscow. The other, more
thoughtful, quickly asserts American commitment to the international body.
Typically, the President has been further to the right in his rhetoric than in
substance.

On economic and domestic policy, Reagan Jump






his vision of curbing the growth of government remains unaltered. With the
economy bouncing back, he has adamantly refused to raise taxes, so that one of
his most enduring legacies of this third year will be large structural deficits
in the Federal budget that his policies have helped create.

But on less central issues he has been tactically more flexible than during the
high tide of the Reagan Revolution of budget and tax cuts in 1981. Sometimes,
when realism has dictated compromise, he has been less an ideologue than a
broker willing to sacrifice purity for the sake of success. On issues such as
jobs and Social Security, he has practiced selective bipartisanship with
mainstream Democrats.

In foreign policy, Ronald Reagan entered the Presidency from stage right but has
edged away from unrelieved ideological militancy toward a more mainstream
Republican stance. At the core, his approach is still animated by global rivalry
with the Soviet Union. But in that competition, he has taken inconsistent twists
and turns that reflect a dichotomy within his inner circle of advisers. His own
inclinations alternate between cold-war blasts at Moscow's ''evil empire'' and a
pragmatic recognition that averting nuclear peril requires doing business with
the Kremlin, especially on arms control.

Before the Korean airliner incident, he had reduced his campaign of economic
warfare against Moscow and had begun to show flexibility in his position in
nuclear-arms talks. Elsewhere, his professions of support to Taiwan have given
way to the wooing of China, to which he will pay a politically opportune visit
next April. And he has unexpectedly embraced the International Monetary Fund,
calling it ''the linchpin of the international financial system'' and pressing
conservatives in Congress to provide it with $8.4 billion in new funds.

But surprise developments, like the airliner incident or the Lebanese fighting,
may foil the President's recent tactical moderation. Indeed, Soviet leader Yuri
V. Andropov's sharp riposte late last month suggested that what French President
Francois Mitterrand called ''the politics of passion'' may have so stung the
Russians that they question whether they can strike any meaningful bargains with
Mr. Reagan before the 1984 election.

The policy shifts and adjustments - some real, some cosmetic - of President
Reagan's third year reflect the historical rhythm of the modern Presidency. The
public has always been captivated by the drama of a President's first months in
office, but Presidential scholars like Richard E. Neustadt of Harvard University
contend that for most chief executives the third year is a more telltale period,
partly because it is more of a test.

The third year often sets the characteristic pattern for an Administration,
especially if its lasts two terms. Typically, the first two years are a period
of learning or of audacious beginnings on the heels of the first-election
mandate. By the third year, a President has matured in office, having become
accustomed to its levers of power but also having learned its limits and having
lost his honeymoon freshness and strength.

At this stage, too, Administrations usually discover that the outside world does
not always bend pliantly to a President's prescriptions for peace. At home, the
opposition typically has gained power in the mid-term election, making Congress
more difficult to manage and shrinking the President's room for maneuver.

It is a time, Professor Neustadt noted in a recent interview, of crucial
definition, when a President must make hard strategic choices and when his
''personal operating style solidifies'' in the public mind. It is, he explained,
a period when a President reaffirms old policies or takes the new initiatives
for which history will remember him.

Harry S. Truman, for example, put a distinctive stamp on his Presidency in his
third year, inaugurating the Truman Doctrine and the Marshall Plan, throwing
American protection around Greece and Turkey and lifting Europe to postwar
recovery. In 1947, he also vetoed the Republican Taft-Hartley labor legislation
and opened his battle with the Republican 80th Congress over the Fair Deal.
Those events framed Truman's sharp, partisan ''Give 'em Hell'' re-election
campaign in 1948.

For Richard M. Nixon, the second half of his third year was a time of bold new
strokes and dramatic policy shifts. In August 1971, Nixon scrapped his modest
anti- inflationary restraints and proclaimed wage and price controls and let the
dollar float against world currencies. Not long before, he had stunned Americans
with the announcement that he was going to China, a venture that led from Peking
to Moscow and strategic-arms treaties with the Soviet Union. Those gambles
eventually overshadowed the agony of withdrawal from Vietnam and let Nixon run
for re-election as the strong leader who had produced detente.

The third year was equally decisive for Jimmy Carter. On his return from a visit
to Japan in July 1979, he found the nation stalled in gasoline lines. He
canceled an energy speech and vanished into retreat at Camp David, seeking
advice from relays of civic leaders. When he reemerged, he told the nation it
was suffering from a ''crisis of confidence,'' admitted his own errors of
leadership and fired four Cabinet officers. After he gave shelter to the Shah of
Iran, the nation suffered the nightmare of American Embassy hostages in Teheran.
The lingering malaise of that third year bled the Presidency of Mr. Carter and
shattered his dreams of a second term.


In this time of testing, the economic recovery has given Ronald Reagan a strong
political hand. Irish luck spared him crippling foreign crises until his
economic policies were in place.

During his first year, Mr. Reagan quickly conveyed a sense of direction in
economic policy, which, despite subsequent backtracking, has given dynamism and
coherence to his Administration. Lately, with economic growth projected at a
hearty 7 percent for 1983 and unemployment finally dropping, he has stuck with
his original game plan rather than try to check a troubling rise in interest
rates.

In the process, he has etched his own priorities. When in the 1980 campaign he
promised to cut taxes, raise military spending and balance the budget, John B.
Anderson, the independent candidate, mocked him by asserting that it was
possible to achieve such contradictory goals only ''with mirrors.''

This year, President Reagan had to choose. He planted his political flag on two
points: an unyielding commitment to the three-year, 25 percent cut in income-tax
rates enacted in 1981, and an insistence on big boosts in military spending. He
walked away from his campaign pledge to bring the budget into balance by 1984
and from his push last year for a balance-the-budget constitutional amendment.
Politically, he has taken the risk of entering an election year with a $200
billion Federal deficit, leaving a legacy of large deficits along with lower
inflation and economic recovery.

This spring, Senate Republican leaders proposed moderate tax increases and
slowing Pentagon growth, but President Reagan rejected that alternative. Both
houses of Congress subsequently passed a budget resolution proposing tax
increases and cutting his Pentagon increase in half.

As interest rates edged upward this fall, threatening to stall or stunt
recovery, pressures resumed for some compromise. Republican senators and
governors, former President Gerald R. Ford, Alan Greenspan, a close outside
economic adviser to the President, and others urged Mr. Reagan to work with
Congress on the deficit problem.

Within the Administration, support came from Martin S. Feldstein, chairman of
the President's Council of Economic Advisers. He argued that unless the 1984
budget provided ''unambiguous assurance'' of declining future deficits, interest
rates were likely to ''remain high or rise further'' and produce ''a more . . .
fragile recovery that may not make it through 1985.'' But the President was
unmoved. White House officials privately mocked Mr. Feldstein as ''Dr. Doom,''
arguing that his economic forecasts had been so unduly pessimistic that they had
had to be revised upward.

Many other economists believe that he is correct about the danger to economic
growth from 1985 onward; but right now the White House horizon extends only to
November 1984. In that time frame, Reagan strategists doubt that Democrats can
make the deficit an effective political issue. ''You don't tax your way out of a
deficit,'' says Edwin Meese 3d, the President's counselor. ''The deficit is the
result of excessive spending.''

That is vintage Reagan, the stance the President is ready to carry into the 1984
campaign.

On other issues, Mr. Reagan has given ground this year. Prodded by Democrats
back in effective control of the House of Representatives, he swallowed his
distaste for Federal ''make- work'' programs and accepted a Democratic-style
highway jobs bill, a separate $4.6 million jobs and emergency relief bill, a
Social Security compromise and moderated his arms proposals to win support for
the MX missile.

The President has also proven agile at cutting political losses by simply
walking away from liabilities. When his own 1984 budget, proposing a

Reagan Jump Page 54







''freeze'' on domestic programs, generated no significant support, he let it die
quietly. In another area, he used his bipartisan commission on strategic forces
to cast off the notion of a ''window of vulnerability,'' an issue he had used to
attack Carter defense policies in 1980.

When the credibility of his Environmental Protection Agency came under fire as
too lax, too pro-business and too political, the President fired top officials
and installed William D. Ruckelshaus, a moderate Republican with a reputation
for honest, rigorous enforcement.

This pattern of tactical realism, what the White House calls ''damage
limitation,'' has been a hallmark of Mr. Reagan's third year. His strategists
believe it is one reason why, in contrast to the declining public-approval
ratings experienced by Presidents Kennedy, Johnson, Nixon and Carter in their
third years, President Reagan's job-approval rating in the Gallup Poll has
climbed this year from a lowly 37 percent in mid-January to 48 percent early in
mid-September.


Politically, the White House concedes, President Reagan's most vulnerable side
is foreign policy. For after nearly three years in office, he cannot point to
any major achievements.

''We need a win somewhere, whether it's Central America, the Middle East or with
the Russians,'' said one Presidential intimate. With all the risks he has taken
lately, it is hard to see where Mr. Reagan's much-needed ''win'' will emerge.
His mission to China next April could provide a lift. But where he is more
seriously engaged, the prospects are not good.

The fighting in Lebanon and the Korean airliner incident have sharpened
Americans anxieties about dangers abroad. In a New York Times/ CBS News poll
late last month, the public gave the President a negative rating on foreign
policy. The nightmare of Mr. Reagan's political advisers is having American
Marines bogged down under fire in Lebanon next year, while there is some
escalation of the crisis in Central America and a hard freeze in Soviet-American
relations.

By gaining Congressional support for keeping the Marines in Lebanon for another
18 months, Mr. Reagan has spread responsibility for his policy and shrewdly
reduced his domestic political risks. But the opposition of Senate Democrats
indicated they could make it a partisan issue if American involvement in Lebanon
deepens.

In the heat of debate, House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. helped President
Reagan carry the day with his argument that ''cutting and running'' from Lebanon
would result in chaos and seriously set back American interests in the Middle
East. But a Times/CBS News survey indicated that Senator John Glenn, a leading
Democratic Presidential contender, was more in tune with the public mood when he
warned that the nation was ''starting down another slippery slope'' like
Vietnam.

The Times/CBS p oll showed that Americans, by 2 to 1, believe that the struggle
in Lebanon is important to American interests, but they also believe, by nearly
3 to 1, that the United States should withdraw from Lebanon rather than increase
the Marine contingent if the current force proves insufficient to achieve
American goals.

These results underscore how queasy President Reagan's muscle-flexings have left
the electorate about where his policy will lead. For though he has stopped short
of major intervention, he has hovered suggestively near the brink, leaving it
deliberately unclear how far he intends to carry this tactic. Already, Secretary
Shultz has suggested the Marines might move deeper into Lebanon to police a
broader cease-fire arrangement.

The depth of the Administration's predicament in the Middle East is illustrated
by the fact that it has all but abandoned the President's bold 1982 blueprint
for an Arab-Israeli peace based on a federation of the West Bank with Jordan. It
has been forced to scramble defensively to prevent a new regional war, permanent
partition of Lebanon, or a pro- Syrian takeover in Beirut that would annul the
Israeli agreement with President Amin Gemayel.

President Reagan has staked his personal prestige just as heavily in Central
America. In an anti-Soviet mood after the Korean airliner incident, Congress may
be more disposed than previously to go along with aid to rebels fighting the
Sandinista Government in Nicaragua. But nearly three months of American military
exercises have failed to produce any dramatic political or military
breakthrough. The difficulty is that the shock effect of a big American show of
force is wearing off, leaving the United States faced with a prolonged stalemate
that will test its patience.  Page 58






''We can live with stalemate in Central America as long as there's no commitment
of ground troops to combat down there,'' says one Presidential adviser. ''If we
got casualties or U.S. troops moving into El Salvador, then it's 'Katie, bar the
door.' ''

With the Soviet Union, the airliner incident has left precious little time or
maneuvering room, disrupting a gentle mending course begun this summer. Over the
objections of Pentagon hawks, President Reagan had simply dropped his earlier
notion that progress on arms control had to be linked to improved Soviet
behavior in Poland or Afghanistan. He backed off so far from his former drive to
halt the Soviet natural-gas pipeline to Western Europe that he permitted the
Caterpillar Tractor Company to sell pipe-laying equipment to Moscow. In place of
undeclared economic warfare, Mr. Reagan substituted a five- year grain agreement
that pledged no more grain embargos. High officials had envisioned a scenario of
modest agreements building toward some accord next spring on the principles of
an arms treaty and possibly a Soviet- American summit.

But now the fragile scenario has been disrupted by the brutal Soviet downing of
the Korean plane and what Secretary Shultz and other Administration officials
privately fear was American rhetorical overkill in response. Belated admissions
by a Soviet spokesman that a ''trigger- happy'' Soviet pilot had failed to
identify the airliner as a civilian plane have been inadequate to ease the
high-level confrontation.

Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko, blocked from his normal Aeroflot flight into
New York, stayed away from the United Nations General Assembly last month after
a sharp clash with Mr. Shultz in Madrid. And in an exceedingly chilly statement,
Yuri V. Andropov, the Soviet leader, vented Moscow's sense of humiliation that
President Reagan had set the tone for Westerners to ''pile heaps of slander on
the Soviet Union'' for the incident.

Mr. Andropov dismissed President Reagan's new proposals on European nuclear
forces as unacceptable and then declared: ''Even if someone had any illusions as
to the possible evolution for the better in the policy of the present
Administration, the latest developments have finally dispelled them.'' In this
climate, the scheduled deployment of American missiles in Western Europe in the
next few weeks may effectively end hopes of serious arms negotiations before the
1984 elections.

Nonetheless, early this month, President Reagan made another conciliatory move
in the strategic-arms talks. Without altering his plans to push an American arms
buildup, he accepted a Congressional initiative to use each side's desire for
modernization of weaponry as a technique for reducing their arsenals. He
proposed that whenever either side deployed new warheads, it should destroy a
larger number of old warheads.

Also offering to reduce the total of nuclear warheads on American bombers and
air-launched cruise missiles if the Kremlin will dismantle some heavy missiles,
Mr. Reagan declared: ''There will have to be trade- offs. The United States is
prepared to make them so long as they result in a more stable balance of
forces.''

As part of an Administration bargain to win Congressional funding for the MX
missile, this shift pleased influential Democrats in Congress and strengthened
Mr. Reagan's political hand against domestic arms-control critics, though
officials did not expect any quick favorable response from the Kremlin.

For the time being, the White House is philosophical about deadlocks with

Page 60 Moscow. ''I never thought,'' says David Gergen, ''that to win the
election, we had to have a summit or an arms-control agreement. Now the
consequences are less. People understand better why it's so difficult to work
with the Russians.''

However, a year from now, one Presidential aide observes, the public mood may be
less tolerant. ''If the economy didn't come back,'' he says, ''we'd be in
trouble with all these foreign-policy problems.''


For much of the year, President Reagan has teased the press and fellow
politicians by keeping his intentions about running secret. But stumping the
country this summer and wooing special constituencies this fall, he has acted
like a man with reelection on his mind. Some personal factor, like Mrs. Reagan's
health, could, of course, cause him to pass up the race.

But that would surprise his closest political lieutenants. He did, after all,
tell them they could go ahead and announce a Reagan re-election committee this
month, and he indicated that he had settled on former Transportation Secretary
Drew Lewis as his campaign manager. He has told White House aides that he will
announce his plans in mid-December.

''If the President runs again, he's got a tough job getting re-elected,'' Robert
Strauss, former Democratic National Chairman and chairman of the Carter campaign
in 1980, commented in a recent interview. ''But that doesn't mean he doesn't go
to the post a favorite. If Las Vegas asked me the odds, I'd say he's 7 to 5
right now.

''The economy is going to be adequate for him to run. But the '84 election
could, for the first time in years, see foreign policy, in its broadest sense,
have a role - this feeling that this is a dangerous world and we need a
different fellow up there.''

Peter D. Hart, a pollster for the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee,
contends that President Reagan is vulnerable even on the economy. A Hart poll
taken before Labor Day showed a 2-to-1 margin of dissatisfaction with the
economy and nearly 60 percent of those polled said they had detected no recovery
or that, if there was one, it would be temporary. Those reactions, Mr. Hart
contends, suggest that Democrats can make political capital of the economy by
focusing on how Reagan deficits and other policies will be a drag on the future.

In the 1982 Congressional campaign, Democrats worked the ''fairness'' issue
against President Reagan, deriding him for budget and tax cuts that hurt the
poor and favored the rich. They will hit that theme hard again in 1984. ''Reagan
has a very hard 'negative' among women, blacks, Hispanics, Jews and blue-collar
Democrats,'' asserts Kirk O'Donnell, political adviser to House Speaker O'Neill.
''It's not strictly the economic issue. It's more the sense that his first
constituency is the well- to-do.''

Privately, Reagan strategists acknowledge his trouble with blacks and worry that
the heavy registration of 684,000 new black voters in nine southern states this
year makes the South a doubtful region in 1984. They also acknowledge that he
confronts a ''gender gap'' with women showing more nervousness than men about
his foreign policy and more uncertainty about economic recovery.

Where the President now stands with the crucial blue-collar constituency is a
matter of sharp debate. Leaders of organized labor are gunning for him. His
private polls show him holding his 1980 level of support among rank-and-file
industrial workers. But with unemployment still high in big states like
Illinois, Ohio, Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin, some Reagan strategists
fear blue- collar disaffection, but hope that it will ease as the recovery
continues.

''The campaign directly rises or falls on what happens on the economy,''
contends Richard Wirthlin, the President's personal poll-taker. ''If people have
the feeling of a secure world and the economy is good, I don't think they are
going to throw him out.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of President Reagan with national security adviser

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 16, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE VIETNAM WAR RECOUNTED AND RELIVED



BYLINE:
By DOUGLAS PIKE

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 44 words

FOR nearly a decade there seemed to be a virtual taboo on the serious study of
the Vietnam War,but now the floodgates have opened. New Vietnam scholarship is
under way in universities here and abroad, with doctoral candidates churning out
dissertations to challenge old passions and inspire some new ones. The formal
interviewing of refugees, veterans and other witnesses, in the production of
what was once called biography and is now called oral history, has become
something of a cottage industry.

Postwar publications on the war (books and periodicals) have proliferated
exponentially. A safe estimate is that the volume has doubled each year since
1975. This is not a matter of mere publishing fashion. It is a manifestation of
a subterranean influence at work among us, a sense that this country never will
regain its full psychic health until we take the Vietnam War experience out of
our collective subconscious and examine it.

The kind of treatment afforded the war has also undergone alteration in the past
two or three years. We appear to be leaving the smoke-of-battle stage of the
70's that saw the works of the first authors on the scene, mostly angry
survivors lashing out at villainy, perfidy or fate, or people who were principal
military or civilian figures in the war and who were anxious to set the course
for our retrospective thinking about the war and its outcome. Now some books are
coming out that are less dogmatic, more objective, including two valuable ones:
''Vietnam: A History'' by Stanley Karnow and ''Without Honor: Defeat in Vietnam
and Cambodia'' by Arnold R. Isaacs.

Stanley Karnow is a veteran foreign newspaper and magazine correspondent, author
and, more recently, a correspondent on public television. For several years he
has been working on a 13-hour television documentary venture on the Vietnam War
that is now being aired on PBS. Subsequently, the series will be offered to
schools as an educational package that will include printed classroom materials
and teachers' aids. Mr. Karnow's history is listed by the publisher as a
''companion'' to the series, although there will also be a textbook by Stephen
Cohen - ''Vietnam: An Anthology and Guide to a Television History'' - that is
geared directly to the programs.

Arnold Isaacs is also a foreign correspondent (The Baltimore Sun), and he is the
son of a famous foreign correspondent, Harold Isaacs. Both books are
journalistic in the correct meaning of the term: reportorial not analytical,
concrete rather than abstract, con

Douglas Pike, director of the Indochina Archive at the University of California
at Berkeley, is completing two books, ''Vietnam and the U.S.S.R.: A
Geo-Political Relationship'' and ''PAVN: A Study of the People's Army of
Vietnam.'' cerned more with fact than interpretation, and dished up with no
small amount of what some find charming and others irritating - colorful
writing. Mr. Karnow's history is intended to be broad-brushed and interesting,
one that leaves no reasonable questions unanswered. Mr. Isaacs' ''Without
Honor'' is more impressionistic, offering chunks and fragments of the Vietnam
experience, intuitively selected, it would seem, and set down in tones ranging
from moodiness to bitter cynicism. It reminds one of the musings of a police
reporter who has seen too much of humanity's worst side.


IN a way the two books complement each other. All

Vietnam War reporters who spent much time at it were caught up emotionally,
despite the mental tricks they practiced to preserve objectivity. Mr. Isaacs
apparently was consumed by the war in a way that Mr. Karnow never was, even
though Mr. Karnow's tenure extended over a longer period. Perhaps it is a matter
of personal chemistry, or it may be that Mr. Isaacs' service was intense and
sustained while Mr. Karnow's was broken by long periods away from Vietnam. In
any event, the essential quality of the Karnow book is a certain disdain while
the Isaacs book seems made of scar tissue.

Mr. Karnow begins with an overview in a chapter that also contains the general
judgments he has about the war, the main one being the chapter's title: ''The
War Nobody Won.'' He also describes his visit to postwar Vietnam and the social
malaise and economic failure he found there. The other 15 chapters in the book
are more or less straightforward chronology of historic events. He begins with
Vietnam challenges to Chinese hegemony for about 15 centuries and to French
imperialism for several centuries, and he gives the former rather short shrift.
The rise of Vietnamese nationalism, the Vietminh War and the departure of the
French colonialists in 1954 occupy the first third of the book.

The remainder of ''Vietnam: A History'' is devoted to the 1960's and early
1970's, focusing on President Kennedy's thinking on the war; the 1963 coup in
which South Vietnam's President Ngo Dinh Diem was slain; the somewhat mindless
initial American slide into the swamp; the controversial Tonkin Gulf incident in
1964 when two American ships were reported fired upon by the North Vietnamese;
the politics and personalities involved in President Johnson's fateful decision
to intervene fully; the 1966-67 intensification of the war amid growing doubt in
Washington; the oft-told story of the 1968 Tet offensive; the Nixon
Administration's efforts at extrication ending in ''the peace that never was,''
and the shock of the decisive Hanoi victory in the spring of 1975.

Despite a masterly effort to be comprehensive, Mr. Karnow's account comes out
sketchy and abbreviated. Much important history is reduced to a sentence or two,
and slightly less important history is ignored entirely. But Mr. Karnow probably
had little choice. The complex relationships that developed on both sides during
the war, the vast swings of strategy and assessment by the contending forces,
the involuted and often self-canceling local conspiracies and international
intrigues that continued throughout the war, the sheer volume of activity in
Saigon, Hanoi, Washington, Moscow and Peking - all these have combined to throw
up insurmountable barriers to telling the story in a way that is succinct and
also fair.

Even so, one wishes Mr. Karnow had addressed himself more to the Vietnamese and
other Allied forces in Vietnam. His book also tends to lack continuity since he
presents the war as a series of self-contained events that are fixed in neat
time periods rather than as a river of always changing currents. And Mr. Karnow
seems a bit more taken with the devil-in- history thesis - the notion that
someone must be blameworthy - than is usually justified by a dispassionate
survey of what has happened.

But, in fact, he has succeeded in doing what he has set out to do - to provide a
popular history of the Vietnam War. He studs his account with sprightly details
that may or may not contain significance, since he wants to be interesting above
all. There are not many carefully delineated judgments in the book. But that is
more a comment than the criticism it might be, for Mr. Karnow does not claim to
have reached a sweeping verdict on the war. Because he has a sharp eye for the
illustrative moment and a keen ear for the telling quote, his book is first-rate
as a popular contribution to understanding the war. And that is what he meant it
to be.


ARNOLD ISAACS is somewhat harder to get at, partly because he does not announce
the task he set for himself at the outset, and partly because his narrative is
more intimate or personal. At first glance, ''Without Honor'' seems to be a
reworking of stories he filed and of his reporter's notes made in Vietnam.
However, close examination indicates that although Mr. Isaacs covers the same
ground he once reported, he reflected at length, and even agonized, over the
meaning of what he had witnessed, once he got back to Baltimore. But because he
cannot bring himself to render dogmatic judgments - there is too much of the
reporter in him still - he limits himself to offering an interpretive
description of the war he knew.

Mr. Isaacs divides his book into three parts: Five chapters labeled ''The
Peace'' deal with the signing of the Paris Agreements to create a cease-fire and
the departure of American combat troops from Vietnam in early 1973. The second
part, called ''The Pawns,'' deals with the war as it fanned out into Laos and
Cambodia. The final part, ''The Fall,'' details more or less chronologically the
last months of the war in eight chapters. The chapter called ''The Fall of
Saigon'' is reportage at its very best, conveying even now a breathtaking kind
of immediacy.

Mr. Isaacs makes no effort to be comprehensive. Rather, he concentrates on the
later stages of the war - its spread into Laos and Cambodia, the Paris
Agreements and the American troop pullout, the final days of South Vietnam in
1975 and the boat people's agony that followed that collapse. This is a meaty,
fact-rich book, peppered with interpretations, not judgments. The title is
overstated, and that is unfortunate because it may turn away potential readers
who may dismiss it as one more work by the sour or the disappointed. But
''Without Honor'' deserves attention, for it offers vivid recollections of key
moments in the war, set down with honesty by a man who saw and felt deeply.

In the end, however, I put down both books, as I have scores before them, with
an old feeling of unfulfillment. I went to Vietnam as a United States Foreign
Service officer when Dwight Eisenhower was President and, both in Government
service and out of it, have made an entire career of the place. I despair that
the Vietnam story will ever be told the way it was. I've concluded it probably
can't be done in the medium of nonfiction. My hope is that some genetic accident
will throw up an unknown American Tolstoy who is able to write a Vietnam ''War
and Peace.''

A History.  By Stanley Karnow.  Illustrated. 750 pp. New York: The Viking Press.


WITHOUT HONOR Defeat in Vietnam and Cambodia.  By Arnold R. Isaacs.
Illustrated. 559 pp. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press. $19.95.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing of a map of Vietnam

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 16, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS FICTION 117

SECTION: Section 7; Page 40, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1313 words


POLAND, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) Seven centuries of history
in fictional form.  226

CHANGES, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) The crises that arise when a
television anchorwoman and a glamorous physician fall in love.  3317

THE NAME OF THE ROSE, by Umberto Eco. (Helen & Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $15.95.) Unraveling the mystery of a murder in a 14th-century
Italian monastery.  4411

HOLLYWOOD WIVES, by Jackie Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The struggle for
money and power in Tinsel Town.  5510

AUGUST, by Judith Rossner. (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95.) The five-year
relationship of two women, a teen-age patient and her analyst.  684

WINTER'S TALE, by Mark Helprin. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $14.95.) Heroic
lives in Manhattan between the late 19th century and the year 2000.  767

WHO KILLED THE ROBINS FAMILY?, created by Bill Adler and written by Thomas
Chastain. (Morrow, $9.95.) The publisher offers a $10,000 prize to the reader
who submits the best answer.  8104

THE AUERBACH WILL, by Stephen Birmingham. (Little, Brown, $16.95.) Three
generations of a German-Jewish family in New York.  995

MONIMBO, by Robert Moss and Arnaud de Borchgrave. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.)
What happens after Castro unveils a plan to stir racial tension in the United
States.  10719

RETURN OF THE JEDI, adapted by Joan D. Vinge. (Random House, $6.95.) Illustrated
storybook based on the latest ''Star Wars'' film.  11144

EVERYTHING AND MORE, by Jacqueline Briskin. (Putnam, $15.95.) Life after Beverly
Hills High School: the careers of four women.  121128

CHRISTINE, by Stephen King. (Viking, $16.95.) A car that kills is at large among
a Pennsylvania town's high school set.  131313

THE SEDUCTION OF PETER S., by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $15.95.) The sudden
danger-filled success of a long out-of-work actor.  141525

HEARTBURN, by Nora Ephron. (Knopf, $11.95.) A roman a clef about a marriage
breaking up.  151231

THE LITTLE DRUMMER GIRL, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $15.95.) A British actress
caught between agents of Israeli intelligence and of the Palestine Liberation
Organization.



NONFICTION

1140

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J. Peters and Robert H.  Waterman Jr. (Harper
& Row, $19.95.) Lessons to be learned from well-run American corporations.  274

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck.  (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  337

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $17.95.) The rescue of two
Americans from an Iranian prison.  4249

MEGATRENDS, by John Naisbitt. (Warner, $17.50.) Predictions about America in the
next decade based on an analysis of conditions today.  5 1

THE MARY KAY GUIDE TO BEAUTY.  (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) An illustrated guide
for women prepared by the staff of a cosmetic firm.  692

THE BODY PRINCIPAL, by Victoria Principal. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Exercises
for women by a television personality.  763

FATAL VISION, by Joe McGinniss. (Putnam, $17.95.) The case of Jeffrey MacDonald,
Ivy League graduate, respected physician and convicted killer of his wife and
daughters.  8455

THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson. (Morrow, $15.)
How to increase the productivity of those with whom you work, as well as your
own.  9105

THE BEST OF JAMES HERRIOT.  (St. Martin's Press, $19.95.) Selections from the
writings of the Yorkshire veterinarian.  10521

CREATING WEALTH, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) Making money in
real estate.  11 3

THE PETER PAN SYNDROME, by Dan Kiley. (Dodd, Mead, $14.95.) A psychologist's
analysis of the plight of men who have never grown up.  12855

NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to buy real
estate with little or no money: a 1980 book.  13133

OUTRAGEOUS ACTS AND EVERYDAY REBELLIONS, by Gloria Steinem. (Holt, Rinehart &
Winston, $14.95.) Essays by a leading feminist writer.  141114

OUT ON A LIMB, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $15.95.) The actress tells of her
mid-life ''journey to find her true self.'' 151291

JANE FONDA'S WORKOUT BOOK, by Jane Fonda. (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) Exercises
for women by the film actress.  The listings above are based on
computer-processed sales figures from about 2,000 bookstores in every region of
the United States. And Bear in Mind Other recent books that in the opinion of
the Book Review staff are of particular literary, topical or scholarly interest:


ARISTOTLE TO ZOOS: A Philosophical Dictionary of Biology, by P. B.  Medawar and
J. S. Medawar. (Harvard University Press, $18.50.) One can learn a tremendous
amount of modern biology from this accessible, opinionated and delightfully
eccentric work by the winner of the Nobel Prize for Medicine in 1960 and his
wife.

CAL, by Bernard Mac Laverty. (George Braziller, $12.95.) A novel of the Troubles
in Northern Ireland, whose emotional impact is grounded in a complete avoidance
of sentimentality.

THE CANNIBAL GALAXY, by Cynthia Ozick. (Alfred A. Knopf, $11.95.) Miss Ozick's
second novel is about a Jewish survivor of Nazi-dominated France who establishes
a primary school in the American Midwest.

CATHEDRAL, by Raymond Carver. (Alfred A. Knopf, $13.95.) Short stories by a
writer who draws upon the American voice of loneliness and stoicism.

CHILDREN OF WAR, by Roger Rosenblatt. (Anchor Press/Doubleday, $13.95.) A
journalist and father of three travels in five weeks to five war zones around
the world to interview and understand children caught up in those wars.

HUGGING THE SHORE: Essays and Criticism, by John Updike.  (Alfred A. Knopf,
$19.95.) A large selection of Mr. Updike's essays and reviews that documents his
achievements as a man of letters.

LITERARY THEORY: An Introduction, by Terry Eagleton. (University of Minnesota
Press, cloth, $29.50; paper, $9.95.) A vigorous, lucid examination of current
literary theories with an eye to their political underpinnings.

LOCAL KNOWLEDGE: Futher Essays in Interpretive Anthropology, by Clifford Geertz.
(Basic Books, $18.50.) Eight essays, comparing different cultures, written over
the past decade by an anthropologist who has attracted attention well outside
his discipline.

MARBOT: A Biography, by Wolfgang Hildesheimer. (George Braziller, $16.50.)
Introducing a new genre - fictional biography. The author has made up Sir Andrew
Marbot (1801-1830), an English art connoisseur, critic and minor man of letters,
out of whole cloth. But it is quality cloth, through which we can see the spirit
of the age and some of its prime movers.

THE STORIES OF WILLIAM TREVOR.  (Penguin Books, $8.95.) All the stories from
five previous collections of the last 20 years by an Anglo-Irish master of short
fiction.

THE TROUBLED CRUSADE: American Education, 1945-1980, by Diane Ravitch.  (Basic
Books, $19.95.) A narrative history whose central theme is the rise and fall of
American education since World War II.

UNION STREET, by Pat Barker. (G. P. Putnam's Sons, $13.95.) Divided into seven
sections, each named for a particular female, this first novel explores every
permutation and nuance of working-class life in a grimy industrial town in
England.

WATCH TIME FLY, by Laura Furman. (The Viking Press, $14.95.) Short stories about
the Vietnam-influenced generation of passively waiting lost souls by a writer
who combines apparent artlessness with a moving and very sophisticated esthetic
sensibility.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 16, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS MASS MARKET Mass market paperbacks are soft-cover books
sold at newsstands, variety stores and supermarkets, as well as in bookstores.
This listing is based on computer-processed reports from bookstores and
representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 outlets across the United
States.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 44, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 722 words


1

THE VALLEY OF HORSES, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $3.95.) A fictional saga of
human survival at the dawn of civilization.

2

A CRY IN THE NIGHT, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Dell, $3.95.) A newly rewed woman is
haunted by her past: fiction.

3

MASTER OF THE GAME, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $3.95.) The secret behind a
woman business tycoon's rise to power: fiction.  4

SECOND HEAVEN, by Judith Guest. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Love in various forms heals
three battered people: fiction.

5

ACCEPTABLE LOSSES, by Irwin Shaw. (Avon, $3.95.) A New York literary agent's
life is threatened by a mysterious stranger: fiction.

6

19 PURCHASE STREET, by Gerald A. Browne. (Berkley, $3.95.) A Mafia operation
that has become ''respectable'': fiction.

7

THE 13TH VALLEY, by John M. Del Vecchio. (Bantam, $3.95.) The war in Vietnam:
fiction.

8

THE SKULL BENEATH THE SKIN, by P. D. James. (Warner, $3.95.) The mysterious
death of an actress in a castle off the Dorset coast: fiction.

9

DRAGON ON A PEDESTAL , by Piers Anthony. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $2.95.) Seventh
volume of a saga about the fabulous land of Xanth: fiction.

10

GOODBYE, MICKEY MOUSE, by Len Deighton. (Ballantine, $3.95.) Two World War II
fighter pilots in love and combat: fiction.

11

THE CLAN OF THE CAVE BEAR, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $3.95.) The beginning of
the saga continued in ''The Valley of Horses.''

12

DIFFERENT SEASONS, by Stephen King. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Four novellas with
mainly nonhorror themes by a modern master of horror.

13

MAX, by Howard Fast. (Dell, $3.95.) The birth of the film industry: fiction.

14

TOUCH THE DEVIL, by Jack Higgins. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Tracking down a K.G.B.
agent who has stolen NATO secrets: fiction.

15

A ROSE IN WINTER, by Kathleen Woodiwiss. (Avon, $3.95.) An English noblewoman
torn between two loves: historical romance.

 TRADE Trade paperbacks are soft-cover books usually sold in bookstores and at
an average price higher than mass market paperbacks. This listing is based on
computer-processed reports from about 2,000 bookstores in every region of the
United States .

1

GARFIELD SITS AROUND THE HOUSE, by Jim Davis. (Ballantine, $4.95.) Cartoon
humor.

2

THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson. (Berkley,
$6.95.) How to increase your productivity.

3

THE COLOR PURPLE, by Alice Walker. (Pocket/Washington Square Press, $5.95.)
Black men and women in the South: fiction.

4

CALDER BORN, CALDER BRED, by Janet Dailey. (Pocket, $6.95.) Conclusion of a
romantic saga of the American West.

5

COLOR ME BEAUTIFUL, by Carole Jackson. (Ballantine, $8.95.) Beauty tips for
women.

6

LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo F. Buscaglia. (Fawcett, $5.95.) Inspirational
talks by a California professor.

7

THURSTON HOUSE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $7.95.) Three generations of a wealthy
San Francisco family: fiction.

8

LIFE EXTENSION, by Durk Pearson and Sandy Shaw. (Warner, $10.95.) How to add
years to your life and life to your years.

9

BLOOM COUNTY, by Berke Breathed. (Little, Brown, $6.95.) Cartoon strips
featuring some very odd characters.

10

MORE ITEMS FROM OUR CATALOG, by Alfred Gingold. (Avon, 4.95.)

 A second spoof of the L. L. Bean catalogue.

11

WHAT COLOR IS YOUR PARACHUTE?  by Richard Nelson Bolles. (Ten Speed Press,
$7.95.) Guide for job hunters and career changers.

12

THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (S&S/Touchstone, $7.95.) Psychological
and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.

13

OVER THE COUNTER PILLS THAT DON'T WORK, by Joel Kaufman and others. (Pantheon,
$6.95.) An assessment by the Public Citizen Health Research Group.

14

LINDA EVANS BEAUTY AND EXERCISE BOOK, by Linda Evans. (Simon & Schuster/Wallaby,
$9.95.) How-to by the television personality.

15

THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $4.95.) Philosophical humor.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 16, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AQUINO'S FINAL JOURNEY

BYLINE: By Ken Kashiwahara

SECTION: Section 6; Page 41, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6714 words


Ken Kashiwahara is an ABC News correspondent based in San Francisco. By Ken
Kashiwahara AIPEI ON THE MORNING OF Aug. 21 was hot and humid, so warm that
Ninoy was not wearing his bulletproof vest underneath his cream-colored safari
suit with a patch bearing his initials, ''BSA'' - for Benigno S. Aquino.  It was
the same suit he had worn when he left Manila three years ago.  We left the
Grand Hotel for the airport at 9:30 A.M., resembling the archetypal tourists
loaded down with cameras, shoulder bags, hand luggage and other traveling
paraphernalia. Traffic to the Chiang Kai-shek International Airport, where we
were taking the 11 o'clock China Airlines flight to Manila, was unexpectedly
smooth and we arrived at 10:10 A.M., which was far too early for Ninoy to enter
the terminal. Since he wanted to proceed to the boarding gate at the last minute
to reduce the chances of being detected, he had his car circle the airport.
Earlier in the morning, a friend had taken our tickets and passports to check us
in ahead of time; Ninoy was prepared to have military officials meet him at the
airport and escort him to prison, and he had asked that his baggage claim stubs
be stapled to my ticket.

I was met in the crowded terminal by this friend and, to my consternation,
discovered that a Philippine Airlines flight was also departing at 11.
Nervously, I glanced around for anyone who looked even vaguely suspicious, and
waited for the time to pass.

At about 10:30, Ninoy finally walked into the terminal and we headed for the
immigration counter. As we approached, I saw two men with walkie- talkies.
''Security,'' I thought. They were looking at Ninoy and pointing at him.

Ninoy had no problems going through immigration as Marcial Bonifacio - the name
on the passport he was carrying. But as soon as he left the counter, the two
''security'' men escorted him around the corner.

I panicked. ''This is it,'' I muttered. ''He's been discovered.'' I hurried
through immigration, rounded the corner and there was Ninoy - grinning. ''That
was the Taiwan garrison commander,'' he said, ''and he just wanted to make sure
I got through O.K. Can you imagine? A general? But he said something very
curious. He said he was called by Philippine Airlines this morning and was told
to take good care of me.''

''Well, obviously the Marcos Government knows,'' I said.

''I guess so.'' Ninoy didn't seem bothered. Perhaps it was inevitable. He had
tried to keep the exact route of his trip home a secret - one shared by only a
few of his friends, relatives and a dozen or so members of the press (I was
accompanying him not as a journalist but as his brother-in-law) - but that had
clearly been impossible.

When we boarded, the journalists who had planned to travel with us and who were
already on board were relieved to see us. Ninoy sat in seat 14C, second section
coach; I was across the aisle in 14B. I could not relax until the plane took off
and an unexplained delay of 10 minutes made me even more nervous. Eventually a
television correspondent in first class walked back to where we were and
explained that the delay was caused by a member of his crew turning up late with
the wrong boarding pass.

China Airlines Flight 811 finally took off at about 11:15 A.M. As the wheels of
the Boeing 767 left the runway, Ninoy smiled and said: ''Well, we made it!''
AQUINO SECOND SPREAD



 haps it was inevitable. He had tried to keep the exact route of his trip home a
secret - one shared by only a few of his friends, relatives and a dozen or so
members of the press (I was accompanying him not as a journalist but as his
brother-in-law) - but that had clearly been impossible.

When we boarded, the journalists who had planned to travel with us and who were
already on board were relieved to see us. Ninoy sat in seat 14C, second section
coach; I was across the aisle in 14B. I could not relax until the plane took off
and an unexplained delay of 10 minutes made me even more nervous. Eventually a
television correspondent in first class walked back to where we were and
explained that the delay was caused by a member of his crew turning up late with
the wrong boarding pass.

China Airlines Flight 811 finally took off at about 11:15 A.M. As the wheels of
the Boeing 767 left the runway, Ninoy smiled and said: ''Well, we made it!'' IX
YEARS AGO, I HAD SAT IN A crowded room at Fort Bonifacio as the military
tribunal tried Benigno S.  Aquino Jr. on charges of illegal possession of
firearms, murder and subversion. It was my first encounter with the man who was
the most famous opponent of President Ferdinand E. Marcos. Even though Aquino
looked gaunt - he had lost 40 pounds during his solitary confinement since 1972
and had almost died during a 40-day fast in 1975 to protest his trial by the
military - his legendary energy, magnetism and eloquence were clearly
undiminished, if not honed, by his imprisonment. Maintaining all along that the
charges were ''obviously trumped up,'' he made it clear he would abide by his
belief: ''I would rather die on my feet with honor than live on bended knees in
shame.''

I was then covering the trial for a human-rights story for ABC News. The next
time we met - in 1980 - Aquino, temporarily released from prison, was on his way
to Dallas for triple-bypass heart surgery, and his sister Lupita and I were
planning to be married. During his three-year self-imposed exile in the United
States, I found that the public Aquino was not very different from the private
man.

An almost stereotypical extrovert, he enjoyed the company of friends,
supporters, colleagues, the press - any opportunity to discuss current events.
Even when the crowds were gone and he was alone with his family, the
conversation inevitably turned to international affairs in general and problems
in the Philippines in particular. Blessed with a photographic memory, he could
cite the political and economic minutiae of countries many people had never
heard of. Since he was a voracious reader - a trait he had developed during his
years in prison - the extent of his knowledge was formidable.

He was such an inveterate talker that if he wasn't talking in person, he was on
the phone. It got so that whenever he visited, Lupita or I would put a phone in
his room.

Through the years, there was never any doubt among the members of the tightly
knit Aquino clan that Ninoy had assumed the political mantle of his father and
grandfather. Ninoy's grandfather, Gen. Servillano Aquino, was a famous
insurrecto who fought against the Spanish and then the Americans at the turn of
the century. His father, Benigno S. Aquino Sr., was a senator, Speaker of the
Assembly and a Cabinet minister.

Ninoy himself was the Wunderkind of Philippine politics. As a young reporter and
intermediary of President Ramon Magsaysay, he made his way deep into the Luzon
jungles and persuaded Luis Taruc, Communist leader of the Hukbalahap guerrillas,
to surrender. At 22, he was the youngest Mayor of Concepcion, his hometown. At
28, he became the youngest Governor of Tarlac Province.  (While he was Governor,
this scion of one of the country's oldest families married Corazon Cojuangco,
daughter of the man who owned Hacienda Luisita, an 18,000-acre sugar-cane
plantation in Tarlac, as well as banks and other real estate. Around this time,
as a self-proclaimed ''radical rich guy,'' he subdivided land owned by the
Aquino family, as well as land that he bought, into individual plots and gave
them to field and factory workers.) At 34, Ninoy became the youngest senator in
the country and a cinch to become the Philippines' youngest President when he
was arrested by President Marcos who, hours later, declared martial law.

Ninoy survived imprisonment; he survived the death sentence meted out by the
military tribunal in 1977 because an international outcry that followed the
announcement forced the Marcos regime to grant Ninoy a reprieve; and he survived
open- heart surgery. After his recovery, Ninoy accepted fellowships at Harvard
University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where he lectured,
studied and wrote about peacefully transforming dictatorships into democracies,
all the while speaking out against the Marcos regime. He traveled around the
world in search of political solutions for his country, meeting with Filipino
dissidents, exiled leaders of the armed Moslem rebellion in the southern
Philippines, as well as winners and losers of past revolutions.

In a book that Ninoy was working on at the time of his murder (''The
Philippines: Democracy or Dictatorship''), he concluded that the struggle in the
Philippines ''is between those who have been mesmerized by the 'efficiency' of
authoritarianism and those who still hold that democracy with all its flaws and
inefficiency is man's best hope for betterment and progress. Man's sense of
justice makes democracy possible; man's injustice makes it necessary.'' ESPITE
11 YEARS OF EXILE and imprisonment, Aquino was still considered by many in and
out of the Philippines to be his country's best hope for a rebirth of democracy.
He personally considered a return home urgent and timely. The Philippine economy
had deteriorated. So, reportedly, had Marcos's health.  The opposition was
fragmented, and increasing numbers of moderates were moving to the armed left,
which had made such gains that the country now had the largest active guerrilla
war in Southeast Asia. From an estimated 500 guerrillas in 1972 who were
operating along a handful of fronts and had an estimated 100,000 supporters,
last year armed guerrillas numbering in the thousands operated along at least 45
fronts and had a mass base of one million.

Ninoy believed that Marcos, with complete control of the military, was the key
to a peaceful transition to democracy. Before it was too late, he wanted to
persuade the President to loosen the reins of authoritarianism and institute
crucial national reforms. He thought by risking the return home, risking
imprisonment and even the death sentence, Marcos would see he was serious about
a peaceful national reconciliation. Ninoy was afraid that if Marcos died or
became incapacitated, a power struggle would lead to a military takeover or
armed conflict.

Sometime in May, Ninoy decided to return home. His fellowship at M.I.T. was
ending and he felt he had done all he could in the United States. Many of his
friends, political colleagues and relatives - fearing for his safety - had
advised against this step. Yet once he made his decision, his family and friends
stood firmly behind him.

The large amount of money Ninoy had been able to raise for the opposition's
cause while he was in the United States was particularly encouraging.  Many
wealthy, pro-Marcos businessmen, obviously covering their political bets, had
secretly pledged political capital.

Ninoy's immediate goal was to organize the Philippine opposition for the
parliamentary elections in May 1984. He needed at least four months to prepare
and four months to campaign, and an August return would give him that time. He
had no plans to run for office, neither did he think that with Marcos appointees
counting the ballots the President could be toppled politically. But he thought
he could break Marcos's financial back.

''The grass is dry. All you need is the spark,'' Ninoy said, referring to the
President's serious economic problems. Ninoy thought he could force Marcos into
overspending by mounting a well-financed opposition campaign, confident he could
raise at least $1 million from foreign sources alone.

In early July, Ninoy set Aug. 7 as his homecoming date, a Sunday when workers
and students were off, when the welcoming crowd at the airport would be larger
than on a weekday. He wanted to make a big homecoming splash to show the world
that the Philippine opposition was ready to do political battle, that the people
were disenchanted with Marcos.

His announcement to return home was the first salvo in what became a battle of
nerves between the two Filipino archrivals.

In the beginning, some Government officials seemed to favor the homecoming. On
July 3, for instance, Defense Minister Juan Ponce Enrile told an opposition
leader there was no legal basis to reimprison Aquino if he returned. Marcos,
Enrile said, issued the order releasing Aquino from prison for his heart surgery
in the United States and that order had not been rescinded.

An official at the Ministry of Justice said motions filed before the Supreme
Court regarding Aquino's death sentence had been dismissed as ''moot and
academic'' when Aquino left for the United States. One opposition leader
speculated that Marcos would not reimprison Aquino immediately, but would
pretend to be studying his case at least until after President Reagan's planned
visit in November.

*


But on July 19, the Philippine Government adopted a different strategy. During a
visit by Imelda Marcos, wife of President Marcos, to the United States, she had
met with Ninoy and had promised to renew his passport for him; it was still in
her possession. Ninoy was therefore forced to request a travel document from the
Philippine Consulate in New York. But the Government rejected the request,
claiming military intelligence had uncovered an assassination plot against
Aquino by relatives of victims he had allegedly ordered killed, and suggesting
he postpone his trip for one month while Government agents attempted to
''neutralize'' the would-be assassins.

Since he had never ordered anyone killed, Ninoy considered the Government's
basic premise ''preposterous'' and was puzzled by its illogic. ''If true,'' he
said one evening, ''what it means is that Marcos is more concerned about me, the
alleged victimizer, than about the victims.''

Ninoy began to speculate that Marcos had become irrational. His optimism faded
and he began questioning whether he should return under the circumstances,
whether he should be accompanied by journalists. (He had thought that having
journalists along could be a kind of security. ''They'll be my only protection
in case

* Early this month, the White House announced that President Reagan was not
including the Philippines among the countries he would be visiting in Asia.

Aquino Jump pg 61




 something happens,'' he had said.)

''If I came in quietly,'' he said, ''Marcos might be lenient.'' He would not ask
for leniency; he just hoped Marcos had some sense of justice and decency left in
him to allow it. House arrest would still allow him to organize the opposition
and possibly talk to Marcos, but in solitary confinement he might not be able
to. He even speculated the Government might be setting him up for ''the kill.''

But in the days that followed, Ninoy was riding high again. He concluded that
the assassination plot was another Marcos ploy to prevent him from going home.
During a meeting with Mrs. Marcos in May, she had tried to discourage him from
returning by informing him that the President could no longer control the
actions of certain parties in his Government; she offered to set him up in
business if he remained in this country. He had politely declined the offer and
dismissed the threat.

Without a valid travel document, he began to explore alternatives. The Marcos
Government had threatened all airlines with revocation of landing rights and
stiff fines if they brought an ''undocumented passenger'' to the Philippines.
Ninoy was in favor of using a false passport. He had two: One had been bought in
the Middle East and carried his nom de guerre, Marcial Bonifacio: ''Marcial''
for martial law, under which he was jailed as a political prisoner;
''Bonifacio'' for the name of the military prison in which he had languished for
seven years and seven months.  (Fort Bonifacio itself was named after the
Filipino hero who had fought against the Spanish in the 1890's and who was
executed by a political rival.) The other ''travel document'' was a blank
passport which an old Government acquaintance had procured for him and in which
he had written his real name.

On July 31, Marcos fired another salvo: He revived Ninoy's death sentence. When
he heard it, Ninoy's mood plummeted again. But planning for the Aug. 7 arrival
continued and Ninoy settled on a Korean Air Lines flight from New York to Seoul
with a connection to Manila.  All the flights he had considered landed in Manila
between 11 A.M. and 1 P.M. Sunday. Five planes arrived then and the jumbo jets
disgorging their passengers would add confusion to Aquino's homecoming and help
disguise his actual flight.

But on Aug. 2, all that planning became academic when Ninoy received a cable
from Defense Minister Enrile: ''. . . We are convinced beyond a reasonable doubt
that there are plots against your life. . . . We request you, therefore, to
suspend your return to the Philippines for at least one month. . . . Your avowed
intention to answer the call for national unity and reconciliation will not be
advanced by any attempt against your life which will exacerbate the present
situation. . . .''

Enrile is a lawyer and Ninoy was struck by the legal certainty of the phrase
''beyond a reasonable doubt.''

''Why not postpone?'' he asked rhetorically that evening. ''Why not be
accommodating on this one point? There's nothing magic about Aug. 7. Why should
I push them against the wall? If I do, they may have to prove it's true.''

Ninoy weighed the pros and cons of postponing. He might lose the momentum that
had been built up among his supporters in the Philippines, but if postponing
would help him achieve his primary goal - persuading Marcos of the urgent need
for political change - it was worth it.

Some opposition leaders were clearly upset with the postponement, but agreed to
go along with Ninoy's wishes. He set a new arrival date: Sunday, Aug. 21, one
month and two days after he was first notified of an assassination plot against
him. The opposition homecoming committee stressed that the new date had to be
firm.

Ninoy began to speculate about the reason the Government was insisting on ''one
month.'' It could be a delaying tactic. At the end of one month, Marcos could
ask for another month, then another, to keep Ninoy out of the country until
after the planned Reagan visit in November. It could be that Marcos's health had
deteriorated to such a point that he needed surgery immediately.

Page 62

Indeed, on Aug. 5, the Government produced more grist for the rumor mill. The
New York Times reported a Government official saying that Marcos was going into
a ''three-week seclusion'' to write two books. Ninoy was astounded by this
development. ''What the hell is going on? It doesn't make sense,'' he said.
''Why would he have to go into seclusion to write books?''

His contacts in Manila informed him that the capital was buzzing with the rumor
that Marcos would be undergoing a kidney transplant. Some warned that the
''seclusion'' could be a Government tactic to divert attention from Aquino's
homecoming. Ninoy learned from United States Government sources that Marcos
might be using the seclusion to reorganize his Government.

More rumors of Marcos's declining health followed, but they made no difference.
Ninoy was committed to the Aug. 21 arrival date.


On Aug. 12, Ninoy called and asked where I would be in an hour. I told him. He
said he would call from a ''clean one'' - a phone he was certain was not tapped.
(Filipino dissidents in this country live with the awareness that their
activities may be monitored and their phones tapped; some suspect that the
American Government shares intelligence information with the Marcos regime. One
anti-Marcos opposition leader living in the United States once used a pay phone
to relay information to a man who used an alias to check into a Manila hotel
just to receive the call. That man was subsequently confronted with the
information and arrested by the Philippine military.)

An hour later, Ninoy called and said he was leaving the next day for Los Angeles
and Singapore and would be in Taiwan on Aug. 19. I was to meet him in Taipei,
where we would be flying China Airlines to Manila; because Taiwan had no
diplomatic relations with the Philippines, he said, there were fewer chances of
his being discovered by Philippine Government officials.

On Aug. 14, Ninoy flew to Singapore, using the fake passport with his real name.
In Singapore, he was met by the son of the Sultan of Johore and whisked across
the border to Malaysia, where he met with high-ranking officials from Indonesia,
Thailand and Malaysia, to explain why he was going home and what he hoped to
achieve.

Back in Singapore, Ninoy picked up a Taiwan visa for his Bonafacio passport, and
on Aug. 19 prepared to fly to Hong Kong, where he would be changing planes for
Taipei. At the check-in counter, however, the ticket agent looked at Ninoy's
passport and, in apparent surprise, dropped it. She called for her supervisor.
''This is it, they've got me,'' Ninoy thought. But he was allowed to board, and
he never found out why the ticket agent was so flustered.

For his flight from Hong Kong to Taipei, Ninoy switched to the Bonifacio
passport. Except for the Taiwan visa and a fake Manila departure stamp, which
someone had forged for him in the United States, the passport pages were clean -
which aroused the suspicions of the immigration officer in Taipei.

''Where did you come from?'' he asked.

Ninoy thought quickly. ''From Manila.''

''But the flight came from Hong Kong,'' the officer pressed.

''Yeah, but I had to fly to Hong Kong to make a connection because I couldn't
get a direct flight.'' Ninoy was convincing and the immigration officer let him
go.

In Taipei, Ninoy stayed at the Grand Hotel. Soon after his arrival, he received
indirect word that China Airlines had learned of his presence in Taipei. He was
shaken and decided to do something he hadn't planned: inform the Taiwan
Government through an intermediary to determine if the Government would prevent
him from boarding the China Airlines flight.

Shortly, through another intermediary, the Government responded. ''We have never
heard of Aquino and we do not know he is in Taiwan.'' Ninoy relaxed a bit. He
noted there was no love lost between the Taiwan Government and Marcos, who had
unceremoniously ejected Taiwan's Ambassador from the Philippines when Manila
established diplomatic relations with Peking.

Saturday, Aug. 20, the journalists who were to accompany us to Manila arrived in
Taipei, and Ninoy spent most of the day and night being interviewed in his room.

The reporters asked about the alleged assassination plot, which he answered with
bravura, although - as he was to indicate later - he still believed that the
plot was a Marcos ploy.

''Assassination is part of public service,'' he told one reporter. ''Look at
what happened to President Reagan. If my fate is to die by an assassin's bullet,
so be it. But I cannot be petrified by inaction or fear of assassination and
therefore stay in a corner.''

To a Japanese television crew, he said: ''You have to be very ready with your
hand camera, because this action can happen very fast. In a matter of three,
four minutes, it could be all over and I may not be able to talk to you again.''

Ninoy had been in constant telephone contact with his family and supporters in
the Philippines, and he told another reporter he had received word that he might
be ''hit'' at the airport and that the assassin would be shot in return.
''That's why I'm going to wear this,'' he said, holding up a bulletproof vest.
''But if they hit me in the head, I'm a goner.'' Though tragically prophetic, it
was not so much a premonition as an indication of another rumor he had heard.

Still, on the eve of an uncertain homecoming, Ninoy seemed to take the death
threats more seriously than he had in the past. Max Vanzi, a pg64


U.P.I. correspondent, had just arrived from San Francisco with the latest wire
story from Manila: Gen. Fabian C. Ver, Marcos's powerful right-hand man and
chief of the Philippine armed forces, was quoted as saying that if Aquino
arrived in Manila, he would be put back on the plane and returned to his
departure point.

Ninoy dismissed that statement as preposterous, laughing at the notion of
himself becoming a diplomatic Ping- Pong ball: Marcos sending him back to
Taiwan, Taiwan refusing to accept him and sending him back to Manila.

But in the same wire story, Ver also warned that Aquino might be assassinated at
the airport. When he heard that, Ninoy's face fell. ''Oh, my God!'' he muttered.
Ver was the Philippine Government official Ninoy distrusted the most, describing
him as ''blindly loyal'' to the President.

''Ver is so loyal if Marcos told him to jump from a building, he would salute
and say, 'What floor, sir?' '' Ninoy quipped.

Later, when all the reporters had left and we were alone, he commented that this
was the first time Ver had talked publicly about assassination. He voiced
another concern. He had just heard from Manila that the opposition leaders would
not be allowed to meet him at planeside. He had wanted them there to demonstrate
to Marcos that the opposition was united.

''That's a bad sign,'' he said. ''What it means is that they're going to play
hardball. You know,'' he added quietly, ''the best thing might be if they turn
the plane around tomorrow.'' He still considered assassination only a remote
possibility and certainly not at the airport - not with reporters and cameramen
accompanying him.

Ninoy's biggest concern was that the Philippine Government might stop the plane
at the end of the runway and whisk him off to prison where he would be held
incommunicado.

I told him of the preparations being made for his Manila homecoming. Leaflets
were being distributed at universities, yellow ribbons were being tied to trees
(to recall the song ''Tie a Yellow Ribbon 'Round the Old Oak Tree,'' about a
former prisoner returning home) and a big crowd was expected at the airport.

''Boy, Direk is really doing it, huh?'' he exclaimed, his face beaming.
''Direk'' is the Filipino slang for director, his nickname for Lupita, who is a
movie director and who already had been dispatched from San Francisco to Manila
with an 18-point list of instructions. Teresa Aquino Oreta, another sister, also
had left for Manila from the United States. And Aurora Aquino, his 74-year- old
mother, and other family members had an active role, as well, in planning the
homecoming.

Throughout the day, reporters in Manila were attempting to locate Ninoy to
determine what flight he would be on. As a precaution, Ninoy called a friend in
Indonesia, who booked him on Garuda Indonesian Airways under ''B. Aquino.'' He
had also been booked on an Air France flight, and had even hinted that he might
arrive on a private plane.

Ninoy finally went to his bedroom about 12:30 A.M., exhausted. He lay face down
on his bed, hands outstretched, fingering his rosary beads and praying.

He was subdued that last night. ''You know,'' he said, ''I'm so tired. Maybe
it's better if they take me straight to prison so I can rest for a while.'' Even
with all the talk of assassination, Ninoy still clung to the hope he might be
placed under house arrest.

Ninoy slept only about four hours. Up by 5 A.M. Sunday, he said his rosary again
and called his wife, Cory, in Boston for the last time. She read the Bible to
him. He spoke briefly with his children and cried. He then sat down and wrote
each of them a letter.

When I arrived in his room, he was his usual exuberant self.

I was wearing a beige safari shirt, similar to the ones I used to wear when I
was covering the Vietnam War. Ninoy looked at me and broke out in a huge grin.

''My God, man, what's that you're wearing? You look like you're going to cover a
war!''

''Look at you,'' I bantered.  ''What are you, a white knight in shining armor?
And look at that patch? What does that stand for? Boy Scouts of America?''

For a moment, I became serious. ''Listen,'' I said, ''if they come to get you on
the plane, I want you to tell them that your brother-in-law is with you and you
want him to go with you.'' He agreed.

The mood at breakfast continued to be jovial. He had ordered room service: eggs,
bacon and toast. He asked for ketchup, which he poured over his eggs. He always
ate his eggs that way. I looked over in mock revulsion and said, ''That's
disgusting.''

Ninoy talked about the phone call to his wife and said, ''One regret I have is
that Cory has had to suffer so much.'' Ninoy's political life had kept him away
from home a lot and Cory knew there was some risk in his return home, but had
stood by him.

''You know, Kris really wanted to come with me,'' he continued wistfully. Kris
is his 12-year-old daughter. ''But I had to tell her 'no.' ''


As the Boeing 767 reached cruising altitude, the cameramen and reporters noisily
went into action, crowding the aisles near Ninoy's seat. They were quickly asked
to go to the rear of the plane, which was virtually empty.

Ninoy spent most of the in- flight time posing for photographs and giving
interviews. Finally, interviews over, Ninoy returned to his original seat, but
was besieged by a handful of Filipino passengers. One woman kept kissing him and
the cameras rolled again. Ninoy was embarrassed. ''My wife's not going to like
this,'' he muttered. Other Filipinos asked for his autograph. One shoved her
passport in front of him and asked him to sign. He started to do so.

''Noy, you can't sign a passport!'' I exclaimed. He hadn't realized what he was
signing and autographed her boarding card instead.

Just before the plane began its descent, Ninoy took out his bulletproof vest,
went to the bathroom and put it on. When p. 66 he sat down again, he turned to
me and wondered if we were going to land. There had been speculation that the
Manila control tower would refuse to permit the plane to touch down and would
order it back to Taipei.

''I think it's a victory if we just land,'' he said. ''Everything else is a
bonus.''

As we descended over a Philippine landscape of rice fields and rural villages,
Ninoy reached into his bag and handed me a box. ''Here,'' he said, ''I want you
to have my watch.'' I was stunned.

''Why? Why are you doing this?'' ''I just want you to have it.'' I took it as a
symbol of our adventure together.

Then he repeated instructions he had given me earlier. ''Don't forget to go to
my house as soon as we land and have someone take my belongings to me in prison.
It's the same stuff I had there before. They'll know.''

I turned away for a few minutes, and when I looked back, Ninoy was fingering his
rosary beads, his lips moving in silent prayer.

As the China Airlines jet touched down, I turned and said: ''Noy, we're home.''
He smiled. Then came some tense minutes while the plane taxied. Kiyoshi
Wakamiya, a Japanese correspondent and close friend of Ninoy's who sat next to
me, was clearly agitated. Looking out the window, he exclaimed that the tarmac
was deserted. I leaned over to look. As we taxied by other planes parked at the
terminal, the absence of activity appeared ominous. But then I caught a glimpse
of two maintenance men under two of the planes and dismissed the fear.

As we turned into Gate 8, Wakamiya could see part of the welcoming crowd in
front of the terminal building. Ninoy looked pleased.

But as we pulled into the gate, I noticed several soldiers dressed in khakis
standing under the jetway. A vehicle was parked there, too. Then a blue van
pulled up, the back door opened and a group of soldiers dressed in blue fatigues
and carrying rifles and pistols jumped out, fanning out around the plane.
Inside, a ripple of nervous chatter spread through the plane as people crowded
around the windows, watching the activity on the tarmac. Shutters clicked in a
half-dozen cameras.

As soon as the engines were shut down, three khaki-clad soldiers began climbing
the service stairs of the jetway. The tension increased.

''Noy, they're coming to get you,'' I warned. I was nervous, but still assumed
they were going to escort him to prison and that the soldiers in blue were there
as ''window dressing'' - to provide security because of the alleged
assassination plot.

Passengers began standing up to disembark. Cameramen and photographers remained
at the windows. Then came an announcement over the plane's intercom: ''Would all
passengers please remain on board.'' For a few seconds there was silence, then
everyone resumed talking.

The three soldiers began making their way down the aisle, stepping around
photographers and cameramen, who by now were standing or kneeling on seats,
camera shutters clicking. The first soldier walked right past Ninoy, but the
second one, who wore sunglasses, recognized him. The third soldier bent down;
Ninoy smiled and shook his hand. (I remembered Lupita once telling me that
Filipinos are cordial even to their enemies.) They exchanged a few words in
Tagalog. Then Ninoy stood up and the three began to escort him out.

By now the sound of excited chatter had gone up several decibels. All the while,
the shutters clicked and cameramen, photographers and reporters shouted and
jostled for vantage points.

I waited for Ninoy to tell the soldiers that he wanted his brother-in-law to
accompany him, but he didn't and began walking away from me. Over the noise, I
shouted a reminder to him: ''Noy, can I go with you?'' He turned back and looked
at me for a split second, unsmiling. Without breaking stride, he said quickly:
''Yeah, come on.'' The last soldier leading him out was just ahead of me. I
leaned forward and said: ''I'm his brother-in-law. Can I go with him?''

He turned back and ordered: ''You just take seat.''

I decided to follow anyway, but the passenger compartment had become chaotic.
Television crews and photographers jumped in front of me to follow, too, pushing
and shoving as we left the plane and stepped onto the jetway leading into the
terminal. But once inside the jetway, the soldiers abruptly rushed Ninoy out the
service door. Plainclothes security guards who had been waiting in the jetway
pushed the windowed door shut and blocked it on the outside. Cameramen and
reporters pushed against the

pg 69 door, shouting at each other and at the guards. I pushed too, straining to
see over them, but couldn't.

Then, nine seconds after Ninoy went out the door, we heard the first shot. There
was instant pandemonium. Everyone pushed harder, trying to get the door open.
Four seconds later, we heard three more shots. The jetway was filled with
shouts. Then there was a burst of automatic-rifle fire.

''Goddamit!'' I yelled. ''Bastards! Bastards!'' This wasn't supposed to happen!
It couldn't have happened!

I had to see what was going on, but couldn't in the crush. I ran to a window of
the jetway, but couldn't see anything from there either. Reporters and camera
crews stampeded back into the plane, hoping for a better view. I ran after them.
Inside the plane, passengers were screaming. The journalists were pushing
against the windows to see what was happening, climbing over passengers to do
so.

''What happened? What happened?'' I shouted, shaking with rage. Vanzi, the
U.P.I. correspondent, approached. ''I'm sorry,'' he said, a stunned look on his
face. ''I saw him on the ground. He was shot in the head. There was a lot of
blood. I'm sure he's dead.''

''Are you sure it was him? Are you sure?'' I was frantic.

'Yeah, I'm sure. I'm sorry, man.''

I wasn't satisfied. I asked Wakamiya. ''They killed him! They killed him!'' he
gasped.

By the time I fought my way to the window, Ninoy's body was gone. The soldiers
had lifted him into the blue van and driven off, I was told. There was only a
body dressed in blue on the tarmac.

''Those bastards! Those - bastards,'' I muttered over and over. Reporters began
asking passengers what they saw. Some passengers were crying; some reporters
were in a state of shock. Photographers were still pointing their cameras out
the windows. With Ninoy's body gone, the only thing I could think of at that
point was getting out into the terminal to tell my wife, Lupita, and Ninoy's
mother what had happened.

I ran through the jetway toward the terminal. There was a long line at the
immigration counter. I ran to the front and told the first man in line: ''My
brother-in-law has been shot. I have to get through.'' He quickly stepped back.

Once through immigration, I ran into some journalists who were there to cover
the homecoming. ''Where's Lupita?'' I asked frantically. Lupita had been the
family's contact with the press. They pointed me to the V.I.P. room in the far
corner of the terminal. On the way there, some members of the family called my
name and tried to stop me. I kept walking.

The V.I.P. room was jammed with reporters and cameramen. I called for Lupita.
Cameras began pointing toward me; microphones were thrust in my face. ''What
happened?'' they asked. I didn't answer. I found Lupita. I was still shaking.
She took me into a corner. I told her what had happened. Someone else stuck a
microphone between us. I lost my control. ''Get that goddamn thing out of my
face!'' I yelled, shoving it away. ''He was my brother-in-law.'' Unconsciously,
I had used the past tense. I saw Ninoy's mother sitting in a chair looking at
me, deep sorrow in her eyes. I didn't have the heart to tell her. I went over,
kissed and hugged her. ''Mommy'' was all I could say.

I still wasn't convinced that Ninoy was dead. Instinctively, I began thinking of
sources as if I were covering a news story. Two sources are not enough, I
thought. I need more.

I went back to the arrival area and waited for the other journalists who had
accompanied us. The welcoming crowd had gathered outside the terminal. Then I
heard them cheering: ''Ninoy! Ninoy!'' My heart stopped. Ninoy was outside, I
thought. I told Lupita to run back into the V.I.P. room to tell her mother that
Ninoy might be alive. I strained to see over the crowd, to see if Ninoy was
there. Soon someone said they were cheering opposition leader Salvador H.
Laurel, who was working his way through the crowd to tell them Ninoy had been
shot.

I then saw Jim Laurie, an ABC News correspondent, walking out of immigration.
He, too, had seen Ninoy lying on the tarmac, shot in the head. ''I'm sure he's
dead,'' Laurie said.

I was devastated, and paced up and down until Lupita took my arm and said,
''Let's get out of here.'' Our car inched its way through the horrendous Manila
traffic and my impatience grew with every second. I wanted to get to a phone to
call Cory. I had promised I would call as soon as we got to Manila.

Finally, at the home of one of Lupita's sisters, I phoned Boston. I was still
shaking. I dreaded making the call. Cory answered and spoke very calmly. She had
already been called by Japanese Congressman Shintaro Ishihara, a close family
friend, who had heard the news from Wakamiya. I related more of the details.
Cory is amazingly strong, I thought, stronger than I. She said she was O.K.,
relatives were on their way over. She thanked me for all I had done for Ninoy.
I was touched she would say such a thing at a moment like that. I emphasized we
still had no official confirmation that he was dead. She asked me to let her
know of any developments.

A few minutes later, the phone rang. It was an Army officer from the Fort
Bonifacio hospital. He said Ninoy was there.

''Is he dead or alive?'' Lupita shouted repeatedly into the phone. He would not
answer. Our hopes were raised again. Lupita raced out the door to the hospital.
I said I would stay at the house and asked her to call me as soon as she
confirmed anything at all. An anxious hour passed before she finally relayed a
message to me.

I called Cory again.

Ninoy was dead.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Aquino on Flight 811; photo of Aquino putting on bullet-proof
vest; photo of Aquino greeting Aviation board; photo of Aquino shot; photo of
Aquino's family at home; photo of funereal procession

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 16, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 15, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1128 words


A COMPELLING DRAMA OF DESPAIR AT MCCARTER





PRINCETON IN ''Play Memory'' at the McCarter Theater here, we watch

the deterioration and downfall

of Cam MacMillan, ostensibly through alcoholism but, deep down, through despair.

Cam is a tobacco salesman in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, a milling town surrounded
by small prairies. He engaged in the illegal practice of swapping gasoline
coupons for sales commissions during World War II. Trouble was, Cam was caught.

A criminal in one sense, a scapegoat in another, Cam is disgraced, an outcast.
One by one, his house furnishings (a picture on the wall, a rocking chair, even
a door) are carted off in exchange for life's necessities - and, once, for a
Christmas tree.

Was Cam ''helpless in (his) nature to act differently?'' his daughter recounts
in her ''memory'' narrative? Was he, as a minister says, ''losing his mind?'' Or
was Cam true to his own convictions that he wouldn't compromise, which to him
meant to come down, to give in to the ''raw deal'' of life?

Joanna McClelland Glass's play compresses 28 years into two acts.  The first is,
perhaps, overly long.

The piece reflects the ''memory play'' device of Tennessee Williams in ''The
Glass Menagerie'' and the theme of value systems questioned by Arthur Miller in
''Death of a Salesman.''

''A man's life is most accurately described by his checkbook,'' bemoans Cam, as
if Willy Loman were suddenly among us. For some theatergoers, Cam's ultimate
resignation to death might possibly recall Marsha Norman's '' 'night Mother.''

For all that, Miss Glass has her own distinctive, impressively literate voice,
her own vision that combines affirmation with submission to defeat, which can
also be an acknowledgement of responsibility.

Harold Prince's staging echoes the silent sounds of hearts pierced. On the
surface, movement flows in rhythm with the weaving in and out of actuality and
reportage. These are the two components of Miss Glass's view of memory.

As Cam slaps his daughter Jean, she falls to the floor in a choreographic whirl.
Mr. Prince is a master of body language to telling effect. Watch Cam's wife,
Ruth, a testament to resilence, suddenly walk up the stairs, stooped and tired.
The director is at one with the playwright.

Miss Glass has pulled off the near- impossible feat of transforming Cam, a
character full of contradictions, into a man we accept without judgment.

He hurts his daughter psychically and physically. He berates his wife for her
simplicity, her goodness, her hardiness. He won't make concessions to survival.
He won't accept prescribed platitudes for recovery.

What is affirmative about the reminence of Cam is his clinging to ''opinions,
standards and judgments.'' And when those fail, his ultimate love for liquor. By
turns, he relies on appearances and rejects them, looking for inner truth.

In an intelligent performance, Donald Moffat communicates the ambivalence that
Cam feels about his daughter, his humiliation over his family's suffering, his
overall defeat when he says, ''We don't remember what the good times are,' and
his pride when he will not ''fight for crumbs.''

Proclaiming the strength of her pioneer stock, Jo Henderson is a tower of
''sticking power'' as Ruth. Valerie Mahassey plays Jean, the ''miracle'' child
born to Cam and Ruth in their middle years, but a disappointment to Cam because
she wasn't a boy.

Like the thwarted but triumphant student in ''The Effect of Gamma Rays on Man in
the Moon Marigolds,'' Jean blooms under adversity.

Miss Mahassey personifies a flourishing flower. We see her at the age of 3; at
the top of Act II, she's 12. The performance is nurtured through pain and
fulfilled by truth.

In both Miss Henderson's and Miss Mahassey's performances, there is love, and
Miss Glass succeeds in demonstrating how painfully complicated that is.

The fragmented, painted curtains that rise and fall upon Clarke Dunham's setting
are visual counterparts to the playwright's ''amalgam'' of mental associations,
where memories, and lines, are sometimes spoken in counterpoint. Larry
Grossman's ''incidental music'' sustains a rueful mood.

In ''Play Memory,'' Miss Glass appears to be asking unanswerable questions.
After awareness, what? How do you live with it? Some can; others can't.

The play is painful. The memory is unutterably moving. The piece is almost a
nightmare of serenity that is touched by poetry, illuminated by perception and
cleansed by tears.



STONY POINT, N. Y. In suffering the failure of ''Scream,'' don't fault Joe
Brancato's staging. It's as tight as the play permits and better than it
deserves.

By putting on this relatively unknown work, which Arthur Laurents wrote, Andrew
M. Horn, executive director of the Penguin Repertory Company here, must surely
have thought that he had come up with a coup.

No way.

Mr. Laurents wrote ''Scream'' in 1977, and it understandably went no further
than an initial production in Houston. For the record, this is the first showing
in the metropolitan area.

The work has a concern, a crucial concern: to remind us all of the Holocaust and
to warn us that it could happen again.

Nessa, who escaped from Auschwitz, and her husband, Itzhak, conduct a regular
ritual: a catechism summoning ''attention'' to survivors of the Holocaust and
its six million victims.

They involve their children, Sonny, a Vietnam veteran, and Rochelle, who is
married and lives in White Plains. She refuses to be called Rachel, her real
name.

The play takes place in Nessa and Itzhak's apartment in Kew Gardens, Queens.
Nessa owns a beauty parlor downstairs. A knife, rope, handcuffs and a gun are
among her accessories.

Enter Julius, a former Nazi officer, to have his hair dyed in the apartment.
Nessa gets out the chloroform and the handcuffs; before long, Julius is in a
wheelchair.  The situation is rife with possibilities for theatrical tension.
The problem is that language has been superimposed upon it.

Mr. Laurents has written in declamations, explanations, slogans and bogus
psychologizing. The characters indulge in self-analysis, rather than being.

''I am life,'' Nessa announces, but she does not come alive, except for ranting
and raving about how she is an ''inspiration for the whole world.''

The confrontations between mother and son (no one wants to be reminded of war,
hers or his, he maintains) become didactic rather than dramatic.

''Scream'' travels, bumpily and boringly, from diatribes to melodramatic excess
without making a stopover to real drama. The cast is at the mercy of the script.

Closer screening of ''Scream'' would have been in order. The name of a
well-known playwright alone does not make the play.

Performances continue through Saturday.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 17, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

TENNESSEE G.O.P. FEARS LOSING BAKER'S SEAT TO ALBERT GORE JR.

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 903 words

DATELINE: NASHVILLE, Oct. 14


''I don't know where people get the idea that Al Gore is a shoo-in as the next
Senator from Tennessee,'' said Senator Howard H. Baker Jr., who touched off a
campaign for his seat by announcing that he would retire next year.

''It is by no means a foregone conclusion that Gore is going to be elected,''
Mr. Baker said. ''We will have a strong candidate. Tennessee will be a good
state for Ronald Reagan. The Governor has a strong organization, I have a strong
organization, our Republicans in Congress have strong organizations, and we will
all work for the Republican candidate.''

Mr. Baker, the Senate majority leader, is in the minority here at home in
assessing the prospects of Representative Albert Gore Jr., the probable
Democratic candidate for the vacated seat in 1984.

The likelihood that Representative Gore will follow the footsteps of his father
into the Senate is privately accepted by most Republican and Democratic
politicians here. He is generally considered as good a politician as his father,
a Senator from 1953 through 1971 after serving for 14 years in the House. The
son consults his father frequently.

Paying Attention to His District

To avoid being accused of neglecting his district, Mr. Gore has forgone all
junkets since his election in 1976, spending nearly every weekend stumping his
district and, later, the state.

Senator Baker and President Reagan both failed to persuade Gov. Lamar Alexander,
widely considered the only Republican who could defeat Mr. Gore, to make the
Senate race. But although polls showed that Mr. Alexander was more popular than
Mr. Gore, Mr. Alexander declined.

The Republican candidate is expected to be State Senator Victor Ashe, 32 years
old, who calls himself a ''raging moderate'' in the Howard Baker tradition. He
has toned down his image as a gadfly who stung Republican and Democratic
colleagues alike. He has the quiet backing of Senator Baker, Governor Alexander
and the state's Republican organization.

Mr. Gore, 35 years old, is considered a rising star who could someday be a
contender for the White House. His major problem, he said, was that supporters
could take his election for granted and neglect working for his victory.

Facing a Home Audience

Mr. Gore's campaign committee has amassed $500,000 of the $2 million to $2.5
million he says he expects to spend.

At a town meeting in Bloomington Springs, a rural community, Mr. Gore wore a
conservative blue suit to face an audience in blue jeans or overalls. The
Congressman, who has moderated his liberal image by such votes as one supporting
the MX missile, was asked why telephone rates had increased so sharply that some
Bloomington Springs farmers were pulling out their phones.  Mr. Gore, an expert
on telecommunications law, answered at length, noting that local users were
being forced to pay 100 percent of the equipment costs of long-distance users,
leading to an increase in local monthly telephone bills to $28 from $12.

''A lot of people will take their telephones out,'' he predicted, ''and our
commitment to universal service will be undermined.''

On U.S. Troops in Lebanon

Why had he voted to continue the presence of United States troops in Lebanon for
18 months? ''The decision to send troops to Lebanon was not well thought
through,'' Mr. Gore said, ''but since they are there and there are now
negotiations with the Syrians, it would be a mistake to remove them.

''It's important to learn the right lessons of Vietnam,'' he continued. ''A cat
that sits on a hot stove won't sit on a hot stove again, but he won't sit on a
cold stove, either.''

Why do millionaires, who make up less than 1 percent of the population, occupy
most of the seats in the Senate? ''That tells us that something's wrong with the
way the system is working,'' Mr. Gore replied. ''We need reform of campaign
financing. There ought to be limits on campaign spending.''

Mr. Ashe said of Mr. Gore, ''He's a bright, intelligent, attractive guy with
whom I don't agree.'' He noted that Mr. Gore had voted against a
budget-balancing amendment, the Reagan tax cut and the B-1 bomber, and for the
nuclear weapons freeze. ''The broader issue is whether or not the Howard Baker
record of moderate Republicanism should be abandoned,'' Mr. Ashe said.

Ex-Baker Law Partner in Race

Also seeking the Baker seat is Frank Barnett, a Republican, Mr. Baker's former
law partner, who is a former Governor of American Samoa. He is believed to have
the support of former Gov. Winfield Dunn, whose son Charles is treasurer of the
Barnett campaign.

''Both Victor and Al Gore have spent their entire careers in public service,''
Mr. Barnett said. ''I feel as if I have a balanced background, in business and
public service, and they don't.''

A third candidate for the Republican nomination is Ed McAteer, the most
conservative candidate, who is president of the Religious Round Table. ''I have
a natural political base in the state,'' Mr. McAteer said, ''church groups and
small-business men.''

Although he has raised money from outside the state, he agrees with his adviser,
Richard A. Viguerie, that his campaign will work only if he can generate
financial support in Tennessee.

The conventional wisdom is that the nomination will go to Mr. Ashe. Mr. Gore
acknowledged that he faced one potentially serious problem: ''Complacency.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Albert Gore Jr.

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 17, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ARMY LEADERS PLANNING LIGHT INFANTRY DIVISIONS

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 884 words

DATELINE: FORT MONROE, Va.


Army planning officers here have outlined a program for new light infantry
divisions specially prepared to fight in such places as the mountains of Iran,
the jungles of Central America or the cities and forests of Europe.

Officers charged with shaping these divisions said they would be perhaps half as
large as existing mechanized divisions, could be swiftly deployed by air into
remote regions and would be made up mostly of combat troops rather than support
troops.

''We're trying to get it filled with fighters,'' said one officer. ''Our aim is
to get more trigger-pullers into the division.''

A light infantry division would have more rapid-fire machine guns and automatic
rifles than a regular infantry division, antitank guns that are easily carried,
and light, more mobile artillery. Soldiers would fight on their feet but would
have helicopters for quick movements.

Existing Units Under Study

Current regular infantry divisions have 16,000 to 18,000 soldiers each; the
projected light infantry divisions may have 8,000 to 12,000 soldiers.

The officers here have been studying the size of current division units, from
the squad of 11 soldiers to battalions of 835 officers and soldiers.

Since potential enemies would have tanks, armored personnel carriers and
self-propelled artillery, weapons such as portable missile launchers would be
essential to destroy those forces, the planners say. ''Contrary to popular
opinion,'' one officer explained, ''a tank is not necessarily the best antitank
weapon.''

The planners said the divisions' headquarters staffs would be small but would
emphasize intelligence and communications to control dispersed troops in
constant movement. ''This requires exceptional discipline, initiative at the
lowest echelons and precision in execution,'' a staff paper says.

More Training, Less Maintaining

More time would be spent on training the new divisions, and soldiers would spend
less time maintaining tanks and heavy equipment. They would be ready to move on
short notice and would take enough ammunition, food and supplies for 48 hours of
battle.

In contrast to existing divisions, the light infantry would not have tanks and
armored personnel carriers or heavy artillery. There would be few combat support
troops such as engineers and logistics units, the military police and
administrative units. Those units would be retained at the next higher level,
the corps.

Officers at the Army's Training and Doctrine Command, based here, which is
responsible for devising new ways for the Army to operate, are scheduled to
present their initial findings soon to the Army's Chief of Staff, Gen. John A.
Wickham, in Washington.

The next step would be for General Wickham, who ordered the light infantry study
shortly after took his post in June, to decide which options would be
tested.Then an existing unit would be reorganized to test operations.

What the Army Has Now

Later the Army would decide how many light infantry divisions were to be formed
and at what strength. The Army today has seven mechanized divisions, four
armored divisions, two infantry divisions, one air assault division, one
paratroop division and one high-technology division, plus nine smaller, separate
brigades of 3,000 to 4,000 soldiers each.

Among issues that may have to be faced, the officers indicated, is opposition
from Western European allies who might look upon the use of light infantry as a
step away from the American commitment to the defense of Europe, which now rests
on armored and mechanized divisions.

Opposition might be expected from the Marine Corps, which could consider light
infantry a threat to its mission as a quick-reaction force; from the Air Force,
which would have to spend money to fly light infantry overseas and provide air
cover, and from the Navy, which would be responsible for sea supply lines and
fire support.

After the Vietnam War, the Army turned to the potential threat to Europe and
started to concentrate on armor, mechanized infantry and heavy artillery. That
program is now moving toward completion.

A Cue From a Predecessor

When General Wickham's predecessor, Gen. Edward C. Meyer, became Army Chief of
Staff in 1979, he sought to make the Army capable of responding to contingencies
around the world.

General Meyer also focused attention on guerrilla, counterinsurgency and
commando operations to be carried out by Special Forces and Ranger battalions.
He also ordered the Ninth Division at Fort Lewis, Wash., to experiment with high
technology.

General Wickham, who was General Meyer's Vice Chief of Staff, has pushed ahead
on that track. One of his first decisions as Chief of Staff was to press the
light infantry issue.

Once organized, equipped, and trained, officers say, light infantry divisions
would have enough antitank firepower to help stop a Soviet invasion through
mountains just below the Caspian Sea into Iran. A light infantry division would
also be trained to help put down an insurgency in Central America.

Army planners said light divisions would also be useful in European cities where
tanks would be hampered, in European forests where tanks and artillery would bog
down, and wherever the Soviet Union might employ its light forces.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 19, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

RULES COVERING THE MARINES ARE REPORTED UNDER REVIEW

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 661 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 18


The Joint Chiefs of Staff have begun a review of rules governing the operations
of the United States Marines in Lebanon, Defense Department officials said
today.

The Marines, who are based at Beirut's International Airport, have been
subjected to increasingly frequent fire.

The officials said the review included everything from giving the marines more
freedom to strike back to providing fire support from the guns of the battleship
New Jersey or from planes aboard the carrier Eisenhower, both standing off
Lebanon.

''We are just not going to let the Marines take much more of this,'' an
official, alluding to the almost daily toll. Since September, seven marines have
been killed and more than 50 wounded.

The fate of the Marines was said to have been discussed at a meeting of the
National Security Council in the White House today. Officials said President
Reagan might make a statement at a news conference on Wednesday about the United
States role in Lebanon.

'No Sense of Backing Away'

One White House official said, ''There is no sense of backing away from the
basic commitment there.'' He said President Reagan intended to keep the Marines
in Lebanon until a national reconciliation had been achieved.

But officials left open the possibility that the President might permit military
commanders to apply greater military force to protect the Marines.  While the
fundamental role of the Marines would not be changed, the officials indicated,
the way they went about accomplishing their mission might be altered.

The officials indicated that little thought was being given to introducing more
troops into Lebanon, although they said this could be achieved quickly by
airlift from the United States.

Some officials said there was pressure on the Government to do something.

''The American public is not going to stand by and see marines picked off one by
one,'' an official said.

The officials said they thought the news of marines' being killed or wounded
singly or in small numbers had captured more public attention than had the daily
lists of casualties during the Vietnam War.

 Weinberger Was Unenthusiastic

Officials recalled that Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger and the Joint
Chiefs had been unenthusiastic about dispatching the Marines to Lebanon in the
first place, on the ground that the United States would become involved in the
fighting or be seen as adversaries by both Arabs and Israelis.

But the officials said that to withdraw the Marines now might well lead to
disaster, including the fall of the Lebanese Government or a renewal of allout
fighting.

Some officials said that what are known as the rules of engagement had already
been revised to permit the Marines more freedom to respond to attacks. But they
said the revisions were not likely to be publicized.

The officials underscored the difficulties of increased military action by the
Marines, who are in Lebanon as apart of a multinational force along with
British, French, and Italian soldiers.

''We don't want to become part of the fighting there,'' said an official.

Identity of Snipers Unclear

A particular problem is the difficulty in determining just who it is that is
firing at the Marines. Some officials said there was evidence that Iranian
squads had been added to the array of forces in the Beirut area.

Another said that almost anything the United States did to apply more military
power might easily undermine the cease-fire and possibly unite warring factions
against the United States.

In the background were unspoken concerns that increased United States military
activity could lead to a confrontation with the Soviet Union, whose advisers
were said to be serving with Syrian forces.

On the other hand, some officials expressed impatience with the restrictions put
on the Marines, contending that they should be allowed more freedom to manuever
and to fire at forces that have been shooting at them.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 19, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

COMECON MEETING FACES DIVISIVE ISSUES

BYLINE: By JOHN TAGLIABUE

SECTION: Section D; Page 24, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 741 words

DATELINE: WEST BERLIN, Oct. 18


Leaders of the 10-nation Communist trade bloc appealed today for more
cooperation in energy saving and food production at the start of their annual
economic policy meeting in East Berlin.

But Western analysts said the appeals were overshadowed by the same broad policy
differences that have been standing in the way of a long-planned summit meeting
intended to seek long-term remedies for the East bloc's pressing economic
problems, such as its cumbersome currency system.

Reflecting the somber economic and political climate surrounding the trade
meeting, Prime Minister Willi Stoph of East Germany said in an opening speech
that the United States and its allies had ''sought to erect trade, credit and
economic barriers and to enforce a policy of discrimination'' against the
Eastern bloc.



'Danger of War'

Asserting that the planned deployment of American medium-range nuclear missiles
in Western Europe later this year ''raises the danger of war,'' Mr. Stoph called
for greater efforts to diminish Eastern Europe's dependence on the West.

The 10 members of the trade group, officially known as the Council for Mutual
Economic Assistance, or Comecon, are the Soviet Union, East Germany, Poland,
Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Bulgaria, Rumania, Cuba, Mongolia and Vietnam.

Yugoslavia, which has a Communist Government but is not a member of the Warsaw
Pact military alliance, is an associate member. Several countries with close
economic ties to the East bloc, including Angola, Laos and Afghanistan, sent
observers.

Comecon Government leaders ordinarily hold their annual meeting in June or July,
but this year's meeting was delayed repeatedly in the expectation that the
summit meeting of Eastern European Communist leaders might take place.



Summit Meeting Postponed

Western analysts now say that because of uncertainties over the West's recession
and the possible deployment of the nuclear missiles, the summit meeting will
probably not take place before late 1984 or 1985, if it takes place at all.

The trade group's most divisive issues emerged on the first day in reports on
energy and raw materials, and on farm and food production.

The report on fuels and raw materials, calling efficient energy use one of the
''most important conditions for stable and dynamic economic growth,'' made a
plea for closer cooperation to develop energy-saving products.

The report on farming said greater cooperation was necessary to produce chemical
farm products, like fertilizers and pesticides, and to increase production of
mechanical farm equipment.

Western analysts say solving the energy problem is one of the most pressing
issues for Comecon's smaller members, most of which are net importers of prime
energy sources like oil.

Most of these countries import their oil and natural gas from the Soviet Union
in exchange for industrial and farm products, under a rolling price system based
on an average of Western oil prices over the last five years.

But when Western oil prices tend to fall, as is now the case, the Soviet Union's
trade partners continue to pay high energy prices.



Shipments Cut

Aggravating the problem, the Soviet Union last year cut its oil shipments to its
Eastern European allies by 10 percent, to enable it to increase its shipments to
the West.

At the same time, prices for farm products in the East bloc, the major source of
income for small countries like Hungary, Rumania and Bulgaria, have been
virtually frozen over the last 10 years. Thus analysts expect these countries to
put pressure on the Russians for farm price increases, possibly by linking the
prices with the subsidized farm prices of the European Common Market.

Even with major concessions on the energy and farm fronts, which most analysts
say are not likely, a pressing problem for the smaller Comecon countries
remains. Lacking hard or convertible currencies, trade between the Soviet Union
and its Comecon allies is reckoned on a bilateral barter basis, tallied in
so-called transferable rubles.

One consequence of this system, analysts note, is that a trade deficit run up by
a smaller country like Hungary with the Soviet Union cannot be offset by
increasing Hungary's exports to another East bloc country like East Germany.
Indeed, this handicap has meant that the cumulative deficit of the Russians'
smaller partners, excepting Rumania, has mounted continually, nearly doubling
between 1980 and 1982.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 20, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN SAYS U.S. WON'T LET SYRIA DISRUPT LEBANON

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1256 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 19


President Reagan said tonight that the United States would not allow Syria,
''aided and abetted by 7,000 Soviet advisers and technicians,'' to destroy the
chances for stability in Lebanon.

He said the Syrians were seeking to do this by their efforts at
''foot-dragging'' in the search for peace.

In a televised news conference in the White House, Mr. Reagan also said he did
not believe that the ''free world would stand by and allow the Strait of
Hormuz,'' the exit from the Persian Gulf, to be closed to oil traffic by Iran.

Iran Threatened to Close Strait

The Iranians have threatened to close the strait if the Iraqis, with whom they
have been at war since September 1980, use French Super Etendard bombers to
launch Exocet missiles against Iranian oil targets.

Mr. Reagan refused to go into details on what military actions might be taken in
case Iran closed the strait.

''That is for them to wonder about,'' he said about the Iranians.

Much of the news conference was devoted to the unresolved situation in Lebanon,
and the continuing danger to the 1,600 marines at the Beirut airport. The
President and his advisers are reviewing Middle East policies, but Mr. Reagan
gave no hints of changes. Most of his replies were consistent with known policy.


Syria Is Called a Roadblock

The United States has in the past criticized Syria for its refusal to be more
forthcoming in pulling its troops out of Lebanon and its support of
anti-Government forces in Lebanon. Mr. Reagan said that the Syrians were causing
a ''roadblock'' and that, aided by the Russians, they were ''contributing to the
disorder and the trouble.''

In answer to other questions on foreign policy, he made these other points:


- The Reagan Middle East peace initiative of September 1982 remains in place,
but progress hinges on resolving the deadlock in Lebanon.


- There is no comparison between Lebanon and Vietnam and, in particular, between
the problems faced by the Marines and the defeat suffered by the French at Dien
Bien Phu in 1954 because, the President said, the French ''didn't have a New
Jersey sitting offshore as we do,'' alluding to the battleship off Lebanon.When
asked why the marines were being required to remain at Beirut airport, which is
vulnerable to fire, the President said: ''They are part of a multinational
force. Their sector just happens to be the airport, and airports just happen to
be flat.''

- The Soviet Union is expected to ''negotiate seriously'' for arms control
agreements and an accord is possible by the end of Mr. Reagan's term in January
1985 despite the ''great propaganda effort'' now going on. The Russians will see
that the United States is determined to go ahead with the deployment of missiles
in Western Europe and will not ''unilaterally disarm.''

- Covert action is an integral part of any government, but Mr. Reagan would not
comment on specific actions in Nicaragua because ''you can't let your people
know without letting the wrong people know - those who are in opposition to what
you're doing.''

Reagan Refers to Snipers

When the President was questioned about the danger to the Marines in the Beirut
area, he attributed the recent problem to snipers who were ''just individuals
that are out murdering.''

He said the United States was ''not sitting idly by'' and was ''looking at every
option and everything that we can do that can leave us in the position to carry
out the mission for which they were sent and, at the same time, make their lives
safer.''

Mr. Reagan said the United States was ''doing what we have been doing, trying to
complete the plan that we launched more than a year ago.'' He added that the
United States ''knew it was a hazardous undertaking when we joined in the
multinational force, but our objective remains the same.''

He said there had been considerable progress in the area and added, ''As long as
there's a possibility of making the overall peace plan work, we're going to stay
there.''

In another Middle East development, a House Appropriations subcommittee has
rejected an Administration request for funds to enable two Jordanian Army
brigades to serve as a special Persian Gulf strike force, the panel's chairman
said today.

''There is no money for Jordan in the defense appropriations bill,''
Representative Joseph P. Addabbo, Democrat of New York, chairman of the defense
appropriations subcommittee, said in a telephone interview.

The full House Appropriations Committee is now to take up the defense bill on
Thursday and is not expected to include aid for Jordan. But the aid could still
be voted on the floor or in conference, if the Senate approved it.

The Administration has been seeking to provide Jordan with $225 million to mount
a mobile force that would help Saudi Arabia and other friendly Persian Gulf
nations combat potential leftist rebellions.

The United States had imposed secrecy on plans for the mobile force, which call
for equipping Jordan with four C-130 military transports, medical evacuation
planes, bridging equipment for tanks, ammunition and infantry weapons, but the
plans were disclosed last week by the Israeli radio.

A senior State Department official said today that Israel and its supporters
here were working against the idea.

''The Israelis are making a big deal out of this,'' the official said. ''They
don't realize that it is in our interest and in their interest to help Jordan.''

He said the United States, now in the midst of a Middle East policy review, was
trying to persuade King Hussein of Jordan to reconsider his refusal to join in
talks with Israel about the future of the West Bank. Approval by Congress of the
additional arms may improve the atmosphere, the official said.

Ambassador Meir Rosenne of Israel said Friday, ''Any weapons given to any Arab
country are of concern to Israel, especially in a state of war that you have in
the area.''

Some supporters of Israel in Congress said aid to Jordan might be considered in
a more favorable light if the Administration were more forthcoming on an Israeli
request to use $250 million of American credits for research and development of
a new Israeli fighter, the Lavie.

The Pentagon has allowed Israel to use credit to purchase Pratt & Whitney
engines for the Lavie, but not for research and development on the ground that
American companies have to finance research and development of new planes on
their own.

Committee Chairmen Complain

The unusual way in which the Jordanian aid request has been managed, bypassing
the usual committees, has been criticized by some House leaders.

Representative Clement J. Zablocki, a Wisconsin Democrat who heads the Foreign
Affairs Committee, said: ''I object to the way this is being handled. This
involves the transfer of resources to a foreign country and that is under the
jurisdiction of this committee.''

A similar complaint was voiced by Representative Clarence D. Long, a Maryland
Democrat who heads another Appropriations subcommittee, for foreign operations.

In the House, both the Zablocki committee and the Long subcommittee normally
have jurisdiction over credits or funds for foreign countries to finance
purchases of American planes.

Congressional sources said the Administration first sought to get approval for
the $225 million program through the budget for the Central Intelligence Agency,
which is overseen by the intelligence committees in both houses. But these
committees declared this was not a proper function for them.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Joseph Addabbo (page B11)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 20, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SENATE VOTES HOLIDAY TO HONOR DR. KING

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 652 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 19


The Senate voted today to make the third Monday in January a national holiday to
commemorate the birth of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.

The vote was 78 to 22, with four Democrats joining 18 Republicans in opposition.
The measure now goes to the White House and President Reagan said tonight he
would to sign it.

Previous legislation honoring Dr. King, slain in 1968, foundered primarily
because of opposition from conservative Republicans and Southern Democrats.

To many lawmakers, the passage of this bill reflected blacks' growing power and
determination to see Dr. King receive an honor bestowed on only one other
American, George Washington. Black voting power helped reverse the position of
many politicians, including President Reagan.

On a legal public holiday, Federal offices are closed, but state and local
governments decide whether to close facilities such as schools and banks. ''If
you took a secret poll, the Senate would not want additional holidays,'' said
Senator J. Bennett Johnston, a Louisiana Democrat who supported the bill. ''But
the symbolism of it is so strong, that sweeps aside those arguments very
quickly.''

The measure had been rammed through Congress ''in an atmoshere of intimidation
and political harrassment,'' in the words of Senator Jesse Helms, the North
Carolina Republican who led the opposition. ''It's a tyranny of the minority,''
he said at a news conference.

Republicans for the bill were alarmed that Senator Helms's opposition would
damage their party with black voters. ''It's unfortunate to write off the black
vote when our party is making a serious effort to enlist black voters,'' said
Senator Alan K. Simpson, Republican of Wyoming.

Republicans led by Howard H. Baker Jr. of Tennessee, the Senate majority leader,
led the fight for the bill and to minimize damage they feared Senator Helms
would inflict on the party. Mr. Baker said today of the measure, ''It is proof
positive that this country and the Senate has a soul.''

Coretta Scott King, Dr. King's widow, said at a news conference after the final
vote: ''For those of us who believe in the dream, it is a great day for America
and the world.''

In the last two days of debate, senators recalled Dr. King's impact on the
nation's laws and spirit. Senator Alan Cranston of California said: ''The life
of this one individual changed the course of our nation's life.''

Because most Government offices and many private businesses close on Federal
holidays, critics said the measure would be too expensive. ''This is a time in
our history,'' said Senator J. James Exon, Democrat of Nebraska, ''when we
should go to work, not plan another day off.''

Senator Helms said the rights leader had forged close ties with Marxists and
insulted the Government by attacking the Vietnam War. He said Dr. King was not a
fitting ''role model'' for American youth. To many senators, Mr. Helms was
motivated in part by a calculation that his opposition would help his re-
election campaign next year.

Senator Bill Bradley, a New Jersey Democrat, said of Senator Helms and his
allies: ''They are playing up to 'old Jim Crow' and all of us know it.''

Several senators reported receiving ''very vitriolic'' comments against the
holiday. Senator Bob Dole, the Kansas Republican who managed the bill, said,
''If the voting was based on mail and phone calls I'm not sure there would be
any votes for it.''

Several lawmakers say those comments were generated by Senator Helms' North
Carolina political apparatus and other conservative organizations to raise money
and recruit supporters. ''Helms has brought all the crazies out of the
woodwork,'' Senator Johnston asserted.

Senator Helms insisted in an interview he had no political motive and had not
used the issue to raise funds. ''I'm not going to say it's not going to be
mentioned,'' he said. ''You do the best you can with what you have.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: chart of federal holidays

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 20, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENT'S NEWS CONFERENCE ON FOREIGN AND DOMESTIC ISSUES ;

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 4746 words


Following is a transcript of President Reagan's news conference last night in
Washington, as recorded by The New York Times: OPENING STATEMENT

Good evening, I have a statement. This week, we marked an anniversary here in
Washington - at least some of us did - the 1,000th day since we charted a new
course for America. From the outset, we knew that a breaking with the past and
beginning on the new road would be long and hard, and it has been.

Coming to grips with the most serious economic crisis in postwar history has
tested our mettle, our patience and our unity. And, believe me, I understand how
difficult it's been to hear that America is making sure and steady progress when
it's our family and friends who are suffering the ache and disappointment of
hard times.

But we Americans are a people of deep faith, hard work and common sense, and we
never stop believing in ourselves. So we're emerging with renewed confidence.
We've made great strides in these first 1,000 days; inflation and interest rates
are down dramatically, we've passed the first real tax cut for everyone in
nearly 20 years, and now a strong recovery is sending Americans back to work.
Almost 400,000 found jobs last month.

We have the highest number of people working in our history, almost 102 million.
Virtually every sector of the economy, from construction to the auto industry to
high technology, is expanding, creating new hope and a more secure future.

We have the chance to build the kind of lasting economic expansion that this
nation has not enjoyed since the 1960's. And I ask the Congress for cooperation
in these last four weeks before it leaves for the year. Many key budget
decisions remain and we have a real opportunity to hold down spending and reduce
deficits. And I think we should remember these deficits didn't just spring up in
a thousand days; they're the product of too many years of tax and tax and spend
and spend.

In these closing days of Congress, let us rededicate ourselves not to taxing
people more but to making government spend less. This is the way to keep the
United States on a steady path of economic growth and opportunity for all our
people. And now your questions.

Jim?



QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS




View On Nicaragua

Q. Mr. President, regarding the recent rebel attacks on a Nicaraguan oil depot,
is it proper for the C.I.A. to be involved in planning such attacks and
supplying equipment for air raids, and do the American people have a right to be
informed about any C.I.A. role?

A. I think covert actions have been a part of government and a part of
government's responsibilities for as long as there's been a government. I'm not
going to comment on what, if any, connection such activities might have had with
what has been going on or with some of the specific operations down there, but I
do believe in the right of a country when it believes that its interests are
best served to practice covert activity and then - while you people may have a
right to know, you can't let your people know without letting the wrong people
know - those that are in opposition to what you're doing.




Marines in Lebanon

Q. There's growing concern about the marines in Lebanon, and your national
security affairs adviser has said that the loss of life is unacceptable and that
the partition of Lebanon is unacceptable. What are you going to do about it and
I'd like to follow up.

A. Helen, we're going to keep on doing what we have been doing - trying to
complete the plan that we launched a little more than a year ago. We know there
are hazards there, and no one can feel more deeply about the loss of life and
the wounding of some of our men there. We knew it was a hazardous undertaking
when we joined in the multinational force. But our objective remains the same.

We have made great progress there. If you remember back, Beirut itself was being
shelled daily in an exchange of fire that was killing literally hundreds of
civilians on a daily basis, wounding others grievously. That - a cease-fire
followed there. A government was created, representatives to a parliament were
elected, the Israelis withdrawn to the Awali River and have announced their
intention of permanent withdrawing.

The disorders that have plagued Lebanon for some eight years have, of course,
taken over - this was one of the reasons for a multinational force to try and
have some stability while the Government - and incidentally I left out the fact
that the Lebanese Army, which has been created by this new Government in which
we've helped with training and supplies is a fine Army - not as big as it should
be but the problems its confronted with - but the mission is to enable the
Lebanese Government and its military to take over its own country with the
withdrawal of all forces.

Earlier in that first ceasefire there was a successful ousting of some 10,000 of
the P.L.O. militia from the country. As long there's a possibility of making the
overall peace plan work, we're going to stay there.



Peace in Middle East

Q. May I ask what plans do you contemplate, how will you broaden the peace in
the Middle East and bring about a reconciliation of all the parties and the
restoration of the legitimate rights of the Palestinians?

A. Well this - you've named exactly the goals of the plan that I proposed a year
ago last September and it began with trying to straighten up the Lebanese
situation with the border of Israel - the northern border - being violated as it
was by terrorist groups, innocent people there being killed. They had a
responsibility to try and defend that border.

Now an agreement has been reached between the Lebanese Government and Israel. We
are doing everything we can to persuade Syria to quit being a roadblock in this
process. But that was the first phase - Lebanon. Then - and our intention
remains the same - working with the more moderate Arab states to bring about the
kind of peace with Israel that Anwar Sadat helped bring about. Our process is
following the lead that was established in the Camp David talks and the two
United Nations resolutions, 242 and 338. And this is what we want to do. But as
I say it all is kind of hinging on the resolution of Lebanon.



The Helms Position

Q. Mr. President, Senator Helms has been saying on the Senate floor that Martin
Luther King Jr. had Communist associations - was a Communist sympathizer. Do you
agree?

A. We'll know in about 35 years, won't we. No, I don't fault Senator Helms's
sincerity with regard to wanting the records opened up. I think that he's
motivated by a feeling that if we're going to have a national holiday named for
any American, when it's only been named for one American in all our history to
this time, that he feels we should know everything there is to know about an
individual.

And I say I don't fault his sincerity in that but I also recognize there is no
way that these records can be opened. Because an agreement was reached between
the family and the Government, with regard to those records. And we're not going
to turn away from that or set a precedent of breaking agreements of that kind.

Q. Sir, what do we do then in 35 years if the records are opened and we find
that Dr. King was a Communist sympathizer? Do we then try to undo the law? I
mean I'm not quite certain where the logic is here.

A. The logic is there in that there is no way that this Government should
violate its word and open those records now.

I happen to - while I would have preferred a day of recognition for his
accomplishments and what he meant in a stormy period in our history here, I
would've preferred a day similar to, say, Lincoln's birthday, which is not
technically a national holiday but is certainly a day reverenced by a great many
people in our country and has been.

I would've preferred that, but since they seem bent on making it a national
holiday, I believe the symbolism of that day is important enough that I would -
I'll sign that legislation when it reaches my desk.



Positioning of Forces

Q. Mr. President, when I was in the Marines the doctrine was to take the high
ground and hold it and not to deploy on a flat open field like the Beirut
Airport. What reason is there to prevent the marines from taking some more
defensible positions in pursuit of the policy for which you sent them there?

A. Well Gerry, all of those things we're asking ourselves, and we're looking at
everything that can be done to try and make their position safer, but you must
remember - you were talking about and you were being trained as marines for
combat - and if these marines had gone there to join in the combat on the side
of whatever force we might have picked, then all of those rules would apply.

But they're there as part of a multinational force to try and maintain a
stability, and their sector happens to be trying to maintain that airport and
open it up for traffic. So airports just happen to be flat, and we're doing
everything we can and making everything possible for them to defend themselves.

Q. Mr. President, does that mean that they cannot sally forth from the borders
of the area to which they are assigned if they are attacked from a nearby
position, whether it's high ground or not?

A. All I can tell you is, I can't answer that question right now, but I,
virtually daily, tell our people that - to be in consultation with the men on
the ground, the commanders there, of those units, or anything that in keeping
with our mission that we can do to help insure their safety. Now let me turn
over in another direction.

Andrea?

Pick up 1stADD

subREAGAN TEXT





Cost of New Holiday

Q. Mr. President, you have said in the past, a year and a half ago, following up
on Sam, that you had real reservations about the expense of another national
holiday. In fact, to quote you, you said, ''It might be that there is no way we
could afford all of those holidays that we would have with people who are also
revered figures in history of many of the groups that make up our population.''
So I'm wondering, why have you changed your mind now about the holiday for Dr.
King, and why are you willing to sign that legislation?

A. Because I think this has become so symbolic of what was a very real crisis in
our history, and a discrimination that was pretty foreign to what is normal with
us, and the part that he played in that. I think that the symbolism of it is
worthy of this.



Query on Golf Club

Q. I'd like to follow up, then. Can you explain to us why you've decided to
spend the coming weekend in Augusta at a golf club that is very exclusive and
that we understand has no black members?

A. I don't know anything about the membership but I know there is nothing in the
bylaws of that club that advocates any discrimination of any kind. I saw in a
recent tournament down there, a national tournament, I saw blacks playing in
that tournament on that course. I've been invited as a guest to go down and play
a round of golf on the Augusta golf course, and, as I say, I think I've covered
all that I know about it.

Dean?




Choice for Interior

Q. Mr. President, your recent nomination of Judge Clark as Interior Secretary
shocked just about everybody but yourself and Judge Clark, I think. I wonder,
sir, if you could tell us what qualifications he has for that Interior
Department post?

A. Well, I think the qualifications of being a very able and fine administrator
and manager - I have known him from the time he was my Chief of Staff when I was
Governor in California. I know that on the bench as a Supreme Court Justice of
California he dealt with many problems of this kind. I know of his own personal
interest and knowledge in this field. He's a fourth-generation rancher, as he
himself has stated. He's greatly interested in this entire subject, and I
believe that he will do a fine job in carrying out the policies which I've
advocated there.

Q. Mr. President, did he want to leave the national security post?

A. He expressed a very definite interest in that position. And as I say, it did
not surprise me knowing his great interest in that. And I appointed him. Cathy?



Immigration Bill

Q. Mr. President, after years of bipartisan work on a comprehensive immigration
reform bill, it appears House Speaker O'Neill has successfully blocked action on
it in the House. And he even suggested that you might veto it for political
purposes. What, if anything, are you going to do to help House Republicans who
are trying to free up that bill?

A. I am going to try and get - and have been supportive of an immigration, some
immigration, legislation for a long time. This country has lost control of its
own borders. And no country can sustain that kind of position.

I support it actively and worked hard for the passage twice of the Senate bill
on immigration. I will admit that the House bill, I had some disagreements with
some of the structure in the forms - in the form of that bill but recognize that
there was a process called conference, when there were differences between the
two bills.

I want to sign, as quickly as possible, immigration legislation. And I'm going
to have to shift again here.

Steve?



Re-election

Q. Mr. President, let's speak about re-election if we might for a moment. You
have said that you want to delay the decision as long as possible to maintain
your credibility with Congress, for instance. This is understandable, as I see
it, as long as you run. But it's getting late, and if you don't run at this
point other Republicans who would then have an interest in it would be way
behind their Democratic opponents. It would seem to hurt the party. Therefore,
practically speaking now, don't you have to run?

A. I have to commend all of you people, you can find more different ways of
asking that question!

Q. There's one way to stop it!

A. Yes, and down the road one day, probably in the not too distant future,
probably before my birthday, I will put your minds all at rest, one way or the
other. And I don't think - in the first place, I think that campaigns are too
long, and I think one of the reasons we don't have as many people voting as we
should in this country is not because they haven't got an interest but because
we satiate them and we wear them out until they seem to be campaigning year in
and year out and day in and day out. And if any of the Democratic candidates are
listening, yes, I mean them too with this.

So I don't think there would be any harm done by - I know that some who've
preceded me in this office have waited much longer than I'll probably wait
before they've said anything about it.

Q. Just to make sure - every time we've heard it, it's been a little later. Your
birthday, I think, is in February? Is that now the schedule?

A. No, I just happened to mention that.

Q. Will we hear by Christmas?

A. What?

Q. By Christmas, perhaps?

A. It's possible. You know, I'm unpredictable in many ways.

Leslie?




Marines in Lebanon

Q. Mr. President, back to the Middle East. You said that the Syrians are being a
roadblock to the situation in Lebanon. But there are analysts who say that they
are deliberately foot-dragging and in fact harassing us and the marines over
there in order to wear you down so that you will pull the marines out. No. 1, do
you agree with that assessment? Is that what the Syrians are doing. And
secondly, can you be worn down?

A. Well, the answer to the first part of the question is that I know the Syrians
are dragging their feet but they have - there have been other indications as to
the reason for that. Syria for many years has talked about a thing called
Greater Syria in which they believe much of Jordan and much of Lebanon truly
should belong to them. And I think that they have that kind of an interest in
this, and aided and abetted by about 7,000 Soviet advisers and technicians and
some pretty sophisticated Soviet weaponry, I think that they are contributing to
the disorder and the trouble.

Now if they're doing it with the idea of wearing me down, they're going to be
disappointed.

Q. Could you clarify that. What do you mean they'll be disappointed? What are
you going to have the marines doing if they escalate, for instance?

A. Well the marines will always defend themselves, and we will provide that
defense. But we're going to - I know that many of the Arab nations have been
joining us. We're going to continue the diplomatic process that was advanced so
brilliantly by Phil Habib and by Ambassador McFarlane which brought about the
present situation and the desire of the Government there to now broaden its base
and bring in some of the dissident groups and all. We're going to continue with
that process.

But I don't think there's any way we should stand by and just let Syria destroy
what so many people want, which is peace and order there in that troubled
country.




PICK UP 2d&LastADD

subREAGAN TEXT




Arms Control Talks

Q. Mr. President, do you feel the Soviets will negotiate seriously on arms
control once the Presidential election heats up? Or is it a matter of achieving
an agreement in the next several months or waiting until 1985?

A. Now wait a minute - try that again. I think I was still thinking about some
things that I would have said in addition to my other answer.

Q. Given the uncertainty that a Presidential election would create, would you
feel the Soviets would still negotiate seriously on arms control once the
Presidential election heats up? Or is it a matter of achieving something between
now and the time you announce, or wait until '85?

A. I think the Soviets are going to negotiate seriously. There is a great
propaganda effort going on on their part now because their target is - they've
been encouraged by some of the demonstrations that they've helped organize
throughout the world. They think maybe they could persuade our allies to turn
back and not ask us for the deployment of the intermediate-range weapons, but
we're going to deploy, and deploy on schedule. And once they see we're going to
do that, and now that they know that we're determined to build our strength and
not unilaterally disarm, as we so foolishly have done over recent years, I think
they're going to see that the best thing for them is to negotiate with us and in
good faith. And they may do some things - they may try, as has been rumored, a
walkout, and things of that kind, but we'll just wait at the table. And I think
they'll come back.

Q. Something to follow up. Do you feel confident that you'll get an agreement by
the end of your first term?

A. By the end of this term?

Q. Yes.

A. Well I hope very much that we will. We've been at this - I realize the
history of negotiations in the past has been long drawn out, but if you will
look at some of the negotiations in the past, maybe it was long drawn out
because the longer the Soviets sat there the more we unilaterally disarmed, and
they found that just by waiting they could get things that they wanted. We're
not doing that. We're arming.

Yes?



Vietnam Comparison

Q. Mr. President, before the United States went into Vietnam, the French
suffered a devastating defeat there by putting their troops in a saucer- shaped
depression with the enemy up around the sides shooting down on them. Doesn't
this appear uncomfortably similar, to you, to the way we are deploying our
troops in Lebanon, on the low ground? And how soon can we expect that we're
going to redeploy them to a spot that makes more sense?

A. Well, right now with the cease- fire it isn't from high ground that they're
being fired upon. Actually, much of this that has tragically taken lives there
is literally coming from civilians, from radicals in residential neighborhoods,
where we have always refrained from using artillery cover or anything of that
kind.  And when they were fired upon from the hills, that's when naval gunfire
responded. And maybe the French at Dien Bien Phu, in that terrible defeat,
didn't have a New Jersey sitting offshore as we do.

Q. But our marines are still being killed, Sir.

A. I know and as I say, most of this from the sniper-type fire. As a matter of
fact, some of the TV news accounts have carried actual interviews with the very
young men who are doing this and who are claiming their right and yet they are
not even members of some of the unofficial militia.

They are just individuals that are out murdering. And we're not sitting idly by.
We're looking at every option and everything that we can do that can leave us in
the position to carry out the mission for which they were sent and, at the same
time, make their lives safer.



Iran and Iraq

Q. Mr. President, Iran has threatened to close the Strait of Hormuz if Iraq uses
its French fighters against Iranian interests. Is the U.S. prepared to use
military force to stop Iran from cutting off our oil? And do you believe we
would be successful?

A. Let me just say that I don't think it would be proper for me to talk about
tactics or what might be done. But I will say this: I do not believe the free
world could stand by and allow anyone to close the Straits of Hormuz and the
Persian Gulf to the oil traffic through those waterways.

Q. Can you say how far we'd be willing to go?

A. No. As I say, that's for them to wonder about.

Sarah? I have to call on you, I talked to your boss the other day.  Q. Thank
you, he enjoyed it.




Democracy Project

Q. Sir, I want to ask you about a proposal that you are backing that's before
the Senate now. I don't think they've passed it quite yet but they're about to.
It's that Project for Democracy, and we would - it would mean, I believe, that
we would provide taxpayers' money and private sector leaders to go into other
countries to decide if they have a democratic government or not? If we think
they don't, then we would turn over that government and set up a government that
we liked. Don't you think that would get us into a lot of wars?

A. Sarah, that's not the aim of this program. This is - what you're talking
about is the thing that I spoke to the British Parliament about when I was there
at the European summit. What we have in mind is that the Marxist-Leninists and
the world Socialist movement, for that matter, have - they've been ardent
missionaries for their beliefs all over the world. And we in the democracies,
and where free enterprise is practiced, have just sort of thought that maybe
everyone could see how well we're doing and follow our lead.

The proposal is for people to go and be the same kind of missionaries, and see
if they cannot explain democracy. One of the first meetings we had in connection
with that was here in this room, in which people from all over the world came
and it was a session during our election year to tell them about elections, and
how legitimate elections could be won. Not those kind where you've only got one
person to vote for and you'd better vote for him or somebody'll come and get
you.

And it's going to be - it's an education program. The idea of worldwide - and
pointing out the differences that those countries have chosen - new countries -
whether it's Taiwan, Singapore, South Korea - those countries that have chosen
our idea, our way, instead of statism, authoritarianism or totalitarianism -
their living standard, their prosperity, their freedom for their people, is so
much greater than anything the other countries have. We just want to explain to
people how it works.

Gary?



Outer Space Defense

Q. Mr. President - thank you - do you favor the five-year program that Cap
Weinberger has recommended to you for the outer space defense of this country?

A. Gary, nothing has actually been presented to me as yet. I'm fascinated with
reading all about it, but I haven't seen it, and I can tell you that no one has
suggested any such figure - in the billions of dollars - that have been
proposed. All of this is simply the carrying out of what I asked for quite some
time ago, and that was for us to see if there is not a defensive weapon that can
stop this race in offensive weapons throughout the world that can render maybe a
system of horrifying weapons obsolete. And so they're proceeding with the
research on that. But I think there's a great exaggeration of the kind of money
that's being talked.

Q. Can I follow up? Would this not create, instead of an offensive arms race, a
defensive arms race? A defensive arms race between the U.S. and Soviet Union?

A. Well, would that be all bad? If you've got everybody building defense, then
nobody's going to start a war. And that's maybe part of the idea. The danger
that we're in today was voiced by Dwight Eisenhower in a letter to a publisher
back in 1956, in which he, a man of war, said that couldn't we see that the
weapons that we're building today are making victory or defeat obsolete - that
we're coming to a stage in weaponry in which there can be no victory as we've
always thought of it - no winner or loser in war that can just be the
destruction of the people. And he said when that moment arrives - and I think it
has arrived - he said then won't we have the common sense to sit down at a
negotiating table and do away with war as a means of settling our disputes?



Housing Starts

Q. Mr. President, new figures out today show that housing starts were down
pretty sharply last month, and the figure for the number of building permits
went down for the second month in a row. Analysts are saying this could mean the
economic recovery is going to level off, maybe kind of peter out next year, and
more people are becoming concerned about high interest rates. Given the big
deficits being projected by your own Administration, isn't it time for some
strong action by you to get interest rates down?

A. Well, I think what we're doing is aimed at getting interest rates down. Now
I'm not sure that interest rates entirely are to blame for this, and I don't
know whether the recent figures - in the first place, they're still way above
what they were not too long ago, before this recovery started, running around a
million-seven or something.

But what I want to know is are they seasonally adjusted or not? I have to tell
you I have not seen any evidence as to whether they are, and I'm going to make
an inquiry. Because if they're not, then you have to say, Well, is the interest
rate - is that the principal cause or only cause? Or is it possible, because
people don't start building houses back in the East and the Middle West and in
the snow country when autumn comes, there is a great drop-off in building.

Now if it is seasonally adjusted, then we have to look at things like the
interest rates. And it wouldn't surprise me if people are waiting because there
is - I think there's a great expectation that there's going to be a further drop
in the interest rates, and so anyone would be smart to wait for that drop to
take place.

But what we are doing about that, and the deficit, first of all is the economic
recovery program, which is working. About half your deficit is caused by the
recession. So economic recovery can halve your estimate. Our previous estimates
of the horrendous deficits have already been trimmed back by the amount of
recovery that we've had so far.

The other part of that is structural, it is built in because of government
spending. And I'm going to continue as hard as I can trying to get further
reductions in government spending as a means of bringing down the deficits and
getting us to the point of balanced budget, which we must reach. I have grown up
listening to the other party, year after year, in the 40-odd years in which they
have controlled both houses of the Congress, tell us that deficit spending was
necessary, and a little inflation also, to maintain prosperity. Well, I used to
predict out on the mashed-potato circuit that what is happening would happen -
the bottom would fall out. It did.

Now that recovery - and if we can continue more spending cuts - if we had
obtained the cuts we asked for in the beginning of our economic recovery
program, the deficit would be $40 billion smaller than it is right now.

Q. Thank you, Mr. President.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of U.S. marines

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SCREEN: 'AMERICANA'

BYLINE: By Janet Maslin

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 546 words

DATELINE: AMERRY


-GO-ROUND provides the overworked central metaphor for David Carradine's
''Americana,'' a film that seems to have emerged from a time warp very much the
worse for wear. Shot in the mid- 1970's, written by Richard Carr from a novel by
Henry Morton Robinson, it features Mr. Carradine as a soldier who arrives in
Kansas with his Vietnam experience fresh in his mind. He is, in the words of one
of the film's few characters to do much talking, ''one weird dude.''

In the middle of town, he spies a run-down old carousel and takes on the project
of restoring it to usefulness. The entire film concentrates on carousel-related
incidents. An elderly storekeeper sells the soldier supplies while offering folk
truisms like, ''You don't bother nobody, nobody'll bother you around here.'' A
local policeman (Bruce Carradine) harasses him, as do the town bullies. A garage
mechanic (Michael Greene) displays mixed and volatile feelings about the soldier
and his project. And a barefoot girl in a thin little frock watches the repair
process, running away each time the soldier sees her. Barbara Hershey, as this
prairie nymph, does nothing here but spill out of her dress and scamper
bashfully away from the camera.


Mr. Carradine's screen presence is always one of quiet authority, but as a
director he demonstrates no notion of how to harness that power. His silence
here borders on the inarticulate, and the screenplay's sparingness in explaining
his past is far too stony. There is at least as much presumption to the title as
there is authenticity. And the use of amateur actors - ''the people of Drury,
Kansas,'' as themselves, say the credits - is less a help than an affectation.

The climactic scene in ''Americana,'' which opens today at the Embassy 72d
Street theater, involves a dog. The soldier is taunted into fighting the dog,
and he kills it. He must do this in order to earn the last part needed to
restore the merry-go- round's motor. Finally, he weeps over the carcass, places
it on a carousel seat, sets the machinery in motion and walks away. Anything
this moment reveals about Vietnam and about America, not to mention about dogs
and merry-go-rounds, has been said better elsewhere.


''Americana'' has been rated PG (''Parental Guidance Suggested''). It contains
moderately strong language and sexual innuendoes.


Carousel Incidents

AMERICANA, produced and directed by David Carradine; story and screenplay by
Richard Carr, based on ''The Perfect Round'' by Henry Morton Robinson; director
of photography, Michael Stringer; music by Craig Hundley; edited by Mr.
Carradine and David Kern; executive producer, Skip Sherwood; released by Crown
International Pictures. Running time: 91 minutes. This film is rated PG. The
American SoldierDavid Carradine Jess's DaughterBarbara Hershey Mike the Garage
ManMichael Greene Ole StorekeeperArnold Herzstein SandySandy Ignon JohnJohn
Barrymore 3d GregGreg Walker CopBruce Carradine Old LadyGlenna Walters The
ColonelFran Ryan The LieutenantClaire Townsend Wrecking Yard ManDavid Kern
JakeDan Haggarty New StorekeeperBuz Storch BartenderJames Kelly Durgin Grateful
Dead FanRick Van Ness The Local DogBuffalo The Fighting DogMasagwa The people of
Drury, Kansas, as themselves


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 22, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

TV: HOW U.S. IS SEEN

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 46, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 518 words


''International Edition'' begins with the idea that it is a good thing if we can
see ourselves as others do. Therefore, it is presenting stories from the foreign
press about the United States and its interests, along with the people who
reported them. In fact, this is a good thing, although perhaps not for the
reasons ''International Edition'' had in mind. The series, which began last
Saturday, continues today at 10 A.M. on Channel 13.

''International Edition,'' produced for public television by the Maryland Center
for Public Broadcasting, presents both the print and electronic press -
reproducing key sentences from the one and showing film excerpts from the other.
The moderator, Ford Rowan, then questions the reporters.


Thus, in the opening episode last Saturday, ''International Edition'' showed a
West German television report about the training being given 1,000 Salvadoran
soldiers by 125 Green Berets in Honduras. The report said that the morale among
the Salvadorans was high. It also said that by training the soldiers in
Honduras, the Reagan Administration could avoid vexing legalisms about the
number of advisers in El Salvador.

Then, in an interview with Mr. Rowan, Dieter Kronzucker, the West German
reporter, brushed aside comparisons between El Salvador and Vietnam. El
Salvador, he said, could never be a ''quagmire.'' He said the conflict had
finite dimensions.

This was followed by a story from a Saudi Arabian newspaper. It said that
Washington misunderstood Lebanese complexities, and that a military solution in
Lebanon hadn't the slightest chance of success. Mr. Rowan then asked the Saudi
reporter if Lebanon could be a quagmire. ''Of course,'' he replied. ''Just ask
the Israelis.''

The value of all this to the viewer, however, may not be in learning how the
United States and its interests are portrayed abroad; it may simply be in the
stories themselves.

Those in today's episode do not have the same weight as the ones on the opening
program. Moreover, the stories - a British television report on the aftermath of
the air controllers' strike, a Taiwan newspaper account of United States-Taiwan
relations, a Danish television report on the Rev. Jerry Falwell - are similar to
stories that American audiences might see or read. On the other hand, perhaps
there is a lesson here, too - something about the world as global village.

In the follow-up discussions, however, Mr. Rowan elicits comments that are
rather like editorial sidebars. The British reporter says the United States ''is
a terribly puritanical country.'' The Danish reporter says Mr. Falwell wants to
''create a religious state.'' The Taiwanese reporter talks about Confucianism.
Mr. Rowan, a skilled interviewer, works hard at creating a roundtable.

''International Edition'' is being shown on Channel 13 between Paul Duke's
''Lawmakers'' at 9:30 and ''American Interests,'' a foreign affairs discussion
program, at 10:30. This viewer wishes Channel 13 would reinstate the practice of
showing public-affairs programs on Sundays. How many adults watch television on
Saturday mornings?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 22, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

BYLINE: By James F. Clarity

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 696 words


Assessment of Junketing

As envisioned by the Reagan Administration, the proposed National Endowment for
Democracy will be an agency that sends people around the world to promote the
American way of life. President Reagan praised the proposal at his news
conference Wednesday night.

But Bob Dole of Kansas, chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, fears the
endowment could be used to satisfy the wanderlust of some Congressional staff
members.

So he took the floor Thursday night to push through a restrictive amendment to
the legislation creating the endowment. The amendment would make it difficult
for Congressional staff members to get the endowment to pay for overseas trips.
Mr. Dole also cast some light on the current state of junketing.

''Let us face it,'' he said, ''there are some staff who make a career out of
traveling around the world as often as they can at taxpayers' expense. Some have
been to various countries seven or eight times with no real purpose. They know
all the angles. They know the loopholes. If you make them an officer or member
of the board of the endowment, they have an open-ended travel agency at their
disposal.

''For this commission they have one bag, for this commission they have another
bag, and for another commission they have another bag. Sometimes they come to
Washington just to get their laundry done and pick up their mail.''

Mr. Dole added: ''I heard the President's response last night of all the good it
is going to do around the world, and I hope that is true. Not too many people
get to travel around the world and when they do, they have to pay for it
themselves.''

The Vietnam Medal

Without a single dissent, the House of Representatives has approved a bill
ordering the Treasury Department to coin and sell ''a national medal honoring
the courage and dedication of the men and women who served in the Armed Forces
of the United States in the Vietnam conflict.''

The measure now goes to the Senate. The bill's sponsor, Representative Frank
Annunzio, an Illinois Democrat, said, ''There is, perhaps, no adequate way to
honor our Vietnam veterans, but this is their nation's humble attempt to do
so.''

Another supporter of the medal, Representative Ed Bethune, an Arkansas
Republican, said, ''No other group of American veterans has been so honored, but
the unique circumstances of the Vietnam era vet requires this particular
action.'' The House bill requires the Secretary of the Treasury to select a
medal design from submissions by veterans and others and to ''offer such medals
for sale in a manner designed to elicit as much public response as possible.''

Not-So-Free Advice

Free advice is ample in Washington, but the American Security

Council Foundation is trying to persuade people to pay for the privilege of
advising some members of Congress.

The foundation, a conservative organization, seeks to raise money by offering
membership on what is being called the United States Congressional Advisory
Board.

That membership, being widely solicited by mail, entitles members to ''fight
against a well-established, well-organized group of ultraliberal organizations,
who, though well intentioned, have been unilaterally disarming the U.S. and are
now trying to keep us from rebuilding our strength.''

No examples of unilateral disarmement were given, but the foundation seemed to
be attacking proponents of a nuclear freeze. Already on the advisory board's
letterhead are the names of four conservative members of Congress: Senator Jake
Garn, Republican of Utah; Senator J. Bennett Johnston, Democrat of Louisiana;
Representative Jack F. Kemp, Republican of upstate New York, and Representative
Bill Chappell Jr., Democraat of Florida. They are described as proponents of
Congressional passage of the Peace Through Strength Resolution, an antifreeze
measure.

Potential board members are advised that participation is ''an investment of
time and money.'' A member donating ,000 will be called a chairmen's adviser and
will get a ''handsome engraved wall plaque.'' A donor of of 00 will be a state
adviser, receiving ''an impressive 9 by 12 embossed and sealed membership
certificate.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 23, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

House Votes Vietnam Medal

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 48, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 74 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 22


The House has unanimously approved legislation directing the Treasury to design
and sell at cost medals honoring American troops who served in the Vietnam war.
Under the bill, which the House sent to the Senate Tuesday, the design of the
gold, silver, and bronze medals would be chosen in consultation with recognized
organizations representing Vietnam veterans and would have to be approved by the
National Commission on Fine Arts.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 23, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE VIEW;
'ZORBA' IS NO CLASSIC, BUT QUINN MAY BE

BYLINE: By Benedict Nightingale

SECTION: Section 2; Page 3, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1588 words


Not long ago I saw a revival of ''Hair,'' and could not believe it was the same
show that had sent me skipping into the street back in 1968. What had felt so
liberating suddenly seemed puny, sniveling and worse: an infantile celebration
of a ''now'' generation which time had mercifully relegated to the ranks of the
thens, a tawdry paean to stoned simpletons. ''Hair,'' like many another
acclaimed musical, had not weathered well. Nor, for that matter, had the 1960's.

''Zorba,'' generally regarded in 1968 as fluff beside ''Hair,'' fares rather
better in revival; and it does so despite inadequacies in most departments, from
Joseph Stein's book to Michael Cacoyannis's production at the Broadway to the
voicebox of the mainly marvelous Anthony Quinn, whose macho habit it clearly is
to gargle daily with iron filings. It, too, is of its period. Zorba himself,
with his rampaging id, his wanderlust, his boast that ''I own nothing, I judge
nothing, I am free,'' was very much a hero for the 60's. He even mouthed a few
anti-war sentiments that wouldn't have sounded amiss in the Vietnam-obsessed
lairs of ''Hair.'' But the musical, like Mr Cacoyannis's 1964 movie, ultimately
derives from a novel published in 1946, when a flower child was still a young
person who enjoyed gardening; and some of that work's permanence of spirit finds
its way into the theater now.

Some. Not all, not enough. It was, of course, always going to be difficult to
adapt as dense and deep a writer as Nikos Kazantzakis to the musical stage, and
one should be grateful that he made the jump in relatively unmangled shape.
Several songs are direct transpositions of anecdote, reminiscence or rumination
that would be hard to extract in any more conventional dramatic way. And the
same main incidents in the novel reappear in the musical: Zorba's nights on the
town with boss Niko's money, the murder of the village widow with whom Niko has
an embryonic affair, the death of the moldering courtesan Zorba had promised to
marry, the collapse of the mine he and Niko have come to Crete to exploit. Well,
all right, in book and movie it's the failure of Zorba's lumberjacking
enterprise that finally (and hilariously) dashes his and his boss's commercial
hopes. But it is easier, and safer for everyone in the theater, to stage a mild
explosion than a wild avalanche of giant logs; so let's not quibble about a
detail.

Yet musicals, especially those dating from before the reforms of Stephen
Sondheim, are subject to their own magnetic law. They tend to gravitate toward
the tried, tested, and found wanting. One can imagine the early script
conferences for ''Zorba'': ''You want the folks to think Niko is some kind of
deviant? You can't have a juvenile lead like that. We gotta build up the
love-interest. Now, that widow . . .'' And, yes, the widow gradually moves
center-stage, and her transitory amour assumes an importance it had in neither
novel nor film. She speaks, which she shouldn't, and, God help us, she sings:
''Niko, I feel I'm living at last. Niko, I'll be good for you . . .''

The transformation of this bleak, mythic figure into a rapturous American
housewife just back from her encounter group doesn't matter only in itself. It
distracts us and Niko from what is, like it or not, his primary relationship:
the one with Zorba. In essence Kazantzakis's tale is a vividly illustrated
debate between the claims of the head and those of maw, gut, heart and gland.
But it is a very one-sided argument, with all the fun, charm and eloquence given
to the spokesman for feeling; and so the subject becomes the emotional education
of a parched intellectual. The servant teaches the master, Zorba cures Niko of
chronic bookishness. That's the center of the thing, or should be.

Of course one can hardly expect to be offered Zorba's philosophy in all its
ebullience, since there are only two-odd hours available and much singing and
swirling to slot into them. But that philosophy is less complete and more dilute
here than it need be. Whatever the exigencies of time and entertainment, Zorba
should surely not concentrate quite so exclusively on the subject of women and
sex. It risks turning an all-purpose Dionysus into an old goat.

Now, the creators of the musical have clearly sensed some of this danger,
because they've provided the character with a brave new song applauding the
emancipated female (''God made women to be free, interesting, exciting''). That
is presumably intended as a sop to the sisterhood, a corrective to Zorba's
sexism, his tendency to see women as helpless and pitiful. But in practice the
result is inconsistency - and a hero who seems yet more obsessed with one topic
only.

Still, it is difficult to complain too bitterly when that hero is Anthony Quinn
and that topic principally represented by Lila Kedrova. It is doubly difficult
when they bring such warmth and artistry to the business of renewing the
partnership they forged in the film. Miss Kedrova, her big, ingenuous smiles
contrasting sharply with her big, woebegone oyster-eyes, gurgles and flutters
her way through the role of Zorba's aging, half-cracked mistress, capturing all
its fragility. Her very nose, jutting from behind a bedsheet, manages to look
infinitely vulnerable. And Mr. Quinn's Zorba remains a splendidly genial, zesty
and authoritative presence, whether he's with her, Robert Westenberg's austere
and attractive Niko, or the peasantry beyond.

He can't really sing. His attempts to hit the right note sometimes put me in
mind of a huge bird, a turkey perhaps, trying to land on a tiny branch; and,
right or not, the noise he actually emits is a sort of tubercular boom, as from
a rusty cannon. Nor does he bring to Zorba's celebrated dance the ''savage and
desperate'' energy Kazantzakis described and I recall him exuding in the movie.
Instead, an intent frown puckers that long, long face, making him look as if
he's straining to lay an egg. The egg, I fear, turns out to be his footwork,
which is unnecessarily stately and cumbersome.

Yet he has his moments, plenty of them: a dark, brooding stare at the memory of
his son's death; a wry, sly, almost invisible amalgam of lip-twisting, eyebrow-
raising and shoulder-shrugging at yet another instance of his fellow-creatures'
hypocrisy or Niko's earnestness; a delicacy, surprising from so burly a man, in
love. There is a new sensitivity, a new tenderness in his playing of intimate
scenes, and, of course, that lordly, grizzled charisma is undiminished
throughout. He is the Zorba, in some ways even more generous and likable a
figure than one remembered from the movie.

The show as a whole, however, is far from earning the classic status implicitly
claimed by its expensive exhumation. On the contrary, it leaves you wishing for
more almost everywhere you look, or listen. Fred Ebb's lyrics are sometimes
vapidly sententious - ''life is what you do till the moment you die'' - and
frequently need more edge and bite. John Kander's music busies itself with brass
and bouzouki, yet is strangely lacking in aggression and atmosphere. It doesn't
thrust you, as it should, onto a baked earth under a stark sky; but then neither
does Mr. Cacoyannis' production.

In the original production, Hal Prince placed the entire action within the
framework of a cafe, and made use of something akin to a classical chorus, under
a black- gowned narrator. Mr. Cacoyannis ditches the Brechtian trickery and,
more surprisingly, much of the Greekishness. The narrator survives as a
lady-astrologer in purple, with no obvious function beyond handing out tarot
cards and making gratuitously ominous comments (''There's a house at the top of
the hill where someone's waiting for you''); and the singers and dancers around
her seem pretty characterless. Always judge a director of musicals by his
handling of throng. Always suspect him if, like Mr. Cacoyannis in the opening
scene, he brings on a balloon-seller to add to the factitious color and
festivity. Since one sees such people about one- tenth as often in life as on
the musical stage, it's a sure symptom of an ailing imagination.

That imagination fails to revive when the action moves to Crete. It doesn't help
that the set - stone steps and platforms, backed by what look like etched
cookies sewn together - forces everything to the front of a stage whose horizons
one longs to see tellingly exploited. It doesn't help that some of those
isolated villagers have apparently been shopping for skirts and pullovers in New
Hope or Carmel, or that the widow's dress is a smart, black version of the one
the heroine of ''42d Street'' wears at her moment of triumph, or that she has
had her hair done at much the same salon. It doesn't help that the local accents
vary from American high school to Greek kebab house.

No, it doesn't help. But all could still be well if the bit players radiated
some of the animal primitivism that Kazantzakis evoked in the book and
Cacoyannis in the movie. Yet when their big opportunity comes, with the cutting
of the widow's throat by a vindictive villager, the savagery seems oddly
half-hearted. One would not expect the woman's head actually to be sliced off,
as happens in the novel. Equity might object. But after the example of ''Sweeney
Todd'' there can be no excuse for failing to use so much as a capsule of
stage-gore. Who would have believed that ''Zorba''was attacked for being too
realistically brutal back in 1968? At the Broadway, even its violence seems
sedate.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 23, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CENTRAL AMERICA: U.S. ON A 'DISASTER COURSE'

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 752 words


To the Editor:


Profiting from experience is a particular virtue of democratic societies.
Autocratic regimes, lacking in accountability, are more prone to rigidities and
orthodoxies. If myopia prevails, there is no public recourse. Policy is made in
secrecy and to be known only after the event.

Unfortunately, the United States is embarked on a disaster course in Central
America - the result of decision-making more characteristic of autocratic than
democratic systems.

Decisions are being made in secret. Accountability is restricted. There is
inadequate review and debate in the Senate. The result is a policy characterized
by orthodoxies, rigidities and myopia. Not only are we slowly moving toward a
quagmire situation, but at a time of growing scarcities we are wasting precious
human and material resources that could surely be put to better use.

Nor are we likely to get away with it. Unlike Soviet interventions in Hungary,
Czechoslovakia or for that matter Afghanistan, we cannot act with total power
and ruthlessness.

Moreover, our present method of deciding policy in Central America results in
political ''unlearning.'' Confounding the democratic process denies us knowledge
based on painful experiences.  Algeria, Vietnam and many other situations have
shown us how difficult and unwise it is to oppose genuinely popular
''revolutionary'' regimes, and that we cannot impose solutions which they
reject. Even where we succeed in getting rid of this regime or that, we leave a
bitter and sullen legacy.  In Central America, as in Latin America more
generally, hatred for the United States is accumulating, and with it a growing
contempt for the kind of government it represents.  The more unlearning in our
Government, the more we teach people to become our enemies. Every past
intervention is retrieved to become embodied in present ones. It is the Latin
Americans who are learning. The more such knowledge they have, the less good are
our prospects for bringing about long-term stability, growth and democracy in
the region.  There are few Latin Americans who do not regard the sad events in
Chile today as the direct result of American ''destabilization'' of the Allende
regime. There are few who regard our present actions in Central America as
anything but sinister.

The unlearning process is not limited to our policy in Latin America. It affects
our internal politics, too. We lose balance and perspective, and we become
confused about our appropriate role in world affairs. Who wants to intervene in
the affairs of small countries by adding misery to already miserable lives?

Not only are a good many Americans disgusted with the undeclared war being waged
against the Sandinista Government in Nicaragua and for the present regime in El
Salvador, but they want to know what we think we could accomplish if we won.

We need the kind of full-scale public debate which not only allows for a proper
airing of views but makes use of what we have learned. For if we fail, and it is
increasingly likely that our present policy will, these wars will have been
fought behind the backs of the American people.

There is also concern over the atmosphere of adventurism surrounding the Reagan
Administration. The half-truths and falsehoods orchestrated in part by the
C.I.A. rob our country of its standing abroad and its civility and sense of
decency at home. The elevated purposes and aims which an articulate President
proclaims with evident gusto only make matters worse.

What should be clear is that Congress cannot continue to abdicate its judgment,
a lesson we should have learned from the Vietnam war. To allow the continued
buildup and military escalation in Central America without a full review and
debate is even more dangerous than the buildup of American forces in Lebanon.

Perhaps the Kissinger commission can help to rectify the situation by providing
alternatives to the present course. Perhaps too, some of the members of that
commission will remind its director that the worst way for democratic
governments to deal with popular radical regimes is by wars of subversion.

The matter is urgent. The situation in Central America is deteriorating rapidly.
Our options are eroding. What we witness there today is becoming for us what
Sartre once called the Algerian war, a ''striptease of our humanism.''

DAVID E. APTER New Haven, Oct. 12, 1983

The writer is Henry J. Heinz 2d Professor of Comparative Political and Social
Development at Yale.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER TO THE EDITOR

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 23, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE NATION;
A NATIONAL DAY FOR DR. KING

BYLINE: By Caroline Rand Herron and Michael Wright

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 409 words


Fifteen years after the assassination of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.,
black Americans have come to carry considerable sway at the ballot box. It was
surely not the only factor, but the possibility of retribution on Election Day
appeared to have strengthened the Senate's resolve last week to approve a
national holiday honoring the civil rights leader's birthday.

The holiday, which will fall on the third Monday in January, had already been
approved overwhelmingly by the House. The Senate's 78 to 22 final vote came
after a bitter last-ditch stand by North Carolina Republican Jesse Helms. Mr.
Helms argued that Dr. King wasn't a fit ''role model'' for young Americans;
among other things, he said, Dr. King had run with Marxists and had too sharply
attacked United States involvement in Vietnam. At one point, Mr. Helms
maintained that derogatory information about Dr. King had been discovered
through wiretaps authorized when John F. Kennedy was President and Robert F.
Kennedy was Attorney General. His brother Robert, Senator Edward M. Kennedy
said, ''would be the first person to say that (former Federal Bureau of
Investigation director) J. Edgar Hoover's campaign against Martin Luther King
was a shame and a blot on American history.''

Separately, Mr. Helms unsuccessfully sought court approval for the release of
F.B.I. investigative reports that have been sealed since 1977. President Reagan,
who originally opposed the holiday, said he would still rather leave it up to
the states. ''But since they seem bent on making it a national holiday,'' he
said, ''I believe the symbolism of that day is important enough that I'll sign
that legislation when it reaches my desk.'' When asked if he agreed that Dr.
King had had Communist associations, Mr. Reagan replied: ''Well, we'll know in
about 35 years.'' After his comments drew criticism, the President called Dr.
King's widow and ''indicated he did not want his remarks misinterpreted,'' a
White House spokesman said.

More questions about Mr. Reagan's views seemed likely after Meldrim Thomson, a
former Governor of New Hampshire, released portions of a letter the President
had sent him responding to a letter of his own. Mr. Thomson had called Dr. King
a man ''of immoral character whose associations with agents of communism is well
established.'' Mr. Reagan replied: ''I have the same reservations, but the
perception of too many people is based on an image, not reality.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 23, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT MEN;
RITES OF PASSAGE

BYLINE: By Michael Norman

SECTION: Section 6; Page 78, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1089 words


Michael Norman is a reporter on The Times's Metropolitan staff.  HEN I THINK of
a long, hot parade ground and a cauldron called Parris Island, the season, even
on cool days, sometimes turns torrid for me.

I was a conscript-in-waiting turned volunteer, a student with a questionable
record who lost his draft deferment and signed up to salvage his good name.
''You have a Hemingway complex,'' a friend said. And indeed it probably was
true.

In the summer of 1967, I boarded a flight at Newark International Airport to
begin the trip to the Marine Corps training depot at Parris Island, S.C. There
was a war on; the island was like a production line that year. I was 19 years
old and making my passage.

No one I know comes of age this way anymore. The younger men I work with and
count among my friends fight their battles in office wars and on the campaign
trail. They test their emotional mettle in divorce courts and develop their
cunning late at night on the A train to Brooklyn.  Beirut, for them, is
unreachable. They have never fired a weapon, never struck another man in anger.
They choose reason over action and listen to the counsel of women. Some prize
patience and subtlety, and spend hours reading the tea leaves of nuance. I have
learned much from some of these men.

When I think of these things, when memory takes on a cadence and passes in
review, I climb to the attic and retrieve an old plaid suitcase that holds my
dog tags and the past. I cling to this musty litter. It reminds me that too much
forethought, too long spent reading the leaves, makes a man timid and wary. I no
longer act on instinct, but I have not forgotten how to use it. The younger men
I know do not have a satchel like this. They might learn much from it.

As it turned out, I am not sure I came of age at Parris Island. Perhaps that
happened later on a bridge on the road to Khesanh or years after Vietnam when my
son was born and for a time I turned forward instead of back. Who can say when
the the picture is finished, when a man has completed an image of himself. I am
still taking my measure, still looking in the mirror and sifting the detritus
behind me.

Here, in the satchel, are letters and photographs and a red-bound book, a record
of that summer. Here is Norman, Michael, Pvt., 2355550, a sober- faced
probationer who thought he had so much to prove. ''I'll never quit,'' he wrote
home from boot camp, full of himself and this new challenge.

I have long since accepted his excesses. He was, after all, in a school that
taught survival, a place of rugged conformists who celebrated their own
machismo. ''You are expected to act like a man,'' the manual said, ''and you
will be treated like one.''

His father fought in the Battle of the Bulge. His grandfather was gassed in the
trenches. But no one ever suggested that war was part of his patrimony. There
was no flag in front of the house, no set of medals on the mantelpiece. Still,
he welcomed the physical test. Indeed, he wanted to be treated like a man and,
as the weeks passed, he learned the drill well.

A few of the young men I have met might profit from a course like this, but I
have never felt censorious enough to recommend it. I am no superpatriot either,
no unpaid Government procurer. What's more, the plaid satchel is in disarray.
Its contents are shuffled. Its owner is filled with ambivalence.

Parris Island has often been my counterweight, the lead ring that gives balance
to other tests and trials. But the lessons of the forced march, the rifle range,
the bayonet drill, the heat, sand fleas and whims of the sometimes malevolent
stewards who trained us, all were meant to mimic combat. What is the capital now
in learning to endure these things? Why prepare for an ascent when the land is
flat and green?

Yes, I learned something of comradeship that many young men will never know.
Bonds grow in the barracks and the foxhole, and the circles formed there seem
stronger to me than cliques in the office or at the club. Still, on a ball field
or in a fishing boat, young men chatter about women and box scores, and I can
hear in their voices echoes from the island.

And yet perhaps I have been wrong. Maybe I know something they do not. I can see
it now in the plaid satchel. This must be why I am drawn to the attic every
year, why I open the red book and turn the pages. Here, in the back, are the mug
shots of Platoon 1004. Here is the boy from Alabama who could not read, but
seemed to know so much of the world. Here is Private Riddick from Newark, a
tough, scrappy black kid who used to get letters with ''S.W.A.K.,'' sealed with
a kiss, on the back. Here are Kelly and Kovacs and Lapham and Long. There are
cowards here, and brave men too, the strong-willed who were sure of themselves
and the braggarts who always stumbled. There were men from families with money,
and men so poor they used to sleep at night with their hands on their boots, as
if someone wanted to steal them.

No one I know comes of age in this kind of company anymore. It was the least
discriminating of schools. Some men rose above their backgrounds, others were
betrayed by them. Stripped as we were of class and social station, we measured
each other with the same simple yardstick: Was a man dependable and honest, or
would he cut and run and steal you blind? Years later, as I watched some young
men pirate ideas from one another or duck under a desk when trouble was at hand,
I remembered the island.

And there is one thing more. Many of the pictures in the book are now
photographs in memoriam. There will be no reunion for this class. Part of our
passage was preparing for death. This sets those of us who survived apart from
the young men I know. Any risk we take now will never carry more peril than we
have already known. We are not smarter, of course, but perhaps a bit more
judicious in our choices. We have a sense of loss and know how to guard against
waste. We require explantions. When the tin drum of authority beats out its
call, we are slow to step into line.

When I think of the summer and I hear the order to form ranks, I consider
returning to the island and walking the parade ground. And yet, now, I know
there is no need to make the trip. I have repacked the plaid satchel. Everything
finally is in order. There is no ambivalence left. It goes back in the attic
now. Maybe someday my son or a young friend just come of age and curious about
the past will ask to see it.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 23, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

BEARING WITNESS

BYLINE: By Samuel G. Freedman; Samuel G. Freedman is a reporter for th culture
department of The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 32, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5989 words


THE DOORMAN LEAPS back as the 11-year- old boy takes the lobby of his apartment
building at a gallop, legs kicking out almost sideways.  Halfway down the street
in Manhattan's West 80's, he pauses to look back and sees his father emerge from
the building, walking with an even gait, arms drawn behind him. The boy runs on.
Soon he is outside the pizza parlor that has his favorite video games and he
waits for the man with the quarters, his father, Elie Wiesel.

It seems an implausible scene: Elie Wiesel, a writer and speaker and thinker
fused to the Holocaust, to anguish and agony, to the memory of a son stealing a
crust of bread from his father on a train bound for Auschwitz, is taking his son
to play video games.

Yet the very casual aspect of the moment belies its importance. For almost at
his son Shlomo-Elisha's age, Wiesel was deported from his home to a series of
concentration camps, there to be separated from his mother and sisters, there to
see his father die before his eyes. The body of his work presents such a world
and repeatedly offers choices between life and death, belief and blasphemy,
silence and speech, the pain of survival and the comfort of suicide.
Shlomo-Elisha is Wiesel's wager, not on a perfect world, but on the better side
of humanity.

''My life is a commentary on my books, not the other way around,'' says Wiesel,
who is 55. ''When Marion, my wife, told me she was pregnant, my first feeling
was fear. What am I doing? The world is not worthy of children. I was frantic.
But the next wave was joy. Will it be a boy or a girl? Whose name will it have -
my mother's or my father's?

''I must confess, I felt something special when I carried him for the
circumcision. The circumcision is a very mystical rite. The rabbi had a very
beautiful way of putting it. He said, 'A name has returned.'' ' Wiesel pauses.
''A name has returned. When I was called to read the Torah by name, Eliezer
ben-Shlomo, now there was Shlomo ben-Eliezer. For weeks and days and months, I
would carry him in my arms. I saw myself when I was a child.

These are retrospective and cautiously positive times for Elie Wiesel. His name
has been frequently mentioned as a possible recipient of a Nobel Prize, for
either peace or literature. His writing, while informed as ever by his
survivor's vista, has come to embrace the Hasidic tradition, which celebrates,
if nothing else, the triumph of survival, of singing and dancing despite
heartache. His newest book, ''The Golem,'' to be published next month, is an
illustrated legend, a novel (''Le Cinqui eme Fils'') has just been released in
France and Wiesel is working on a book about Talmudic masters.

As Wiesel has expanded his literary scope, he also has largely achieved his
initial goal of perpetuating the story of the Holocaust. ''Night,'' his memoir,
has sold about one million copies and has become the most widely-read work in
Holocaust literature. This year, Robert McAfee Brown published a glowing
critical overview of Wiesel's work under the almost reverential title of ''Elie
Wiesel: Messenger to All Humanity.'' Wiesel is chairman of the United States
Holocaust Memorial Council, the body that will create a national museum of the
Holocaust in Washington, D.C., and two of his former Boston University students
have gone on to direct Holocaust study centers. His speaking calendar is full,
and this month he has revived his lecture series at the 92d Street Y in New York
with ''Job Revisited,'' an allusion to the topic of his first lecture there, 17
years ago. He is among the best-known Jews in the United States, and some
proclaim him a superstar, a hero.

Reluctantly, Wiesel admits to some satisfaction. ''It's the French expression -
for want of something better, I have to be satisfied with this,'' he says. ''I
have to be satisfied with small miracles. I used to expect major miracles. After
the war, I thought I could change the world by telling the story. This is the
Jewish belief: that out of total darkness will come total light. My night won't
end, and yet other things are possible - day, hope. It's based on that night
that I can experience joy. Because we must experience it. If not, how could we
go on? This is the existential bet we make.''

But Wiesel, for all the conquest of old woes, now has a multitude of new ones.
Believing that if mankind knew of the Holocaust it would avert other wars, he
has instead seen, and often written of, the tableaux of Biafra, Northern
Ireland, Lebanon, Vietnam, Cambodia and Central America. Even in Israel, in
Jerusalem, the one place where he says he feels at peace, Sephardic Jews at a
demonstration last year shouted that Hitler should have killed all their
European brethren. A handful of scholars have arisen to proclaim the killing of
six million Jews an exaggeration or a fraud, while artists and businessmen, from
the producers of the television series ''Holocaust'' to the hawkers of T-shirts
at survivors' gatherings, have commercialized the catastrophe.

And with Wiesel's fame has come, on the one hand, a dehumanizing sort of
adulation and, on the other, criticism of his writing and his personality -
little of it rendered in public - from some leading American Jewish
intellectuals. One Jewish historian and critic says that, beneath the civil
surface, Elie Wiesel arouses passions as strong as those that divided Jews
during Israel's 1982 invasion of Lebanon.

And so a part of Wiesel remains frightened, insecure. ''I am still afraid,'' he
says. ''I live in constant fear. Of anything. If I see a policeman, the
policeman. If I'm in the street, I'm afraid of the street.'' The root of the
little fears, says a friend and fellow survivor, is the big fear. ''Since the
Holocaust, we're convinced the universe is not the same,'' says David Weiss
Halivni, an adjunct professor of religion at Columbia University. ''There is a
blemish on creation and that blemish may lie dormant, but who knows when it will
erupt and devour us? There is a crack in the earth that hasn't healed. That
notion sets survivors apart. And Elie gives it expression in literature.''

THE WINDOWS OF THE study in which Wiesel writes open to a view of Central Park,
and from the 10th floor the tufts of trees resemble so many green cumulus
clouds.  Wiesel works with his back to the view. He sits at a typewriter facing
a wall with a framed photograph at eye level, impossible to ignore. The
photograph is of the house of Wiesel's childhood, in Sighet, Rumania, and
although the picture was taken during the daytime, in the printing the sky was
deliberately darkened, so that the house appears forever in the black of night.

The photograph captures both the private loss and the creative imperative of
Wiesel. Sighet is dead to him, and so is the boy who grew up there, reading the
Talmud and picking apricots on his grandfather's farm. Wiesel emerged from the
concentration camps doubting both God and life. ''When I was 18,'' he says, ''I
was not 18. I was an old man. What I knew then, the teachers of my teachers
never knew. What I lived in an hour, people don't live in a generation.''
Without understanding this, one cannot understand Wiesel or his writings.

In the camps, he heard even a rabbi say, ''It's the end. God is no longer with
us.'' Wiesel himself has said, ''I believe during the Holocaust the covenant was
broken.'' To him this rupture represented not simply a choice of disbelief, but
the shattering of a logic, a prism through which one observed the world. Wiesel
entitled his first book ''Night,'' and in what Robert Brown called ''the most
widely quoted passage in Holocaust literature,'' wrote:

''Never shall I forget that night, the first night in camp, which has turned my
life into one long night, seven times cursed and seven times sealed. . . . Never
shall I forget those flames which consumed my faith forever. Never shall I
forget that nocturnal silence which deprived me, for all eternity, of the desire
to live.''

References to living death pervade his work. ''Night'' ends with Wiesel looking
at himself in the mirror upon his liberation and seeing ''a corpse'' whose look
''has never left me.'' In ''Dawn,'' his second book and first novel, Wiesel
wrote, ''Sometimes I thought of myself as a living graveyard.'' The
autobiographical character in ''The Accident'' attempts suicide, and in the
short story ''The End of a Revolutionary,'' a man welcomes his execution in an
instance of mistaken identity. ''For years he had been dead without knowing
it,'' Wiesel wrote. ''Now his death would become a fact, a part of reality.''

Life, as always with Wiesel, becomes art. To say he is somber is to show
restraint. ''For years and years,'' Wiesel says, ''I only wore black ties.
Strangely enough, at the time I didn't know why. I must've thought it was
cheaper to buy a black tie. But now, in hindsight, I see nothing is without a
reason.'' He remains almost a haggard figure, his face ruddy but deeply lined,
his hair disheveled, like that of a man perpetually distracted.

''I've never seen Elie give a belly laugh,'' says Prof. Irving Abrahamson, the
Elie Wiesel Research Fellow at Spertus College of Judaica in Chicago. ''He'll
chuckle; he'll smile; there'll be a twinkle in his eye. But never a laugh from
within, a laugh that makes you roll on the floor.''

Harry James Cargas, a professor of literature and religion at Webster University
in Missouri and the author of a book of dialogues with Wiesel, recalls: ''I've
been in his apartment twice when he's gotten phone calls from Europe to tell him
that a survivor he didn't even know had committed suicide. They just wanted him
to know. And Elie seemed to absorb it into this perpetual state of profound
sadness.''

Wiesel's arm, after all, will always bear the number A-7713. Nightmares about
ghetto life, the camps and his father still jar him awake and, after nearly 40
years, he has given up hoping they will cease. From a survivor's standpoint,
much of life after the camps seems trivial, almost unreal.

Wiesel remembers the wait when his novel, ''A Beggar in Jerusalem,'' was
contending for France's Prix Medicis, which it did win. ''My publisher was
terribly excited and I was phlegmatic,'' he says. ''At one point, he said,
'Don't you care?' And I said that if something bad happens to me, I close my
eyes and see myself in 1945 and what was bad doesn't seem so bad. And when
something good happens, I think of myself in 1945 and I say this isn't so good.
Whatever happens today is more real and less real. Survivors are more sensitive.
The slightest thing can hurt, and yet nothing can hurt. You go for a walk in the
park and shake yourself and say, 'Am I walking?' You hear steps behind you and
you think they are different steps, steps from a march.''

Several noted Holocaust writers - Tadeusz Borowski, Paul Celan and Josef Wulf -
purged their memories by committing suicide. Wiesel himself has contemplated it.
He recalls two instances in the early 1950's, both times standing alone beside
the railing of ships at sea. ''I don't swim,'' Wiesel says, ''and I looked into
the ocean and felt the attraction, feeling the depth of all that nothingness.
It's Freudian - what he called the oceanic feeling. We are tired. I am tired. My
imagination's tired. How can I go on speaking? And awakening? And altering? To
just lie down, it feels so easy.''

What saved his life was the obsession to write, and thereby to testify. ''My
temptation was before I had begun to write,'' he says. ''Never since. I had not
given my testament. And that was a compelling reason - not to live but to
survive.''

ELIE WIESEL SEES HIMself not as an essayist or novelist in the accepted
contemporary vein, but as a vehicle, a conduit, a messenger. There appears more
than a little self- description in what he wrote in ''Souls on Fire'' of the
Hasidic master, the Maggid of Mezeritch: ''He accepted his role as vessel of
communication, of executor rather than innovator.'' Eliezer in ''The Accident''
calls himself ''a messenger of the dead among the living,'' and messengers and
madmen populate virtually all of Wiesel's work. They usually bear apocalyptic
tidings and their message often is ignored. Wiesel has also repeatedly drawn
witnesses who choose to remain silent: Gregor pretends to be a mute in ''The
Gates of the Forest,'' Azriel in ''The Oath'' takes a vow not to tell of the
pogrom in his town and in ''The Testament,'' Grisha bites off his tongue rather
than be made to inform on his father. All these characters hint at the two
continuing Wiesel dilemmas: how to convey that which is impossible to convey,
and how to convince a skeptical world it is true.  ''I've written 25 books,''
Wiesel says, ''and every one has been a failure. The feeling is always of
inadequacy. I feel it at the beginning of a book, and at the end I'm confirmed.
And yet, I really believe I have to write. There's a certain compulsion. I owe
it to everybody but myself. I owe it to the dead. I owe it to the living. I find
words by accident. Therefore, this accident must have meaning.

''A survivor's testimony is more important than anything that can be written
about survivors. It's important for them, important for the world. And for me,
that is the most rewarding thing - to free, to open up the survivors. They live
clandestinely. What made their being most unique was something they hid. That is
most tragic - to suffer and then to suffer for having suffered.''

Wiesel's task sets him apart from most other writers, even most other Jewish
writers, and so does his style. He draws on two seemingly divergent
inspirations: Jewish religious writings and the French existentialists. He
derives his taste for storytelling, for tales and parables, from lifelong study
of the Bible, the Talmud and the works of the Hasidic masters. In the Prophet
Jeremiah, whose lamentations tell of the destruction of the Temple by the
Babylonian conquerors of ancient Jerusalem, Wiesel found a special antecedent, a
voice he has heard in a Warsaw rid of Jews and on the ground at Babi Yar, where
the Nazis slew up to 100,000 Russian Jews.

''I am fascinated by Jeremiah,'' Wiesel says, ''because he foresaw the tragedy,
he lived the tragedy and he told the tragedy. And nobody listened. He was thrown
in jail and he was ridiculed. Everything that could happen to a person happened
to Jeremiah. They burned his book and he started writing it all over again. If I
want to talk about today, I talk about Jeremiah, the somber beauty.''

Wiesel came under the influence of the French writers, most notably Camus and
Sartre, when he lived and studied in Paris, after the war and before he came to
the United States in 1956. Their contribution lies not so much in writing style
as in personal example. Like them, Wiesel moves in multiple roles: novelist,
essayist, speaker, moral voice. His declarations to survive, to live and to
love, even after the Holocaust, recall the leaps of faith that Camus implored
readers to risk in ''The Plague.''

Some critics, in turn, have denigrated Wiesel for sacrificing style to
substance. ''From book to book, Wiesel has actually been on a forced march from
despair to affirmation,'' Edward Grossman said in reviewing ''Biblical Portraits
and Legends'' in The New York Times. Jeffrey Burke assailed Wiesel's ''tendency
to sacrifice the demands of craft to those of conscience,'' in his Times review
of ''The Testament.'' But to Wiesel, these are compliments.

''This is what I demand from literature: a moral dimension,'' he says. ''Art for
art's sake is gone. We cannot allow it. Just to write a novel, that's why I
survived? It would have been cheap, pitiful, to go through all my generation
went through to go to cocktail parties, to enjoy sales of books, to get a good
review. It would be absurd.''

The subject turned to Ezra Pound, the renowned poet and self-proclaimed Fascist
who broadcast anti- Semitic tirades during World War II, and to more tolerant
writers, such as Ernest Hemingway and Archibald MacLeish, who intervened to
spare Pound from trial for treason. ''I am more demanding of writers,'' Wiesel
says. ''If you have the gifts, you have the responsibilities. The responsibility
to be moral. The responsibility for the way your writings are interpreted. It is
too easy to say Pound didn't mean it when he made his radio broadcasts. What do
they mean, 'He didn't mean it'? He was on the side of the darkest forces.''

Wiesel has applied his vision of morality to myriad topics. Only ''Night''
focuses solely on his concentration camp experience, but, as he has pointed out,
several of the novels that followed examine the options for survivors - suicide
in ''The Accident,'' political action in ''Dawn,'' madness in ''The Town Beyond
the Wall,'' faith and friendship in ''The Gates of the Forest.'' He has dealt
with the repression of Soviet Jews in nonfiction (''The Jews of Silence''),
fiction (''The Testament'') and drama (''Zalmen, or The Madness of God''). He
has written extensively on biblical and Hasidic figures and on contemporary
topics such as the Palestinians and the New Left in West Germany.

His views have found a growing and responsive audience, but not entirely for
(sidelocks) or a beard, Wiesel speaks of spiritual matters without alienating
secular listeners. Says the author of a leading history of American Judaism:
''He seems to provide a lot of answers to a Jewish community with a lot of
spiritual barrenness, a lot of baroque institutions, a lot of money.''

Wiesel has special appeal to the young. ''Kids being kids, they want to see the
world in drama and in pure terms, and Elie does that without being purely
dramatic,'' says Neil Reisner, a 31-year-old writer specializing in Jewish
topics. ''Look at me: My parents were basically assimilated. My grandparents
didn't talk about the old country. What Elie represents is a past I didn't have
a sense of. Elie tapped into an ethnic movement in the 60's. He appealed to
young Jews looking for authenticity and he attempted to work traditional Jewish
values into contemporary, daily life.''

Wiesel's appeal, however, sometimes borders on a cult of personality. ''Let's
face it,'' says Yale's Professor Hartman, ''Elie's a hero.'' Almost a decade
ago, Rabbi Eugene Borowitz wrote in the journal Sh'ma that Wiesel ''is the
closest thing we have in the Jewish community to a superstar.''

''The problem is not Elie,'' says a Jewish novelist. ''The problem is us. It's
the problem our generation has in coming to terms with the documents of the
Holocaust themselves. We have turned the messenger into the message. Many people
who have not sat down with a Jewish history don't have any context for what
Wiesel says, for the Holocaust itself. They don't know what happened. So there's
this amorphous desire to lament, to romanticize, and it seizes on a person. Into
the vacuum comes a type of idol making.''

Wiesel winces in discussing this adulation. In ''The Accident,'' Eliezer is
told, someone ''thinks you're a saint'' because ''you suffered a lot . . . only
saints suffer a lot.'' Eliezer responds, ''What a joke. Saints are dead. . . .
But me, look at me, I'm alive.''

Eliezer Wiesel was born on Sept. 30, 1928, in Sighet, Rumania, a small
commercial town on the present-day border of the Soviet Union. Fittingly, the
day was Simhat Torah, the holiday on which Jews finish reading the Torah for one
year and begin anew for the next, for humility before God guided Wiesel's
childhood.

''During the day I studied the Talmud, and at night I ran to the synagogue to
weep over the destruction of the Temple,'' he recounted in ''Night.'' Dodye
Feig, Wiesel's grandfather, charmed him with tales of the great Hasidic masters,
who were not only religious theorists but charismatic evangelists. In the
secular realm, Wiesel's father, Shlomo, a shopkeeper, bought him books by Freud,
and his mother, Sarah, quoted Goethe and Schiller by heart. ''Novels, I thought
childish,'' Wiesel wrote later, ''and reading them a waste of time.''

Isolated in the Carpathian Mountains, Sighet (which was part of Hungary from
1940 to 1945) almost escaped the cataclysm engulfing Jews elsewhere in Europe;
not until Passover week of 1944 did the Nazis and their collaborators deport the
town's 10,000 Jews. Wiesel's father and mother and the youngest of his three
sisters, Tziporah, died in the concentration camps. (His two other sisters,
Hilda and Batya survived. Batya died eight years ago; Hilda lives in France.)

Wiesel has returned to Sighet only once, 20 years after being deported. The
town's so-called ''Jews' Street'' had been renamed ''Street of the Deported,''
and it was deserted. In the kitchen of Wiesel's old house, where once hung a
photograph of a Hasidic leader, a cross dangled. He went to the family garden
and unearthed the bar-mitzvah watch he had buried as the Nazis advanced, only to
find it ''covered with dirt and rust, crawling with worms, unrecognizable,
revolting.'' The discovery, he has written, was ''the epilogue to my
childhood.''


As soon as he was liberated from Buchenwald, he decided to tell his tale. But he
vowed, he says, that he would not begin, would not even speak of his experience,
for 10 years. Instead, he studied at the Sorbonne and reported from Paris for an
Israeli newspaper. ''Night'' was born on the day Wiesel interviewed Francois
Mauriac, a Nobel laureate and a devout Christian. ''He was talking about
Christ,'' Wiesel recalls, 'and I simply said to him, 'Ten years ago I knew
hundreds of Jewish children who suffered more than Christ did and no one talks
about it.' And he wept. He said, 'You know, you should talk about it.' And that
moved me more than anything.''

Writing in longhand, Wiesel produced an 800-page memoir in Yiddish, entitled
''And the World Kept Silent.'' After publication of the book in 1956, Wiesel
hewed from it the harrowing 127 pages of ''Night.'' ''It had to be something so
austere, so sober,'' he says. ''Pure as a police report.'' With the endorsement
of an introduction by Francois Mauriac, ''Night'' attracted some acclaim in
Europe after its original publication in French in 1958.

But Wiesel's message went virtually unheard in the United States. His agent,
Georges Borchardt, spent a year trying to sell ''Night'' to an American
publisher. Dozens turned it down. Typical was a rejection letter from Scribner's
that said, ''We have certain misgivings as to the size of the American market
for what remains, despite Mauriac's brilliant introduction, a document.''
Finally, in July 1959, Hill & Wang purchased ''Night,'' paying Wiesel an advance
of $100. In the first 18 months after its publication in the United States,
''Night'' sold only 1,046 copies.

Wiesel remembers being asked to lecture about ''Night'' to a Jewish men's club
in 1960. He prepared his talk for two months, but on the way to the lecture ''it
hit me they must have made a mistake,'' and did not realize the book was a
concentration-camp memoir - hardly a popular subject. So Wiesel told the
audience his book was a romance set in an earlier century. No one objected,
because no one had read or even heard of the true ''Night.''

Rabbi Irving Greenberg recalls inviting Wiesel to speak at the Riverdale Jewish
Center in New York in 1965. ''I spoke of Elie for months ahead,'' says Rabbi
Greenberg, who is now president of the National Jewish Resource Center, ''about
what an extraordinary man and speaker he was, about how important a program it
would be.'' From a congregation of 450 families, 30 people showed up. ''When I
asked people afterward why they didn't come,'' Greenberg says, ''the answer was
people didn't want to hear about the Holocaust. And these were Jews - religious,
committed, activist.''

All that has changed now, perhaps having tilted too far in the other direction.
But Wiesel still wonders whether he reaches people. ''A number of times he would
come back from a lecture,'' says Warren P. Green, the director of the St. Louis
Center for Holocaust Studies, ''and talk about the hundreds of people who had
come, and then say, 'But what about those who did not come?' '' Marion Wiesel
says: ''A friend will call and tell me Elie outdid himself in a lecture. When
Elie calls me, I'll ask how it went and he'll say, 'It could've gone better.' ''

One scene in ''A Beggar in Jerusalem'' crystallizes the doubts, the insecurity
bordering on paranoia. A character has miraculously survived execution and the
would-be executioner tells him: ''One day you will regret it. You'll speak, but
your words will fall on deaf ears. You'll try to incite people to learn from the
past. . . . They will refuse to believe you. . . . You'll curse me because you
possess the truth, the truth of a madman.''

That scene almost amounts to prophecy. Beneath the public veneer of support and
acclaim, controversy swirls around Wiesel. He estranged some of the Jewish
organizations that endorsed the television series ''Holocaust'' when he
denounced it as a ''trivialization'' of the experience. Some leading critics -
most of them, interestingly, New York Jewish intellectuals - say Wiesel's
writing of the past 15 years rings of phoniness and that his lectures smack of
performance.

Little of the criticism ever becomes public. Two leading critics told of
declining offers to review Wiesel's books rather than make known their negative
opinions, and these critics, as well as others, will speak candidly of Wiesel
only when guaranteed anonymity. They will not challenge Wiesel in public because
he has survived something they never even experienced.

And yet they are the same people who socialize with Wiesel, share common
friends. It can seem insidious. ''Elie's looked down upon in a whispering
campaign rather than a public critique,'' says a literature professor at one of
the nation's top universities who is also a contributing editor to a major
Jewish journal. ''People don't level with Elie,'' says a prominent Jewish
historian.

''Many of us,'' the professor explains, ''began with considerable adulation. You
had critics using phrases like 'What I learned from Elie Wiesel,' and a number
of us got to know him personally. But with 'A Beggar in Jerusalem,' I started
getting very uneasy feelings. Elie's mystical and Messianic stresses had
declined into mannerisms - gestures that were hollow, didn't seem convincing. As
each new book came out, I read it in the hope the last book had been an
aberration. But everything seemed mired in mannerisms - the tormented sage who
has come through the crucible of suffering.''

Wiesel laughs loudly when asked about his underground critics, which means it
must hurt him, since it is not in his nature to laugh loudly at much. ''It must
be because I do not play the game,'' he says. ''I bother them. I am so atypical
of the American Jewish intellectual. I am not part of any group, and they all
have their groups. Whatever I have, not one of them helped me. So I elude
them.''

Marion Wiesel says, ''People see that Elie is driven and think it is ambition.
But I know that it is something outside him. If Elie is driven, he's not the
driver.''

It should not appear that every academic thinks Wiesel to be didactic or
second-rate. Christian academics like Brown and Cargas have championed his
works, and in Europe, Wiesel's new books routinely receive prominent and
positive reviews. And Yale's Hartman, a naturalized American and a Jew, says:
''There is always in Wiesel's writing brinkmanship, a feeling of being on the
edge of the precipice, of coming very close to blasphemy without blaspheming.
It's genuine. It's so unlike what George Lukacs called the 'Grand Hotel abyss' -
people luxuriating in the feeling of their dilemmas, looking at the abyss from
their comfortable rooms.''

Wiesel, in any case, would hardly slow down or change course to win critical
favor; nor do his audiences show any sign of caring what the critics say. Wiesel
continues to write four hours a day and takes on so many speaking engagements
that, Georges Borchardt says, ''if Elie didn't have people to protect him, he'd
be attending six bar mitzvahs a day.''

A recent Monday was typical. Awake at 5 A.M., Wiesel took the 7 A.M. shuttle to
Boston and by 8:15 was seeing students in his office at Boston University, where
he is the Andrew W. Mellon Professor in the humanities. He taught his course,
''Responses to Jewish Suffering,'' from 12 noon to 3 P.M., spoke to one of his
Ph.D. candidates afterward, and then met with the university's president, John
Silber. After delivering a public lecture on Noah at 7 P.M., Wiesel caught the
last shuttle back to New York, reaching his apartment at 11 P.M. He went to bed
at 1 A.M. and arose five hours later to begin writing. In this unrelenting pace,
Wiesel is responding to the pressure of time.

''I am terrified,'' Wiesel says, ''of being the last survivor. You have no idea
how many funerals you attend for survivors. You see the same faces, except fewer
and fewer of them. How many years do we have left? Five? Ten? Fifteen? On the
other hand, every moment is grace. I could have died in '45. In a way I did.''


But in more than one way, in the most private choices of a determinedly private
man, Wiesel has been reborn.

Wiesel insists he has never resolved the question of belief, often summing up
his dilemma by saying that the Holocaust could not have happened with God and it
could not have happened without God. ''The Holocaust has forced all Jews to
rethink our principles, customs, beliefs,'' he says. ''It has made us more and
less devoted. But something happened; it didn't leave anyone unchanged. Usually,
we say, 'God is right,' or 'God is just' - even during the Crusades we said
that. But how can you say that now, with one million children dead?''

Yet, on a Saturday morning, Wiesel is likely to be found in a small Hasidic
synagogue on the Upper West Side, and, for special celebrations, among the
Hasidim in Brooklyn's Crown Heights. He continues to study Talmud and the
cabala, the Jewish mystical writings. Rabbi Menashe Klein, the dean of a yeshiva
in Brooklyn and one of Wiesel's closest friends, recalls him slipping away from
a White House ceremony to light yahrzeit candles in memorial to his parents.

''Suppose I put on tefillin,'' Wiesel says, referring to the small leather case
worn as a constant reminder of God. ''That is for a personal reason. I say, if I
have problems with God, it is not the tefillin's fault. In my tradition, my
background, the Sabbath was something so personal. If I have problems with God,
why should I blame the Sabbath? The Talmud? When you study Talmud you say, all
right, if I went through all this and I had crises and I had obstacles, why
should I blame it on the Talmud.

''At the same time,'' he continues, ''to tell you I'm as observant as I used to
be would be a lie. Of course not. Before I had peyes and, if I'd been older, I
would have had a beard. If I had stayed in Sighet, these questions of faith
would not have been raised. It is a strange feeling. That's why I write, maybe,
because the child I used to be still lives somewhere. And I'm looking to find
the child. I write to find the child.''

Wiesel reincarnates his childhood in his writings about the Hasidim. The
biographies and legends harken to those his grandfather told him long ago, and
his writings on the subject are as close as he seems capable of coming to
whimsy. At the same time, the Hasidic leaders provide a paradigm for Wiesel, the
adult and the survivor; his book profiling four Hasidic masters is subtitled
''And Their Struggle Against Melancholy.''

''I want to show not only how the Jews died, but how they lived before they
died,'' he explains. ''And it's so heartbreaking, because they were so
beautiful, so innocent. Why couldn't they live? So I try to bring back their
joy. They fought with their joy. Their joy was a weapon.''

Still, as Rabbi Halivni says, ''The notion of rebuilding took Elie longer than
most of us. It took him longer to realize you had to pay your homage to Jewish
life, to have a wife and family.'' In Wiesel's books, the autobiographical
characters, burdened with their own guilt, often have torturous relationships
with women - speaking without loving, coupling without kissing. Marion Wiesel
remembers meeting Elie at a time he went days without sleep, sometimes forgot to
eat and frightened many women, including her, with his distance.

Their wedding was charged with signs of renewal. With Saul Lieberman, Wiesel's
Talmud teacher, officiating, Elie and Marion were married on the eve of
Passover, 1969, in the ancient Ramban synagogue in Jerusalem. On the preceding
Saturday, the men in Wiesel's Hasidic house of study had surprised him with
their own ceremony. They sang and danced around Wiesel and showered him with
fruit and candies, the symbols of fertility. And Wiesel cried, something
unusual. ''I do cry when I'm alone, but never in public,'' he says. ''But this
type of crying could be liberating.''

Those who know Wiesel say that Marion has brought a serenity to his life, that
he even looks healthier since their marriage. Marion is one of the few people,
others being Rabbi Halivni and Rabbi Klein, with whom Wiesel shares his private
life.  He gives the royalties from his Holocaust-related books and lectures to
Rabbi Klein's yeshiva, and has donated other income toward building a synagogue
in Jerusalem as a memorial to his father.

Wiesel likes to drop from sight on his frequent trips to Europe, not even
telling his literary and personal agents of his whereabouts. Wiesel's passions -
chess, music, Talmud study and reading - reinforce his solitary nature. He
favors classical music, particularly Baroque music, requiems and chorales, and
he reads widely - always in French, reading American authors in translation. His
taste runs from Sartre, Malraux and Mauriac to Claude Levi-Strauss,
Bernard-Henri Levy, a young philosopher, and Saul Bellow and Bernard Malamud.
Wiesel does not drink alcohol and appears indifferent to all food but chocolate,
the sweet touchstone to his childhood.

Perhaps the most profound change in him came with the birth in 1972 of his son.
When Elisha was 2, Wiesel already was bragging to friends that the boy's
favorite toy was a typewriter. He calls his son every day, no matter where he is
- once from the Cambodian border - and takes him on any trip of more than a
week. But one day when Elisha was 6 or 7, sooner than Wiesel imagined it would
happen, the boy asked the inevitable question.

''He noticed my number,'' Wiesel says. ''And he said, 'What is this?' I was
taken aback. I didn't know what to answer. He said, 'Did wicked people do it?'
And suddenly he said, 'Why don't I have a grandfather? Tell me where my
grandfather is.' I didn't speak for this entire time. Finally, he said, 'Was it
like Pharaoh in Egypt, who wanted to kill all the Jews?' And I didn't say
anything. I never have told him. I tell him about Sighet. The way it used to be.
Shabbat at home. What my father used to do, what my mother used to do. That, he
should know. The evil deeds, I don't want to tell them. He has them. Almost
genetically.''

But the past is no longer argument enough against what Wiesel calls the
''existential bet'' of living.

''There was a group in ancient Israel called the Pharisees,'' Wiesel recalls,
''who decided after the destruction of the Temple not to have children. And they
were overruled by the Rabbi Ishmael. He said, 'What do you mean? If you do not
have children because the Temple was destroyed, then you should not drink wine
because wine was drunk in the Temple. And you should not eat meat because meat
was eaten in the Temple. If you stopped having children, you'd stop life. And
you cannot stop life.' You have to go on. Eat meat. Drink wine. Have children.
And, I suppose, write books.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: October 23, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A picture on page 36 of The Times Magazine today, showing Elie Wiesel at the 92d
Street Y, carries an incorrect credit. It is by William Coupon.

GRAPHIC: photo of Elie Wiesel and his wife, Marion, of 14 years; photo of Elie
Wiesel lecturing at 92nd Street Y; photo of Passport photo of Wiesel's father,
Shlomo; photo of Wiesel in concentration camp prior liberation; photo of Wiesel
reading Talmud with his son Elisha ; photo of Elie Wiesel standing in study of
his apartment

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 23, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BESTSELLERS MASS MARKET Mass market paperbacks are soft-cover books
sold at newsstands, variety stores and supermarkets, as well as in bookstores.
This listing is based on computer-processed reports from bookstores and
representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 outlets across the United
States.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 44, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 716 words


1

A CRY IN THE NIGHT, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Dell, $3.95.) A newly rewed woman is
haunted by her past: fiction.

2

THE VALLEY OF HORSES, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $3.95.) A fictional saga of
human survival at the dawn of civilization.  3

SECOND HEAVEN, by Judith Guest. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Love in various forms heals
three battered people: fiction.

4

MASTER OF THE GAME, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $3.95.) The secret behind a
woman business tycoon's rise to power: fiction.

5

LIFE, THE UNIVERSE AND EVERYTHING, by Douglas Adams. (Pocket, $3.50.) Last
volume of a science-fiction trek through the galaxies.

6

THE 13TH VALLEY, by John M. Del Vecchio. (Bantam, $3.95.) The war in Vietnam:
fiction.

7

GOODBYE, MICKEY MOUSE, by Len Deighton. (Ballantine, $3.95.) Two World War II
fighter pilots in love and combat: fiction.

8

THE CLAN OF THE CAVE BEAR, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $3.95.) The beginning of
the saga continued in ''The Valley of Horses.''

9

SPACE, by James A. Michener. (Fawcett/Crest, $4.95.) The story of the American
space program told through fiction.

10

THE SKULL BENEATH THE SKIN, by P. D. James. (Warner, $3.95.) The mysterious
death of an actress in a castle off the Dorset coast: fiction.

11

ACCEPTABLE LOSSES, by Irwin Shaw. (Avon, $3.95.) A New York literary agent's
life is threatened by a mysterious stranger: fiction.

12

A ROSE IN WINTER, by Kathleen Woodiwiss. (Avon, $3.95.) An English noblewoman
torn between two loves: historical romance.

13

DRAGON ON A PEDESTAL , by Piers Anthony. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $2.95.) Seventh
volume of a saga about the fabulous land of Xanth: fiction.

14

TOUCH THE DEVIL, by Jack Higgins. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Tracking down a K.G.B.
agent who has stolen NATO secrets: fiction.

15

MAX, by Howard Fast. (Dell, $3.95.) The birth of the film industry: fiction.

 TRADE Trade paperbacks are soft-cover books usually sold in bookstores and at
an average price higher than mass market paperbacks. This listing is based on
computer-processed reports from about 2,000 bookstores in every region of the
United States .

1

GARFIELD SITS AROUND THE HOUSE, by Jim Davis. (Ballantine, $4.95.) Cartoon
humor.

2

THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson. (Berkley,
$6.95.) How to increase your productivity.

3

CALDER BORN, CALDER BRED, by Janet Dailey. (Pocket, $6.95.) Conclusion of a
romantic saga of the American West.

4

THE COLOR PURPLE, by Alice Walker. (Pocket/Washington Square Press, $5.95.)
Black men and women in the South: fiction.

5

COLOR ME BEAUTIFUL, by Carole Jackson. (Ballantine, $8.95.) Beauty tips for
women.

6

LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo F. Buscaglia. (Fawcett, $5.95.) Inspirational
talks.

7

THURSTON HOUSE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $7.95.) Three generations of a wealthy
San Francisco family: fiction.

8

BLOOM COUNTY, by Berke Breathed. (Little, Brown, $6.95.) Cartoon humor.

9

LIFE EXTENSION, by Durk Pearson and Sandy Shaw. (Warner, $10.95.) How to add
years to your life and life to your years.

10

GROWING UP, by Russell Baker. (NAL/Plume, $5.95.) The New York Times columnist
recalls his boyhood and youth.

11

MORE ITEMS FROM OUR CATALOG, by Alfred Gingold. (Avon, 4.95.)

 A second spoof of the L. L. Bean catalogue.

12

WHAT COLOR IS YOUR PARACHUTE?  by Richard Nelson Bolles. (Ten Speed Press,
$7.95.) Guide for job hunters and career changers.

13

THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (S&S/Touchstone, $7.95.) Psychological
and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.

14

MISS MANNERS' GUIDE TO EXCRUCIATINGLY CORRECT BEHAVIOR, by Judith Martin.
(Warner, $10.95.) Etiquette prescribed by an amusingly bossy lady.

15

OVER THE COUNTER PILLS THAT DON'T WORK, by Joel Kaufman and others. (Pantheon,
$6.95.) An assessment by the Public Citizen Health Research Group.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 23, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FICTION

SECTION: Section 7; Page 40, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1340 words


118

POLAND, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) Seven centuries of history
in fictional form.  2318

THE NAME OF THE ROSE, by Umberto Eco. (Helen & Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $15.95.) Unraveling the mystery of a murder in a 14th-century
Italian monastery.  327

CHANGES, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) The crises that arise when a
television anchorwoman and a glamorous physician fall in love.  4412

HOLLYWOOD WIVES, by Jackie Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The struggle for
money and power in Tinsel Town.  5511

AUGUST, by Judith Rossner. (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95.) The five-year
relationship of two women, a teen-age patient and her analyst.  665

WINTER'S TALE, by Mark Helprin. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $14.95.) Heroic
lives in Manhattan between the late 19th century and the year 2000.  785

THE AUERBACH WILL, by Stephen Birmingham. (Little, Brown, $16.95.) Three
generations of a German-Jewish family in New York.  878

WHO KILLED THE ROBINS FAMILY?, created by Bill Adler and written by Thomas
Chastain. (Morrow, $9.95.) The publisher offers a $10,000 prize to the reader
who submits the best answer.  9 1

THE SAGA OF BABY DIVINE, by Bette Midler. (Crown, $11.95.) The entertainer
imagines what her infancy was like in a fable lushly illustrated by Todd Schorr.
1096

MONIMBO, by Robert Moss and Arnaud de Borchgrave. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.)
What happens after Castro unveils a plan to stir racial tension in the United
States.  111020

RETURN OF THE JEDI, adapted by Joan D. Vinge. (Random House, $6.95.) Illustrated
storybook based on the latest ''Star Wars'' film.  12115

EVERYTHING AND MORE, by Jacqueline Briskin. (Putnam, $15.95.) Life after Beverly
Hills High School: the careers of four women.  131229

CHRISTINE, by Stephen King. (Viking, $16.95.) A car that kills is at large among
a Pennsylvania town's high school set.  141532

THE LITTLE DRUMMER GIRL, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $15.95.) A British actress
caught between agents of Israeli intelligence and of the Palestine Liberation
Organization.  151426

HEARTBURN, by Nora Ephron. (Knopf, $11.95.) A roman a clef about a marriage
breaking up.


 NONFICTION 125

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck.  (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  2141

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J. Peters and Robert H.  Waterman Jr. (Harper
& Row, $19.95.) Lessons to be learned from well-run American corporations.  352

THE MARY KAY GUIDE TO BEAUTY.  (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) An illustrated guide
for women prepared by the staff of a cosmetic firm.  463

THE BODY PRINCIPAL, by Victoria Principal. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Exercises
for women by a television personality.  538

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $17.95.) The rescue of two
Americans from an Iranian prison.  6450

MEGATRENDS, by John Naisbitt. (Warner, $17.50.) Predictions about America in the
next decade based on an analysis of conditions today.  774

FATAL VISION, by Joe McGinniss. (Putnam, $17.95.) The case of Jeffrey MacDonald,
Ivy League graduate, respected physician and convicted killer of his wife and
daughters.  896

THE BEST OF JAMES HERRIOT.  (St. Martin's Press, $19.95.) Selections from the
writings of the Yorkshire veterinarian.  9114

THE PETER PAN SYNDROME, by Dan Kiley. (Dodd, Mead, $14.95.) A psychologist's
analysis of the plight of men who have never grown up.  10856

THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson. (Morrow, $15.)
How to increase the productivity of those with whom you work, as well as your
own.  111022

CREATING WEALTH, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) Making money in
real estate.  12 1

VIETNAM: A History, by Stanley Karnow. (Viking, $19.95.) Profusely illustrated
history of the war: tie-in with the current PBS television series.  13134

OUTRAGEOUS ACTS AND EVERYDAY REBELLIONS, by Gloria Steinem. (Holt, Rinehart &
Winston, $14.95.) Essays by a leading feminist writer.  141415

OUT ON A LIMB, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $15.95.) The actress tells of her
mid-life ''journey to find her true self.'' 15 1

A HERO FOR OUR TIME.  by Ralph G. Martin. (Macmillan, $19.95.) The life and
legend of John F. Kennedy.  The listings above are based on computer-processed
sales figures from about 2,000 bookstores in every region of the United States.
And Bear in Mind Other recent books that in the opinion of the Book Review staff
are of particular literary, topical or scholarly interest:

ARISTOTLE TO ZOOS: A Philosophical Dictionary of Biology, by P. B.  Medawar and
J. S. Medawar. (Harvard University Press, $18.50.) One can learn a tremendous
amount of modern biology from this accessible, opinionated and delightfully
eccentric work by the winner of the Nobel Prize for Medicine in 1960 and his
wife.

CATHEDRAL, by Raymond Carver. (Alfred A. Knopf, $13.95.) Short stories by a
writer who draws upon the American voice of loneliness and stoicism.

DASHIELL HAMMETT, by Diane Johnson. (Random House, $17.95.) A cool, steady-eyed
and engrossing biography of a writer who is perhaps as much fun to read about as
his most notable creation, the private eye Sam Spade.

A FEELING FOR THE ORGANISM: The Life and Work of Barbara McClintock, by Evelyn
Fox Keller. (W. H. Freeman & Co., $14.95.) An excellent biography of the
81-year-old ''loner'' from Cold Spring Harbor, L. I., who won the 1983 Nobel
Prize for Medicine for work in genetics that scientists once regarded as
heretical.

HUGGING THE SHORE: Essays and Criticism, by John Updike.  (Alfred A. Knopf,
$19.95.) A large selection of Mr. Updike's essays and reviews that documents his
achievements as a man of letters.

LIGHT, by Eva Figes. (Pantheon, $10.95.) Technique is all or nearly all in this
slender, fastidious novel of a day in the life of Claude Monet - a kind of
Impressionism in words.

LOCAL KNOWLEDGE: Futher Essays in Interpretive Anthropology, by Clifford Geertz.
(Basic Books, $18.50.) Eight essays, comparing different cultures, written over
the past decade by an anthropologist who has attracted attention well outside
his discipline.

MARBOT: A Biography, by Wolfgang Hildesheimer. (George Braziller, $16.50.)
Introducing a new genre - fictional biography. The author has made up Sir Andrew
Marbot (1801-1830), an English art connoisseur, critic and minor man of letters,
out of whole cloth. But it is quality cloth, through which we can see the spirit
of the age and some of its prime movers.

THE STORIES OF BERNARD MALAMUD.  (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $17.95.) Twenty-five
stories from 1950 to the present, chosen by the author, whose special province
has been the every-day, unspectacular anguish of ordinary people.

THE STORIES OF WILLIAM TREVOR.  (Penguin Books, $8.95.) All the stories from
five previous collections of the last 20 years by an Anglo-Irish master of short
fiction.

THE TROUBLED CRUSADE: American Education, 1945-1980, by Diane Ravitch.  (Basic
Books, $19.95.) A narrative history whose central theme is the rise and fall of
American education since World War II.

UNION STREET, by Pat Barker. (G. P. Putnam's Sons, $13.95.) Divided into seven
sections, each named for a particular female, this first novel explores every
nuance of working-class life in a grimy industrial town in England.

WATCH TIME FLY, by Laura Furman. (The Viking Press, $14.95.) Short stories about
the Vietnam-influenced generation of passively waiting lost souls by a writer
who combines apparent artlessness with a moving and very sophisticated esthetic
sensibility.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 23, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACKS: NEW AND NOTEWORTHY

SECTION: Section 7; Page 43, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1068 words


THE 13TH VALLEY.  By John M. Del Vecchio. (Bantam, $3.95.) Set in Vietnam in
1970, when the antiwar movement in the United States had reached its peak, troop
withdrawals were under way and the soldiers still fighting knew there was no
light at the end of the tunnel, John M. Del Vecchio's powerful first novel
depicts sensitive, complex individuals waging an apocalyptic battle. Our critic,
Joe Klein, found ''The 13th Valley'' remarkable for its ability to communicate
''the day-to-day pain, discomfort, frustration and exhilaration of the American
military experience in Vietnam.''



LES FLEURS DU MAL.  By Charles Baudelaire. Translated by Richard Howard. (David
R. Godine, $13.95.) Richard Howard's translation of ''The Flowers of Evil,''
which won a 1983 American Book Award, is ''a triumph of tone'' and ''the first
genuinely readable Baudelaire in English,'' Paul Zweig's review said. ''Although
Baudelaire's strictly formal exploit is not imitated - how could it be? - it is
suggested forcefully. Baudelaire caged his wildness and savagery in severely
controlled lyrics, and Mr. Howard gives us enough of this energizing
contradiction for his translations to shimmer with Baudelairean tension.''



SECOND HEAVEN.  By Judith Guest. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) The author of ''Ordinary
People'' ''brings her own passionate moral concerns to a fine, old-style,
high-drama confrontation with evil'' in her second novel, our reviewer, Norma
Rosen, observed. ''Second Heaven'' revolves around Gale Murray, a 16-year-old
boy evoked ''with great tenderness and insight,'' whose last desperate attempt
to escape from his father (a religious zealot who beats him) involves him with a
recent divorcee and her lawyer.

AKE: The Years of Childhood.  By Wole Soyinka. (Vintage/Aventura, $6.95.) The
Book Review cited ''Ake'' as one of the 12 best books of 1982 and James Olney,
who reviewed it, called Wole Soyinka's autobiography ''the best available
introduction to the work of one of the liveliest, most exciting writers in the
world today.'' Mr. Soyinka - a playwright, poet, novelist and essayist - vividly
re-creates ''a world of pervasive, in-dwelling spiritual presences'' as he
depicts the ''wonderfully colorful, agitated, aroma-laden markets'' and other
aspects of bygone life in Ake, the Nigerian village where he grew up.



THE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF AMERICAN CRIME.  By Carl Sifakis. (Facts on File, $17.95.)
Murderers, swindlers, loan sharks, impostors, pickpockets, gunfighters, fences,
forgers and informers are among the malefactors Carl Sifakis covers in his
comprehensive encyclopedia. A delight for browsers, this volume of 802 oversized
pages provides a panorama of skulduggery in America between A. .D 1000 and the
present. Entries, which deal with criminals, law enforcement officials,
investigative techniques, trials and prisons, among other topics, are arranged
alphabetically, cross-referenced and indexed by broad subject areas.



COLLECTED STORIES.  By V. S. Pritchett. (Vintage, $8.95.) V. S. Pritchett
selected 29 stories written over the past 50 years for this splendid collection.
''As an author of short stories, Pritchett has steadily pursued a course of
quiet originality. He refuses to keep readers awake by trying to knock them
dead,'' Robert Kiely said in his review, which noted that Mr. Pritchett's most
pervasive moral preoccupation is prejudice and that ''the most pernicious
prejudices, his fiction shows, are the ones people have about themselves.''



THE ADVENTURES OF TREEHORN.  By Florence Parry Heide. Illustrated by Edward
Gorey. (Dell/ Yearling, $1.95.) Treehorn is an amusing and touching little boy
with an Edwardian air who imperturbably accepts what befalls him. He discovers
that he is growing smaller in ''The Shrinking of Treehorn'' (first published in
1971) and notices that leaves are turning into dollar bills in ''Treehorn's
Treasure'' (first published in 1981). Reprinted together for readers 6 to 9,
these two tales are enhanced by Edward Gorey's handsome and sophisticated
drawings.

MY SOUL IS RESTED: Movement Days in the Deep South Remembered.  By Howell
Raines. (Penguin, $6.95.) People who helped transform race relations in the
American South talk about their experiences in ''My Soul Is Rested,'' a
heartening mosaic of first-person reports that presents various views of events
and themes. Howell Raines, then a Southern newspaper reporter and editor, based
his book on lengthy interviews he conducted between 1974 and 1976, and our
reviewer, Anthony Lewis, declared in 1977, ''At the risk of sounding gushy, I
have to say that no book for a long time has left me so happy or moved.''



MONSIGNOR QUIXOTE.  By Graham Greene. (Pocket/Washington Square, $3.95.) Graham
Greene's seriocomic offshoot of the gigantic Cervantes fable centers on a priest
in Spain in the 1960's who believes he is Don Quixote's descendant. Promoted to
monsignor, Father Quixote sets off for Madrid to acquire the insignia of his new
rank, traveling in an ancient Fiat he calls Rocinante with the Communist
ex-mayor of his village, whom he dubs Sancho Panza. Our reviewer, Robert Towers,
called this novel ''a whimsical meditation on faith and doubt and the varieties
of human folly.''



ATLANTIC HIGH: A Celebration.  By William F. Buckley Jr. (Little, Brown, $9.95.)
An illustrated account of a 30-day sailing trip from the Virgin Islands to
southern Spain that William F. Buckley Jr. and a handful of his friends took in
1980, ''Atlantic High'' depicts ''a special and precious kind of human
experience,'' the camaraderie of people who join together in a physical
enterprise that is sometimes demanding and hazardous, sometimes tranquil and
beautiful - as Morton Hunt pointed out in his review. Mr. Hunt found Mr. Buckley
wonderful company.



WASHINGTOON.  By Mark Alan Stamaty. (Congdon & Weed, $7.95.) Mark Alan Stamaty's
Congressman Bob Forehead, who's known for his valiant efforts to keep the
underprivileged from oppressing the privileged, is the hero of this collection
of satirical comic strips. Other characters who inhabit Mr. Stamaty's version of
our nation's capital include the villainous tycoon Gerard V.. Oxboggle, the
economics professor Arthur Giggle and - above - the man who holds the
Administration's most important post, Perceiver General Bayard Hotwall.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cartoon

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 23, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NONFICTION IN BRIEF

BYLINE: By Richard Margolis

SECTION: Section 7; Page 16, Column 5; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 697 words

In December 1978, the Shah of Iran's faltering Government, without explanation,
arrested two employees of the Texas- based Electronic Data Systems Corporation,
which had been setting up Iran's computerized social security system. With the
Shah about to fall, EDS had set up evacuation plans but had hesitated to use
them, reluctant to abandon years of work and millions of dollars.

EDS, led by its founder and chairman, Ross Perot, tried frantically to secure
the release of the two men, who had never been charged with anything. Company
executives flew to Teheran to negotiate with the Shah's officials, but the
officials were not interested in negotiations - or bribery. Mr. Perot, known to
the American Government and the military because of his financing of an
unsuccessful mission to rescue prisoners of war in Vietnam, pulled as many
strings as he could. All efforts failed. Finally, Mr. Perot called Col. Bull
Simons, leader of the POW raid in Vietnam, and asked him to lead a commando
mission to rescue the prisoners. Colonel Simons did.

This incident - so soon overshadowed when Iran's new Khomeini regime seized 52
hostages at the United States Embassy in Teheran - is the subject of Ken
Follett's first nonfiction book, ''On Wings of Eagles.'' Mr. Follett's
storytelling gifts, previously demonstrated in ''Eye of the Needle'' and other
novels, coupled with the bitterness that many Americans still feel in connection
with the hostage affair, are enough to account for the new book's best-seller
status, which it richly deserves.

If the book has a fault, it's that Mr. Follett tries to turn it into a novel -
an extra push that it simply doesn't need. It's distracting for the reader to
get through a tense chapter on how the imprisoned men handled life in an Iranian
jail, only to find a last sentence that could have been lifted from a cheap
thriller: ''He realized that he had never known the meaning of freedom until he
lost it.'' But quibbles aside, ''On Wings of Eagles'' is well researched,
crisply written and superbly paced. And even though it was clearly not Mr.
Follett's main purpose, he presents a vivid picture of Iran in ferment. His fans
may be reluctant to see him return to fiction.  A SNOWFLAKE IN MY HAND By
Samantha Mooney.  152 pp. New York: Eleanor Friede/ Delacorte Press. $12.95.

By GRACEANNE A. DeCANDIDO

For Samantha Mooney, love and work are one. In ''A Snowflake in My Hand,'' she
has written a sweet and simple story describing her work as a research associate
at New York's Animal Medical Center, treating cancer patients that happen to be
cats.

Miss Mooney has a rare rapport with cats. Their complex personalities and
wordless communications are quite clear to her. Beyond the pet owner's fondness
for animals, she displays an empathy with animals akin to that evident in the
works of James Herriot. Since all of the cats she treats have cancer, Miss
Mooney's tales are darker than Mr. Herriot's, but she does not flinch when
describing the disease she treats and only occasionally lapses into
sentimentality. Anyone who has had any experience with cancer will appreciate
her forthrightness in defining medical terms and procedures. And those working
with human cancer patients may take a lesson from her compassion, her concern
for the quality of life and her graceful coming to terms with death.

Miss Mooney also has five cats of her own, and her descriptions of them are just
as detailed and affectionate as those of the hospitalized cats. But her friends,
colleagues and family are not as vivid. For example, during the course of the
book, the author's father and a friend die. Yet her grief at the deaths of two
cats she loved and cared for seems more potent and real, until the death of one
of them, the tiny and fragile Fledermaus, releases Miss Mooney's eloquent
mourning and acceptance of all of these deaths, human and feline.



Richard J. Margolis is a columnist for The New Leader.

Hal Goodman is an editor of Montage Magazine.

GraceAnne A. DeCandido is a librarian and freelance writer in New York.

THE ROOTS OF SOUTHERN POPULISM

Yeoman Farmers and the Transformation of the Georgia Upcountry, 1850-1890.  By
Steven Hahn.  340 pp. New York: Oxford University Press. $29.95.

Although its vintage years ended nearly a century ago, Populism persists today
as a lively political impulse and continues to engage the energies of scholars.
In ''The Roots of Southern Populism,'' which in dissertation form three years
ago won the Allan Nevins Prize of the Society of American Historians, Steven
Hahn focuses on post-Civil War protests in Georgia's Upper Piedmont region, a
''particularly fertile political ground'' for Populist harvests.

Neither the war nor the Reconstruction that followed did much to improve the lot
of Georgia's small farmers, most of whom were economically squeezed by
plantation owners on the one hand and by Northern industrialists on the other.
Familiar Populist grievances like falling agricultural prices and discriminatory
freight rates were only part of the problem. Mr. Hahn reminds us that ''the
South in particular was relegated to junior partnership - if not colonial status
- in a powerful industrializing society. Landlords, merchants and petty
cultivators alike groaned under the yoke of subordination fastened by 'Wall
Street' financiers.'' The upshot, to borrow the lament of a contemporary
commentator, was ''a growing feeling among our people of opposition to all
accumulation of capital'' - as good a definition of populism as one could wish
for.

Mr. Hahn's style is sometimes marred by pedantry, but his thesis is clear, and
his perceptions are humane. He is especially helpful in tracing the progress of
biracial populism. ''Trapped in a cycle of indebtedness and ultimate
dispossession,'' he writes, white farmers ''increasingly shared the fate of the
region's blacks,'' thus opening the way to visions of a black- white coalition.
The dream, if not the reality, has survived to the present.  WHO OWNS
APPALACHIA?  Landownership and Its Impact.  By The Appalachian Land Ownership
Task Force.  Introduced by Charles C. Geisler.  235 pp. Lexington: The
University Press of Kentucky. $25.

''Who Owns Appalachia?'' - a pioneering look at real estate holdings in 6 states
and 80 counties - provides yet another illustration of Populism's longevity.
Though presented with all the ponderousness one might expect from a committee
effort, the facts of the maldistribution of property seem dismayingly clear. Of
the 13 million acres studied, nearly three-fourths were found to be in the hands
of absentee owners, either corporations or Government agencies. Corporations
alone held 70 percent of all mineral rights. Viewed from another angle, 1
percent of the owners controlled 53 percent of the land, a state of affairs that
has contributed to the region's chronic poverty. ''Somewhere we lost
ourselves,'' a West Virginia farmer comments. ''I think it was when the
companies bought up the land.''

Not surprisingly, the tax burden in Appalachia turns out to be similarly skewed,
with 53 percent of the land generating only 13 percent of the property taxes
collected. According to the authors, generally low assessments keep schools poor
and cripple public services. Meanwhile, ''Federal and state subsidies are poured
into these 'needy' Appalachian counties to provide a minimal level of services .
. . amidst growing, relatively tax-free exploitation of the region's resource
wealth.''

The authors offer few cures for the malady they describe, other than a
heightened and more precise awareness of the unequal distribution of property.
Their book seems part of the solution. As Charles C. Geisler, a sociologist at
Cornell University, points out in his introduction, the study came into being
not in academia but in Appalachian towns and villages, whose residents hoped to
learn more about the inequities that enveloped them. The study, he says, is
largely the work of community activists, the byproduct ''of an American land
reform movement and neo-populist spirit rekindled since the early 1970s.'' -
R.J.M.  ON WINGS OF EAGLES By Ken Follett.  Illustrated. 444 pp. New York:
William Morrow & Co. $16.95.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 23, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EAST ADOPTS WEST

BYLINE: By Joe Klein; Joe Klein is the author of ''Woody Guthrie: A Life.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 984 words


TURTLE BEACH

By Blanche d'Alpuget.  287 pp. New York: Simon & Schuster. $14.95.



POLITICAL novels about the third world tend to be rather extreme. There is
always the clash of cultures. West bludgeons East with civilization; East
seduces West with inscrutable sensuality. It is a measure of the Australian
journalist Blanche d'Alpuget's sly intelligence that she manages in this, her
first novel to appear in America, to acknowledge the hoary tropical cliches of
Western literature while transcending them. She is too wise to deny the
brutality and seduction, but ''Turtle Beach'' is not so much about the clash of
cultures as about their murky comminglings, the curious symbiosis of West and
East that is the legacy of colonial rule in Southeast Asia today.

The complexities of this world are apparent from the very first paragraph.
Malaysia, we learn, is a place where ''the colonial habits of expression,
colonial assumptions, had resisted change.'' But also a country advanced far
beyond British rule, which was ''a time so different that it seemed unreal now,
and ridiculous.'' Two successive sentences forming a direct contradiction, it
would seem; but no. Take, for example, the Senghor Cricket Club in Kuala Lumpur
- known more familiarly as The Dog (after the inevitable colonial sign, ''No
Dogs or Chinese Allowed''). The Dog still survives in all its exclusive
splendor, but its members now are Malay royalty, Chinese tycoons, Sikh
physicians, as well as assorted Westerners who seem, in a way, social inferiors.
It is polychromatically perverse, third-world cricketeers addressing each other
as ''Old Chap.''

''Turtle Beach'' is lush with such juxtapositions and ironies, not the least of
which is that in this book the white man's burden of civilization is borne most
fervently by a feminist - Judith Wilkes, an Australian journalist who has come
to report on the Vietnamese boat people attempting to land by the thousands on
the East Malay coast. Wilkes is something of a refugee herself, but of a more
familiar sort. She is fleeing an arid marriage to an Australian politician. A
sensitive, intelligent woman, she has realized - to her horror - that she is in
danger of becoming a caricature feminist: a cold careerist, a lousy mother,
dogmatic and sexually restrained. She is, despite her best efforts, an
unremitting voice of Western morality.

The people she meets in Kuala Lumpur are a remarkable lot, each an amalgam of
East and West. The Australian diplomats seem to have gone native, taking on not
only the predictable Asian sexual partners but aspects of Eastern philosophy as
well. Sir Adrian Hobday, the senior Australian diplomat, tells Wilkes: ''We are
witnessing the final stages, after five millennia, of the defeat of tolerance by
intolerance - by the Judeo-Christian-Islamic tradition to which Communism is
also heir. . . . I'm no longer a Christian; I suppose, like others in times of
change, I've returned to the ancient Gods, to concepts of Oneness.''

Hobday is married to a Vietnamese refugee who is rumored to have been ''a
good-time girl in Saigon.'' Minou Hobday seems at first to be a dragon lady of
the Madame Nhu-Imelda Marcos school, with an extra touch of vitriol. She rather
enjoys making Westerners uncomfortable, and isn't above telling a European who
fails to recognize her at a cocktail party, ''Never mind, la. All us gooks look
the same, don't we?'' But Minou is, in her way, as fiercely moral as Judith
Wilkes. Her open loyalty is to her family, still trapped in Vietnam and hoping
to make the treacherous passage across the South China Sea with the thousands of
others. She is known in squalid refugee camps as ''the Angel,'' bringing
refrigerators, food, medicine and films for the children. ''You must forgive her
excesses,'' says Hobday. ''She is the victim of . . . a useless tampering with
history. . . . A senseless misunderstanding of the loyalties and blood-feuds
that rule Indo-China.''

Mrs. d'Alpuget seems able to enter effortlessly the heads of her characters,
both Western and Eastern. There are no inscrutables here. And more, she is able
- unobtrusively; she is rarely didactic - to make plain the social, economic and
philosophical differences, not just between West and East but also among the
contending Asians in Kuala Lumpur, the Malays, Chinese and Indians. She is
obviously not an armchair novelist. She has been to Malaysia, and knows how it
smells and feels and how its people think. Her observations are made all the
more powerful by a graceful style of writing that is, at once, lucid and coy.

It is inevitable, of course, that Judith Wilkes is tempted to ''go native''
herself. The temptation takes the form of Dr. Kanan, a ridiculously handsome
Indian professor, a cricket player and mystic, another of Mrs. d'Alpuget's
amalgams of West and East. He accompanies Wilkes to a barbaric - by Western
standards - Hindu ritual and she is appalled when he is swept up in ''a
superstition which, when discussing it in the car, he had held in contempt.''

For his part, Kanan considers her Western rationality superficial and decides
that she is ''doomed to drift along like a rudderless boat, moved by the
currents, which she would call the 'realities.' Perhaps in another life she
would have more wisdom.''

Toward the end, Kanan and Judith stand together on Turtle Beach, watching a
Vietnamese woman drown. Judith says, ''We must help her!'' Kanan shrugs,
''Why?''

Another writer might let it go at that: Life is cheap in Asia. But not Mrs.
d'Alpuget. Having registered her moral outrage, Judith Wilkes rushes off to
write a story about the drowning, an act that by then seems every bit as
perverse as Kanan's fatalistic unwillingness to intervene.

This is an auspicious American debut for Blanche d'Alpuget, and it raises two
immediate questions: What else has she written, and when do we get to see it?


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing of lion being attacked by its tail

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 24, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BEIRUT DEATH TOLL AT 161 AMERICANS; ;
FRENCH CASUALTIES RISE IN BOMBINGS;;
REAGAN INSISTS MARINES WILL REMAIN;
BUILDINGS BLASTED

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2360 words

DATELINE: BEIRUT, Lebanon, Oct. 23


A suicide terrorist driving a truck loaded with TNT blew up an American Marine
headquarters at the Beirut airport today, killing at least 161 marines and
sailors and wounding 75.

In an almost simultaneous attack, another bomb- laden truck slammed into a
French paratroop barracks two miles away.

According to Lebanese Civil Defense authorities, at least 27 French paratroopers
were killed, 12 were wounded and 53 were reported missing and believed buried in
rubble. Official Defense Ministry figures issued in Paris listed 12 French
soldiers dead, 13 wounded and 48 missing.

It was the highest number of American military personnel killed in a single
attack since the Vietnam War.  The identity of the attackers still had not been
determined tonight.



Truck Loaded With TNT

According to a Pentagon spokesman, a Mercedes truck filled with some 2,500
pounds of TNT broke through a series of steel fences and sandbag barricades and
detonated in the heart of the Marines' administrative headquarters building
shortly after dawn. The explosion collapsed all four floors of the building,
turning it into a burning mound of broken cement pillars and cinder blocks.

Although a marine sentry was able to fire about five shots at the suicide driver
and another marine threw himself in front of the speeding, explosive- filled
truck, neither could block its entry into the headquarters building, where it
exploded in a fireball that left a crater 30 feet deep and 40 feet wide.

In a haunting scene late tonight, rescue workers using blow torches, pneumatic
drills and cranes worked furiously under floodlights to pry out the dead and
wounded still crushed beneath the smouldering debris. Marine spokesmen said
there might have been as many as 300 men sleeping in the building - which
doubled as a bunk house - at the time of the blast.



'Carnage' Like That in Vietnam

''I haven't seen carnage like that since Vietnam,'' the Marine spokesman, Maj.
Robert Jordan, said shortly after emerging from the rescue operation with his
forearms smeared with blood.

Today's blast brought to 170 the number of Americans killed in Lebanon since the
bombing of the American Embassy here in April.

Rescue workers were hindered in their movements by unidentified snipers who
intermittently fired shots into the Marine compound from the nearby southern
suburbs of Beirut. The marines occasionally returned the fire.

Less that two minutes after the attack on the Marine compound, a truck laden
with explosives slammed into a building used by the French as a headquarters for
one of their 110-man companies in the southern Beirut suburb of Jnah, two miles
north of the Marine headquarters. The explosion brought all eight floors down in
a heap, like a fallen house of cards.

(A caller to the Beirut office of Agence France Presse said a group calling
itself the Free Islamic Revolution Movement took responsibility, United Press
International reported.  The caller was quoted as saying that two youths carried
out the attacks)

The two suicide missions were almost identical to the assault on the American
Embassy here on April 18, when a pickup truck slammed into the front lobby and
exploded, killing 63 people including 17 Americans. A collection of previously
unknown pro-Iranian and pro-Palestinian organizations said they had been
responsible for the embassy bombing, but the real identity of the attackers has
still not been determined.

No 'Special' Precautions

According to Major Jordan, the Marine unit took no ''special'' precautions to
guard against car-bombs after the embassy bombing, because it was constantly
upgrading its security and it was felt that the combination of sandbag
checkpoints and steel fence barriers was sufficient to deter any attack.

Major Jordan said the attack on the headquarters of the 1,600-man American force
came at around 6:20 A.M.

A French officer who was standing near the Jnah barracks of the Third Company of
the Sixth French Parachute Infantry Regiment at the time said the soldiers in
that building ran to the windows to see what was happening after being jarred
from their beds by the explosion at the Marine compound.

Less than two minutes later, as they peered from the windows, their own
structure was blown out from under them by an almost identical attack.  A
Lebanese Army explosives expert, Yousef Bitar, said the bomb that demolished the
Marine headquarters consisted of roughly 2,600 pounds of TNT, while the charge
that destroyed the French base consisted of about 600 pounds of the same
explosive.

Bodies Thrown 50 Yards

The blast at the Marine compound was so strong it threw some bodies out of the
building to distances of up to 50 yards. The force rattled windows and shook
apartment buildings all over Beirut.

The marines and sailors in the barracks who escaped death or injury were
quartered in other Marine installations tonight. An accounting of all the men
who had been stationed in the bombed building was complicated by the fact that
30 or 40 men were on leave in Egypt when the attack occurred, and all personnel
records were destroyed in the blast.

Marine replacements for today's casualties were being flown from Camp Lejeune,
N.C., but it was not known how many were on the way.

The explosion at the French barracks blew the whole building off its foundations
and threw it about 20 feet westward, while breaking the windows of almost every
apartment house in the neighborhood. More than 20 Lebanese civilians were
injured in the blast.

Grim-faced French paratroopers and Lebanese civil defense workers aided by
bulldozers also worked under spotlights through the night at the French
barracks, trying to pull apart the eight stories of three-foot-thick cement that
had fallen on top of one another and to reach the men they could still hear
screaming for help. They regularly pumped oxygen into the mountain of rubble to
keep those who were still trapped below alive.

Lebanese Family Trapped

A Lebanese family lived on the ground floor of the French-occupied structure.
According to neighbors, the father had just gone out to buy bread when the blast
ripped through the building, trapping his wife and three children inside. The
father leaned against a fence weeping with his aged mother as the rescue workers
tried to extricate his family.

The explosions seemed timed to coincide with the start of Lebanon's long-awaited
national reconciliation conference. Beirut newspapers said today the discussions
were scheduled to begin in Geneva on Oct. 31. A statement issued in the name of
President Amin Gemayel after an emergency Cabinet meeting tonight expressed deep
regret for the loss of life among the multinational force and vowed that ''no
obstacles will affect the reconciliation process.''

Heavy fighting broke out again this evening in the mountain village of Suk al
Gharb, five miles southeast of Beirut, between the Lebanese Army and Druse
militiamen.

Whoever carried out the attacks against the Marines and the French seemed to
have had detailed knowledge of both the layout of their compounds and their mode
of operation. The building occupied by the Marines had been controlled at
various times in the last two years by Syrian troops, Palestinian guerrillas and
the Israeli Army.

The French Defense Minister, Charles Hernu, flew into Beirut this evening to
inspect the destroyed French building. After touring the blast site, he affirmed
that the French troops would remain in Beirut.

One of the first American officials to tour the devastated Marine headquarters
was the new United States Ambassador, Reginald Bartholomew. Mr. Bartholomew
arrived here only yesterday afternoon. Today was his first full day on the job.

Conversations with some of the marines who took part in the rescue operations,
as well as others who were caught up in the attack, made it possible to put
together a rough reconstruction of how the terrorist bombing took place.

It is believed that at roughly 6:15 A.M. shortly after the sun rose over the
mountains, a two-and-a-half-ton Mercedes truck came rumbling down the main
highway leading toward the Beirut airport.

About a half mile from the airport there is a Lebanese Army checkpoint, behind
which is a sandbag-surrounded bunker where a marine is normally on duty. The
truck was apparently waved through the army checkpoint without a search, not
unusual here, and it apparently continued on toward the airport. Marine sources
could not say at this time whether a marine had been on duty at the post when
the truck went through.

About 200 yards before the truck reached the airport building, it apparently
turned left, crossed the highway and entered a large parking lot between the
airport terminal and the Marine headquarters, situated in a structure called the
Aviation Safety Building. There is no guard at the entrance to the parking lot.

Building Had 4-Story Atrium

Seventy-five yards long and 50 yards wide, the Aviation Safety Building was a
sand-colored four-story structure with an atrium in the middle extending from
the ground floor to the roof. It was the headquarters for all the Marine
companies serving in the area around the airport and contained a mess hall,
library, chapel, gymnasium, administrative offices holding all the medical
records of the marines in Beirut, an infirmary, a supply room, an ammunition
dump in the basement and cots on almost every floor.

The top of the building contained several telescopes that were used for spotting
the sources of attacks on the Marines during the last two weeks. The building
was known officially as the ''BLT'' - Battalion Landing Team headquarters - but
was dubbed by the marines ''The California Hilton.''

It was not the overall command center, however. That building, where the officer
in charge, Col. Timothy Geraghty, has his offices, is situated 200 yards farther
north. Colonel Geraghty was there at the time of the blast.

Truck Headed for Building

According to an unidentified Marine witness quoted by Major Jordan, the Mercedes
truck entered the asphalt parking lot, started to pick up speed and began
heading north, straight for the headquarters building. The first barrier it
apparently encountered was a simple row of barbed wire that bisected the parking
lot. The truck apparently ran right over the wire without difficulty.

By now it was speeding and entered the northern half of the parking lot. This is
an open area with a bunker made of sandbags situated in the middle. The bunker
houses guards from the Lebanese Army and usually a Marine. Whether a Marine was
on duty with the Lebanese guards is not clear. In any event, the Mercedes easily
drove around the sandbagged bunker and headed straight for the six-foot-high
wrought- iron fence that surrounded the headquarters.

At about this point, according to Major Jordan, the Marine sergeant-at-arms
standing outside the headquarters radioed the operations room and said something
like, ''A large truck is bearing down on me.'' That was all he had time to say.

Truck Bursts Through Gate

Seconds later the truck reached the main gate protecting the entry of the
building, which also consists of iron grillwork, and smashed through it.

As the truck was bursting through the gate, an unidentified marine quoted by
Major Jordan was taking a drink of watr from a tank off to the side of the
building.

''The marine said he heard a roar as the truck burst through the fence and
approached the BLT,'' Major Jordan said, ''and then he remembers thinking, 'Oh
God, a car-bomb.' ''

Once the truck was through the fence gate, according to Major Jordan, the
sergeant-at-arms standing at the sentry post at the front door of the building
ordered his sentry to lock, load and fire his M-16 rifle. According to the
witness, the sentry fired at least five rounds at the truck.

Sentry Box Smashed

But it did no good. The truck broke down the gate and then swerved around a
blast wall of sandbags about 15 feet in front of the building entry. According
to the witnesses quoted by Major Jordan, another marine threw himself in front
of the truck, but to no avail.

Now the truck was moving even faster, said Major Jordan, and the only thing
between it and the building was the sentry box at the front door. The sentry box
consisted of sandbags and glass in wood frames. The Mercedes apparently smashed
right through it and drove straight into the heart of the building's lobby.
There, the driver of the truck detonated the explosive.

Some Marines said that the presence of mind of the driver, who steered the truck
through all the barriers, swerved around bunkers, ignored the rifle fired
directed at him and then detonated the bomb not a moment too soon was nothing
short of remarkable.

SUB BEIRUT Beirut Bombing: How It Happened Driver swerves again to avoid sandbag
blast wall. Behind it, at building entrance, is guard hut with sergeant-at- arms
and sentry. Sergeant calls in report and sentry fires five shots before driver
smashes through hut.  Truck reaches central atrium and driver detonates bomb.
Terminal TROOPS type 2,000 soldiers - two armored squadrons, one armored car
detachment, five infantry companies, a company of engineers and a signal unit -
armed with heavy machine guns, mortars, light armored cars and conventional
infantry weapons.  1,400 soldiers, armed with heavy machine guns, mortars and
conventional infantry weapons.  90 soldiers in a squadron of light armored cars.
1,600 marines, most ashore, armed with howitzers, mortars and conventional
infantry weapons, the rest in reserve offshore in amphibious ships.  Four Cobra
helicopters armed with Tow missiles and machine guns or cannon.  Four M-60 tanks
armed with 105-mm. guns.  Three destroyers, the battleship New Jersey and one
aircraft carrier, the Dwight D. Eisenhower, carrying 84 aircraft, stationed with
amphibious ships offshore.  FRENCH HEADQUARTERS HIT MARINE HEADQUARTERS HIT

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Beirut (page A6); photo of rescuers removing wounded marine;
diagram

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 24, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MARINES' SECURITY RAISES QUESTIONS

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1337 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct, 23


After a car bomb blew up the United States Embassy in Beirut on April 18,
killing 63 people, the Marine force at the Beirut airport took steps to
strengthen security measures against a similar incident, Marine Corps officers
said today.

The embassy bombing, and at least seven other serious car bombings this year in
Beirut, gave warning of a common tactic. But a determined terrorist overwhelmed
the new airport defenses, raising questions about why the security measures were
inadequate.

Larry Speakes, the chief White House spokesman, said tonight that President
Reagan had ordered the Marine Commandant, Gen. P. X. Kelly, to go to Beirut to
determine what security measures could be taken to improve protection for the
marines in Lebanon.



'Unbelievable,' Kennedy Says

Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, a member of the Armed
Services Commitee, asked for an investitation by the committee into what he
called the ''unbelievable breakdown in security that allowed it to happen.''

In testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in September, General
Kelly said in answser to a question that the area of responsibility given the
marines in the multinational force dictated their position and that the Marines
Corps was satisfied with the geographic position it occupied in Beirut.

But General Kelly said the disposition of marines and defense measures were the
responsibility of the ''local commander'' on the ground.

Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger said today that it was impossible to
defend against a suicide attack. Various military organizations elsewhere,
however, have applied increasingly vigorous and stringent security measures to
prevent such incidents.

British forces in Northern Ireland commonly use concrete ''dragon teeth''
barriers, much like antitank defenses, that can usually be expected to stop a
vehicle like the truck that reportedly crashed through four barriers and into
the lobby of the Beirut building where marines were sleeping.

A simple barrier of spiked steel mats that could have flattened tires might have
helped in Beirut, a retired military officer said.

But Mr. Weinberger said at a news conference today that ''nothing can work
against a suicide attack like that, any more than you can do anything against a
kamikaze flight.''

Security Was 'Beefed Up'

A Marine officer said today that after the April bombing at the embassy, gate
security at the Marine posiition was ''beefed up.'' He said 55-gallon barrels of
tar were added at the main gate, which was not attacked, as well as additional
sandbags. A barbed-wire fence across an airport parking lot was also
strengthened, he said, but the truck crashed through this fence.

Marine spokesmen in Washington said the truck entered the part of the airport
parking lot still open to civilian use. A spokesman said that ''since air cargo
goes in and out of the airport, a freight-moving kind of vehicle was not so
unusual.''

As described by Marine spokesmen, the truck first crashed through a barbed-wire
fence, built on anchored steel posts that closed off half of the parking lot
near the Marine headquarters. The driver then reportedly crashed through a
relatively flimsey chain-link gate that was flanked by concrete walls and
guarded by a sandbagged bunker usually manned by one or two marines with rifles
and grenade launchers.

Got Past 2-Foot Pipe

The driver, the spokesmen said, was then confronted with a steel sewer pipe two
feet in diameter laid across a road not open to traffic or used that leads to
the headquarters building. It was not clear to officials in Washington whether
the driver somehow managed to drive over such an obstacle or tore it loose from
its moorings and swept it aside before crashing through a final wood and cement
barrier near the building entrance.

Mr. Speakes, the White House spokesman, was asked how the terrorists had managed
to penetrate the marines' security. He replied that the problem was complicated
because the marines were charged with keeping the Beirut airport open to air
traffic and the public.

''It definitely was a difficult situation for us,'' he said, adding that
''people come out of nowehere and perform these acts.''

He said that while Marine officials would investigate how the attack succeeded,
''our goal will be to focus on the future.''



Tactic Favored by Terrorists

Car and truck bombs have been a favorite tactic of terrorists and insurgents for
many years in many conflicts. In Vietnam, the Middle East, Northern Ireland and
England, car bombs have often been successful against civilian and places where
troop installations are close to traffic.

It seemed likely that greatly stepped- up security measures against suspicious
vehicles may now be applied by the Marine garrison in Beirut. But the continuing
harassment that has been inflicted on the marines since late August involves
other problems that may not be easy to solve.

Some grow out of their relatively passive mission, as defined by the White
House, and some out of a ''tactical area of responsibilty'' that is undesirable
from a military point of view.

Some of the military and tactical problems that the marines are facing in Beirut
are much like those that the marines and other troops have faced in the past
when civilian authorities have set the ground rules for military action.



Marines in Static Position

One problem is that the marines are concentrated in a relatively small ''static
position,'' or outpost with fixed boundaries. In the past, marines who served in
such exposed Vietnamese outposts as Con Thien and Khe Sanh called it ''living in
the bull's-eye.'' If one side is static and never moves, opposing guns and
mortars can easily be registered so that, even if their shells do not always hit
humans, they almost always hit the defensive position.

The senior officials in Washington who sent the marines into Lebanon may have
believed that the variety of possible hostile forces would not exert strong
pressure. But this had been disproved even before today's explosions, with the
death of six marines from shelling and sniping.

Urban Areas Not for Troops

A second problem, demonstrated by such sniping and short-range shelling, is the
difficulty for regular troops of living and operating in an urban area.

Almost nothing, includng jungle warfare, is worse for troops. An axiom from
Vietnam was that ''trees are not the best cover for guerrillas; people are the
best cover for guerrillas.''

An urban area makes it difficult for regular soldiers not only to spot and find
hostile forces but also to honor rules of engagment and principles of the laws
of war.

Since the first Marine unit arrived in August 1982 in Beirut, one of the rules
of engagement under which they operate has involved a principle of
''proportionality.'' Although the 16-inch guns of the battleship New Jersey and
of carrier aircraft are available to the marines, such firepower has not been
thought appropriate for use against snipers and mortar crews operating in
civilian neighborhoods. Even after today's bombings, it is not clear where heavy
firepower should be applied.

Judicious Use of Firepower

United States forces are, in general, instructed to be judicious in the use of
firepower, or to avoid merely saturating whole areas with explosives and
fragments. This is never easy to do, but can be especially difficult in densely
populated urban areas.

Only a little more than a year ago, members of Congress and American officials
and commentators were condemming Israel for its heavy bombardment of West
Beirut. The Israelis defended the bombing as necessasry for the protection of
Israeli troops.

A forward defense and patrolling policy would probably provide the best defense
for the marine garrison at the Beirut airport, Marines officers said. But they
said the reinforced battalion now on the ground is too small to undertake such
tasks.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 24, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICANS REACT TO ATTACK WITH FRUSTRATION AND DOUBT

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1016 words


Americans reacted to the terrorist attack upon United States marines in Beirut
yesterday with sorrow, shock, outrage and expressions of growing doubt about the
nation's involvement in Lebanon.

Under somber, overcast skies that arched over most of the country and seemed to
symbolize the mood of mourning and misgiving, people in cities and towns and
many walks of life condemned the terrorist attack and demanded to know how it
could have been allowed to happen.

They spoke of the marines' vulnerability and of the need to insure their
protection against terrorists and the warring factions that have wracked Lebanon
for years. Many also questioned the justification for the marines' presence in
Lebanon and called for a new look at the entire issue of American involvement.

Some urged an immediate withdrawal, a course President Reagan has said would
lead to chaos. Others, saying that pulling out would in effect capitulate to the
terrorists, urged that the Marines stay on and even be reinforced. Some
suggested retaliatory measures if and when those responsible for the attack were
identified.

In scores of interviews that took place in homes, in meeting halls, on college
campuses, in airports and bus stations and on streets in New York, Los Angeles,
Houston, San Francisco, Chicago and elsewhere, many Americans expressed fear
that the nation was being drawn into another Vietnam experience.

Frustration at Complexities

There was a sense of frustration in many of the voices: over the intricate
complexities of the war in Lebanon, over not knowing whom to blame for the
attack, over what many called the vagueness of the mission of the Marine Corps,
and over the inability even to say who the enemy in Lebanon was, let alone how
to find and fight him.

''I'm absolutely appalled,'' said James McIntosh, a professor of social
relations at Lehigh University in Bethlehem, Pa. ''I think it clearly shows
Reagan's foreign policy is wrongheaded. It shows how futile our effort is over
there. We don't even know whom to go after. And we can't protect our people.''

In Evanston, Ill., Nancy Tiffen said: ''I worry that we'll send more and more
people in to stop this kind of situation, like Nicaragua, and sooner or later
we'll have another Vietnam. I worry that someone in Government won't know
exactly where to draw the line.''

Caution Against Overreaction

Sounding weary and resigned, James Halow, 44, a businessman in San Francisco,
said he had followed the news of Lebanon closely for years, admired President
Reagan and felt he had ''a tough job.'' He said partitioning Lebanon was a
possible solution.

''If we pull out,'' Mr. Halow said, ''it opens it up to the Syrians and
Russians, but I'm not so sure that's a bad thing anymore because I don't like to
see Americans getting killed on foreign soil.''

Mary Galligan, a 70-year-old widow who lives in Chevy Chase, Md., heard the news
on the radio. ''I couldn't believe my ears when I heard it,'' she said, sobbing
as her voice cracked. ''I am furious at the people who sent our boys over there.
We're protecting something over there, but I sure don't know what. Not our
boys.''

In church services in many parts of the country yesterday, religious leaders
asked for prayers for the marines who were killed and for their families. Many
cautioned against overreaction based on anger, and some reported a general
feeling in their congregations that the marines did not belong in Lebanon.

Outside an armed forces recruiting station in Times Square, Michael Abdelnoor,
who said he was a pathologist from Beirut visiting in New York, called the
deaths tragic. ''But to withdraw is to accept the blackmailing of two tyrannical
regimes: Syria and Iran,'' he said. ''America should retaliate with the help of
the Lebanese Army.''

In a nearby drugstore, 19-year-old Margie Gonzales said: ''Either Reagan should
pull them out or start fighting back. It is unfair of him to put the marines
there in the middle like sitting ducks. It's like Vietnam.''

Vietnam Is Invoked

References to Vietnam emerged repeatedly in interviews yesterday. ''When are we
going to learn from our mistakes?'' said Anthony Ramos, 23, a university student
in Temple City, Calif.

''It almost seems like Vietnam again, doesn't it?'' said Hazel Warren, a Chicago
resident who was visiting in Monterey, Calif. ''Those poor boys dying, and I'm
sure they don't know what they died for. I feel awfully sorry for the parents.''

The mournful strains of taps rose from the floor of the Florida State Democratic
Convention in Hollywood, Fla., yesterday as delegates and officials fell silent
after an announcement of the attack.

At St. Patrick's Cathedral in New York, as in many churches around the country,
people lit candles for the dead marines and their families and spoke in hushed
tones of the attack. ''I know we should be there for the peacekeeping mission,''
said Paul Kruger, an entomologist from Middlesex, N.J. ''But when you lose 200
lives in an instant, is it worth it?''

''I think they should be protecting themselves better, but I don't think they
should be pulled,'' said Keith P. Luria, an assistant professor at Yale in New
Haven. ''I understand their mission to be a symbolic presence in support of the
Lebanese Government. That's their real mission. Their announced mission is to be
a peacekeeper, but I don't think they're keeping the peace.''

'A Nest of Writhing Snakes'

''The situation in Lebanon is impossible,'' said Susan Pawlowski of Chicago.
''There are 75 different religious and ethnic groups that are not powerful
enough to do anything on their own. They refuse to overcome their differences
and cooperate. They are going to sit on their little pieces of land and kill
each other. It's a nest of writhing snakes.''

''We're trying to play a no-win game,'' said Robert Peck, 35, a Washington
lawyer who works for a Senate committee. ''I think there'll be a lot more
criticism of the specific role of the marines in Lebanon now. We'll have to
question what our goal is there.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of marines preparing to leave for Lebanon

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 24, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CAMP LEJEUNE MARINES ARE IRATE AND UNCERTAIN

BYLINE: By E. R. SHIPP

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 687 words

DATELINE: JACKSONVILLE, N.C., Oct. 23


Marines and residents of this town outside Camp Lejeune reacted with anger and
uncertainty today to the killings in the terrorist bombing in Lebanon. Most of
those interviewed said that if the marines were not allowed to protect
themselves better, President Reagan should bring them home.

At the Albert J. Ellis Airport outside town, the common refrain among marines
returning from leave and civilians passing through was that ''it's another
Vietnam.''

Pvt. John Powers said: ''It's not good at all. We should pull out. Otherwise,
it'll just be another Vietnam.''

Pvt. Wilson Lopez, who is 19 years old, said: ''Right now they're not doing
anything at all. They're not firing or nothing and they're getting attacked. If
Reagan is not going to let them do anything, he should bring them home.''

'Spark of the Fire'

''This is like the spark of the fire,'' he added. ''I think it's going to turn
into a big fire, and the next thing it will be like another Vietnam.''

Pvt. Edwin A. Rodriguez, 19, who is in infantry training school at nearby Camp
Lejeune, said, ''Either we should fight or take the marines out who are still
there.''

Lance Cpl. James E. Duguid said he was concerned that the marines were not being
allowed to fight. ''I don't like the idea of them sitting there like sitting
ducks,'' he said.

Still, he said, the marines are serving a useful purpose. ''I think if they
weren't there, it would be a mess. I think they're doing a job that's good.''

At Camp Lejeune, Lieut. Col. Edward Kelly, commander of the battalion that was
mobilized this morning, presumably to be sent to Lebanon, said, ''Whatever
happens, we'll be ready.''

Civilians Also Upset

Civilians here were as upset as the marines about the deaths, for Camp Lejeune
touches all their lives.

Theresa Moore, the wife of a marine, said the troops should be brought home.

''They don't want us over there,'' she said. ''It's not our fight. They've been
fighting over there for years, and we never got involved before.''

Benjamin Smith Sr. said the marines should never have been sent to Beirut.

''I don't think much of people going to get killed when it ain't a declared
war,'' he said. ''They should bring them home unless they declare war. They got
to do one or the other.''

Michael J. Lupia said: ''It's getting a bit out of hand now. Those people have
been fighting for many years over the same thing. And we're going to go in as a
peacekeeping force? It's rather crazy, I think. It's ridiculous.''

Francine Antwine said: ''I don't think they should be there because they have
already lost some marines and families are being deprived of their husbands and
brothers. They ought to do something or pull out instead of sitting there.''
Replacements Leave

CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Oct. 23 (AP) - Fresh Marine Corps troops with morale said to
be at a ''fever-pitch high'' boarded helicopters here today on their way to
Lebanon, where they will replace the marines killed and wounded in the terrorist
bombing.

Maj. Gen. Alfred Gray ordered the marines to leave Camp Lejeune, which was the
home base for those killed in Lebanon. This afternoon troops were seen boarding
helicopters here to go to Cherry Point Marine Air Station, 60 miles northeast,
to fly out of the country.

General Gray, commander of the Second Marine Division, said at a news conference
that the troops would bring the 24th Marine Amphibious Unit back up to strength.

The general termed the attack ''a godless type of thing, and we're a force that
knows our God.''

''If we were barbaric, we could defend against this sort of thing, but we're
not,'' he said. ''It is possible to train and defend against any type of
terrorist attack, but it is difficult to counter this kind of attack when our
honor, training and Western civilization, and our respect for human life, is
involved.''

He said morale at the base was at a ''fever-pitch high.''

Lieut. Craig Fisher of the public affairs office said relatives of the dead
would be notified through the standard Marine Corps procedure, a personal visit
by an officer.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 24, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

QUESTIONS RAISED AGAIN ON REAGAN'S LIMITS UNDER WAR POWERS ACT

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 762 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 23


With the ink barely dry on compromise legislation giving President Reagan
carefully limited authority to keep marines in Lebanon for 18 months, today's
bombings in Beirut raised anew the question of what military steps Mr. Reagan
could legally take.

Congress asserted in the legislation, which Mr. Reagan signed Oct. 12, that any
substantial expansion in the number or role of United States armed forces in
Lebanon would require a new approval from Congress. Mr. Reagan had earlier said
that ''it would be my intention'' to comply with the requirement.

Although the Administration said today that it had no plans to expand the
marines' role or withdraw them, Mr. Reagan has in the past carefully hedged his
commitment to abide by Congressional limitations on his use of armed forces
abroad.

He insisted obliquely in his Oct. 12 statement that he had the power to keep the
marines in Lebanon even without Congressional approval. He hinted that the
central provision of the War Powers Act of 1973 - requiring the President to
''terminate'' the use of armed forces in ''hostilities'' abroad in 90 days
unless Congress authorized longer involvement - was unconstitutional.

Likely to Stay in Background

The Reagan stand is vigorously disputed by Congressional leaders.

The dispute was pushed into the background by the compromise legislation, where
it will probably remain as long as a majority in Congress approves of Mr.
Reagan's military actions, in particular, his response to the bombings today.

There could be a constitutional confrontation if Mr. Reagan lost Congressional
support for his actions, if he embarked on military escalation without
Congressional approval or if Congress directed him to withdraw the marines from
their vulnerable position and he refused.

Crucial questions on the powers of the President and Congress to control
military forces abroad under the Constitution and the War Powers Act remain as
unsettled as ever.

2 Vague Provisions

The questions are not limited to the situation in Lebanon. A Federal appeals
court heard arguments last week in a suit in which 29 members of Congress have
charged that Mr. Reagan's use of a few dozen American military advisers in El
Salvador violates the War Powers Act.

The Constitution reserves to Congress the power to ''declare war'' but makes the
President the Commander in Chief of the armed forces. Presidents have long
asserted that the Commander in Chief provision empowers them to use armed forces
abroad without Congressional authorization.

Some in Congress have the assertion as a usurping, or perhaps abdicating, of
Congressional power.

The War Powers Act, enacted over a veto by President Richard M. Nixon, grew out
of a Congressional desire to stem the erosion of its role in decisions about
war-making, after the unilateral actions and escalations of President Lyndon B.
Johnson and Mr. Nixon in the Vietnam War.

Report Due Within 48 Hours

The act stated its broad purpose to be ''that the collective judgment of both
the Congress and the President will apply to the introduction of United States
armed forces into hostilities.'' It did not restrict the President's power to
place troops in hostilities, but it did seek to limit his power to keep them
there.

One key provision requires the President to submit a written report to Congress
within 48 hours after United States armed forces ''are introduced into
hostilities or into situations where imminent involvement in hostilities is
clearly indicated by the circumstances.''

Another provision, the heart of the act, effectively sets a 90-day time limit
after such a report ''was submitted (or required to be submitted)'' on
Presidential use of armed forces in hostilities abroad without Congressional
authorization.

The crucial issue is whether the 90- day limit intrudes unconstitutionally on
the President's power as Commander in Chief, as Mr. Reagan and some of his
predecessors have suggested.

Divergent Views From Experts

There are no definitive legal precedents, and legal experts expressed divergent
views in interviews before today's bombings. Prof. Laurence H. Tribe of the
Harvard University Law School said the act's provisions were ''clearly
constitutional'' and could be enforced by the courts.

Lloyd N. Cutler, a Washington lawyer who was counsel to President Jimmy Carter,
said some provisions might be ''unconstitutional as applied'' in certain
situations and doubted the courts would ever ''order the President to take out
the marines.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Sam Nunn and Charles McC. Mathias Jr.

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 24, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

LEGILATORS SAY REAGAN MUST REASSESS U.S. ROLE

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTSByrd Urges Discussions

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1024 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 23


In the aftermath of the attack on the American marines in Beirut, legislators
from both parties said today that the Reagan Administration must redefine and
clarify the role of its troops and their long- range mission in the Middle East.

Shock and anger over the devastating assault moved some Congressmen to call for
the rapid withdrawal of the remaining marines from Lebanon.

This was not the dominant reaction today, but many lawmakers warned that support
for the Administration's policy had been seriously weakened and could
deteriorate further in coming days if the President does not succeed in
justifying his position to the Congress and thr public.

'Back to the Drawing Board'

''It seems to me,'' said Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, the ranking Democrat on
the Armed Services Committee, ''that we ought to go back to the drawing board
and say, 'Mr. President, what are the marines doing there and under what terms
would they be withdrawn?' ''

At the same time, many lawmakers expressed deep frustration at the situation in
Lebanon and said that at least in the short run, the United States seemed to
have no promising policy alternatives. Senator Alan Cranston of California, a
candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination, spoke for many colleagues
when he called the situation ''a total mess.''

''There is no clear way out,'' Senator Cranston said. ''We cannot retreat under
fire and if we were to declare war we wouldn't know who to declare war
against.''

The 1,600-man Marine Corps contingent has been stationed in Lebanonunder a
compromise agreement worked out last month between Congress and the White House.
The President won permission to keep the troops in the region for 18 months,
well past next year's elections. In exchange the President signed the resolution
passed by Congress while asserting that he was not necessarily bound by the
restrictions of the War Powers Act.

Distinctly Different Views

The agreement defused, at least temporarily, a potential Constitutional
collision between the executive and legislative branches. But during the debate
both sides voiced distinctly differentviews over what would happen should the
situation change in Lebanon anforce new decisions about the size and scope of
the marines' role.

Under considerable pressure from Capitol Hill, Mr. Reagan said he would ''seek
Congressional authorization'' if circumstances required ''any substantial
expansion in the number or role of U.S. armed forces in Lebanon.'' But he and
his assistants also insisted that Congress could not restrict the President's
flexibility to act as Commander in Chief.

Today Senator Charles McC. Mathias Jr., a Maryland Republican who contributed
critical support for the President in last month's debate, warned Mr. Reagan he
had to coordinate any future decisions with Capitol Hill.

''The President has got to look at that narrow margin of victory as a limit on
the unbridled exercise of Presidential prerogative,'' Mr. Mathias said.

Public Opinion a Factor

To many lawmakers public opinion is another limit on President Reagan. The most
recent New York Times/ CBS poll reported that by a margin of 2 to 1 those
surveyed compared the United States involvement in Lebanon to the way it became
entrapped in Vietnam two decades ago. For the first time since Mr. Reagan took
office, those who disapproved of his handling of foreign policy outnumbered
those who approved.

An aide to the Senate Republican leadership said many lawmakers backed President
Reagan's policy last month because they ''wanted to give the Administration a
chance'' and did not like the idea of America ''turning tail and running.'' But
they did not believe in the commitment of Americans troops, he added, and the
tone on Capitol Hill is now likely to change.

''A lot of people have been waiting for something to happen so they can say what
they really feel,'' the aide said.

During the debate over the War Powers Resolution, many lawmakers argued that the
Reagan Administration had not adequately defined the role of the marines in
Lebanon, and Senator Nunn dubbed their assignment ''Mission: Impossible.'' Today
those complaints were repeated more loudly than ever.


For example, Senator Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, the Democratic leader,
said in a statement: ''The Administration should talk with the other parties in
the multinational force and reassess our reasons for being there, and these
reasons should be clearly explained to Congress and the American people. The
role of our marines has not been clearly defined. At present our people are just
sitting ducks in a defenseless situation where they don't even know who is
attacking them.''

These concerns were echoed by Henry A. Kissinger, the former Secretary of State,
when he said on the ABC News program ''This Week'': ''I think these forces right
now don't have a mission. I don't think it is clear what we are trying to
achieve in Beirut.''

But if many lawmakers were alarmed by the situation in Lebanon, they disagreed
sharply today over what course the President should take next. Senator Donald W.
Riegle Jr., Democrat of Michigan, said it was clear that ''our forces cannot
adequately be protected in that country'' and called for a withdrawal within 60
days.

Senator Nunn agreed that the troops should leave, but said they had to be
replaced by United Nations forces. ''Our forces in Lebanon now are not a
deterrent, they're hostages,'' the Georgian said.

Senator Ernest F. Hollings of South Carolina, another contender for the
Democratic Presidential nomination, said Mr. Reagan was left with two choices:
reduce the contingent substantially, or increase it to the point where the
marines can defend themselves and ''clear out and clean out a buffer zone''
around their positions.

Senator John Glenn of Ohio, who is also seeking the Democratic nomination,
called for ''internationalizing the situation'' by the use of United Nations
forces and said it was essential to avoid any further direct conflict between
the United States and Syria.


CONGRESS can bite






LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 24, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
U.S. Team to Study 'Yellow Rain' Reports

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 127 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 23


The United States has formed a team to investigate the reported use of chemical
weapons in Southeast Asia and Afghanistan by the Soviet Union and its allies, a
United States Embassy spokesman said Saturday.

The three-man team, based in the embassy here, will evaluate reports of the use
of chemical and biological weapons and interview reputed victims of such
attacks, the spokesman said.

He said the team was set up last week and would be headed by Don Stader, former
chief of the embassy's visa office. He said the team included a physician and an
expert in chemical warfare.

The United States Government has accused the Soviet Union of using chemical
weapons, including one known as ''yellow rain.'' The Soviet Union and Vietnam
have denied the charges.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 24, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

2 AVENUES ARE FACING U.S. FORCE

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 655 words


Military

 Analysis

The situation after the killing of 161 American marines and sailors in Beirut
yesterday emphasizes the wisdom of a comment by Field Marshal Earl Alexander in
World War II: for the military, he said, there are ''no easy options.'' At one
extreme, according to senior American officers, the American command must
consider the withdrawal of the force to the amphibious landing craft offshore.
The Americans would then have to rely on the guns of the battleship New Jersey
and the aircraft of the carrier Eisenhower to respond to infringements of the
cease-fire by Druse and Shiite militia units.

At the other extreme, the Americans say, is an unleashing of the marines for
active combat patrols beyond their present perimeters. Such patrols, a senior
officer said, would inevitably involve fights between the marines and guerrilla
forces. He said he had no doubts that the marines, even without reinforcement,
could handle such situations.

Doubts on Popular Support

Whether there is political and popular support in the United States for such
actions is another question. The officers said they felt there would be a rapid
revival of what they call ''the Vietnam syndrome'' should the marines engage in
active operations.

The American officers said they thought there would be an outcry in the United
States against being involved in ''another Vietnam,'' There is little similarity
between the military situation in Lebanon and that in Vietnam in the early
1960's, they said, but they fear the public would not recognize this.

Active combat patrols, which would probably involve the pursuit of guerrillas
into the hills beyond Beirut, would raise an ominious military problem.
According to United States and Atlantic alliance intelligence services, Soviet
advisers and technicians are stationed with the Syrian forces in Lebanon.

These sources said there were 5,000 to 7,000 Russians in Syria, with about 100
of them acting as advisers for the Syrian forces in Lebanon. Although some of
these Soviet advisers are technicians stationed in Syria to maintain the SA-5
missiles introduced by the Russians earlier this year, at least one Soviet
infantry battalion is reported to be in the country, ostensibly to guard the
SA-5 installations.

Clashes a Possibility

The presence of the Soviet troops and advisers with the forward Syrian forces in
Lebanon raises the possibility of clashes between American and Soviet troops,
according to American military and diplomatic sources. The off-the-cuff
estimation by American diplomats and intelligence officers was that the Soviet
troops would avoid such encounters. But in the fluid and complex situation in
Lebanon, one source said, no one can be sure that such clashes would be avoided.

Another option would be to move the marines out of their positions around the
Beirut airport to areas farther inland, where they might be less exposed to
hostile fire.

Such a move would have the advantage of reducing the marines' exposure to
snipers, but it would not, in the opinion of some senior officers, strengthen
their role as a peacekeeping force. Their view was that the airport must be kept
free of guerrilla attacks as a symbol of the sovereignty of the Government of
President Amin Gemayel, which the marines and other units of the multinational
force are in Lebanon to uphold.

Drawbacks to a Withdrawal

Militarily, the American sources said, the withdrawal of the to their ships and
the assumption by the Navy of punitive action against the guerrillas has little
to recommend it.

The guerrillas' penchant for hit-and- run attacks against the Lebanese Army
would be encouraged by the absence of the marines. The sources said it was
unlikely that either the French or the Italians, the other major forces
involved, had the resources to take over the area now held by the Americans.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 24, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

PENTAGON SAYS MARINES WILL IMPROVE DEFENSES



BYLINE:
By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 856 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 23


Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger said today that the bombing attack on
the United States Marine force in Lebanon would not cause it to abandon its
mission but would require it to find better ways to protect itself.

Mr. Weinberger, briefing reporters on the attack and its aftermath, emphasized
there would be no ''sea change'' in United States policy as a result of the
deaths of at least 161 marines and sailors, the largest loss of life suffered by
the United States military since the Vietnam War.

But the Secretary said the way the Marines operate in Lebanon might be altered,
including the possibility of stationing a smaller proportion of the authorized
1,600-man force ashore.

Pentagon officials said the dead and wounded marines would be replaced. ''They
lost almost the entire headquarters company for the battalion on the ground,''
one official said. ''We'll probably send in a new one.''

Alert Reported at Camp

At Camp Lejeune, N.C., a major Marine base, the replacements made preparations
to depart throughout the afternoon. Pentagon officials said that they would fly
out during the night.

Pentagon officials also refused to discuss the sailing progress of a marine
force that was diverted several days ago toward Grenada, scene of an upheaval.
The force had been headed for Lebanon, where it was to have replaced the marines
stationed there, in what was described as a routine move.

Tonight, after a meeting of the National Security Council, President Reagan
ordered Gen. P. X. Kelley, the Marine Commandant, to go to Lebanon to oversee
the effort to increase security for the force, including steps agreed on by the
National Security Council. Pentagon officials refused to provide any details on
those steps beyond Mr. Weinberger's earlier comments.

Mr. Weinberger had earlier suggested that in the future, troops not actually on
duty might be kept on five support ships off Beirut. Even then, he warned, it
would be difficult for the men remaining ashore to head off attacks of the sort
that took place this morning.

''Nothing can work against a suicidal attack like that,'' he said, ''any more
than you could do anything about a kamikaze flight diving into a carrier or
cruiser in World War II.''

Since the marines began duty in Lebanon more than a year ago, most of the force
has been stationed at Beirut International Airport, a flat, exposed position
that Marine officers have never considered ideal. Only the force's 300
helicopter crewmen, along with their craft, have remained on the five ships when
not on duty.

''Essentially, what we want to try to do is reduce the vulnerability,'' Mr.
Weinberger said. ''But there is no reduction in the original commitment. The
question is where we can best perform the function. There are various ways of
holding positions you have to hold.''

There were no plans, he said, to increase the size of the force.  Officials said
it had never been intended to be a peacekeeper between opposing Lebanese
factions, but rather to demonstrate American support for the Lebanese
Government.

''I don't see that additional forces will do anything but increase the
problem,'' Mr. Weinberger said.

Secretary Weinberger said that if the force needed more military might, it could
always call in gunfire from Navy ships in the vicinity of the support ships.
Among them is the battleship New Jersey, which has nine 16-inch guns and a
number of 5-inch batteries, all fully capable of supporting operations well
inside Lebanon.

Periodically, a carrier, destroyers and cruisers also sail in reach of the
shore.

At the moment, Pentagon officials said, no air group was nearby.

The five support ships, which have a capacity of 2,000 marines, are lightly
armed. They include a helicopter carrier, a supply ship and three amphibious
transports.

Mr. Weinberger also said there were no plans to increase the size of the zone in
which the marines have been operating in Lebanon. Basically, the zone covers the
airport.

Doubts About Avoiding Bombing

There is high ground east of the airport, and the Mediterranean to west.
Normally, combat commanders try to position themselves on high ground. But for
the marines to do that in Lebanon, according to Mr. Weinberger, would put them
''in the middle of everyone else who wanders around up there.''

The Secretary said there would be a full investigation of the bombings. Again
and again, he emphasized he did not think the incident could have been headed
off, considering the suidical bent of the driver of the explosive-laden truck.

''They have taken all precautions,'' he said of the Marines.

Asked whether other top Pentagon officials were satisfied all possible
precautions had been taken, given the bombing incident last spring in which an
explosive-laden vehicle hit the United States Embassy in Beirut, a Defense
official said:

''People around here are still trying to add up just what happened, and so that
issue really hasn't become the focal point, yet. But when you lose a whole
company out of a battalion, people are going to be asking a lot of questions
sooner or later.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 24, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

LOCKHEED BACKED IN A BRIBERY CASE

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 398 words


No evidence exists that the Lockheed Aircraft Corporation bribed foreign
officials with Government money beginning in 1965 to facilitate secret spy
missions into North Vietnam, a member of the House intelligence committee,
Albert Gore Jr., said yesterday.

The existence of a contract between Lockheed and the Air Force, which provided
that the Government would reimburse the company for ''bribes to foreign
officials'' to permit the foreign registration of two American C-130 spy planes,
was disclosed on the CBS News program ''60 Minutes.''

Representative Gore, a Tennessee Democrat, said that the spy operation,
supported by a secret $450,000 fund in Swiss bank accounts, was ''designed to
infiltrate people into North Vietnam, to assist in our conduct of the Vietnam
War.'' The operation, which apparently included at least one flight over China,
was code-named Buttercup.

Mr. Gore, who said he was briefed on the operation by the Air Force, reported
that ''a number'' of ''spy drops'' into North Vietnam had taken place. But
neither he nor any of the former military officers who appeared on the program
were asked on the air whether Lockheed had received any of the $450,000 or paid
any bribes with the money. The Air Force and Lockheed officials who wrote the
contract refused to be interviewed on the air.

Charges of Embezzlement

The disclosure was made by Representative Gore in a televised interview about
charges by the Justice Department that a former Air Force Major General, Richard
Collins, had embezzled $19,000 from the project.

Mr. Gore, in a telephone interview from his Virginia home, said yesterday that,
while there was ''no evidence'' that any bribes had been paid by Lockheed, the
records that would cover such matters had been destroyed. He said the Air Force
believed General Collins had destroyed the files.

The general's lawyer, Stephen Bronis, said last night that it was a ''flat-out
lie'' that his client had destroyed the records. He said he believed that the
records had been destroyed well before General Collins became connected with the
Operation Buttercup money.

Mr. Bronis said a Federal Court of Appeals was considering his effort to block a
trial of his client on the misappropriation charges. He said the General did not
become connected with the money until 1975, three years after the ''spy drops''
reportedly ended.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN DECLARES MARINES' ROLE IN 'VITAL' TO COUNTER SOVIET IN LEBANON;;
TOLL AT 192

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1318 words

DATELINE: BEIRUT, Lebanon, Oct. 24


The American death toll grew to 192 today from the suicide terrorist attack on
the United States Marine base at Beirut airport.

Rescuers dug through the night in their search for more dead and injured from
the twin attacks on the American and French forces' headquarters.

Officials at the French headquarters said tonight that they still heard voices
from under the rubble of the nine-story compound by the sea in west Beirut. But
at the United States Marine headquarters, two miles away, hopes faded of finding
more Americans alive.



Wounded Are Evacuated

Pentagon officials in Washington said that 191 United States marines and sailors
died in the terrorist attack that demolished the four-story compound near Beirut
International Airport early Sunday morning. The number of wounded has still not
been determined, officials said, but 75 men have been evacuated from Lebanon to
hospitals in West Germany, Italy and Cyprus.

The Pentagon identified two United States Army soldiers as among the wounded in
the attack, the first indication Army soldiers were among the victims.  French
officials put the toll at 23 French paratroopers killed, 15 wounded, and 36
missing.

President Francois Mitterrand made a previously unannounced, seven-hour visit to
the Lebanese capital today.



Mitterrand Meets Commanders

Mr. Mitterrand, heavily guarded by Lebanese Army and French security forces,
inspected the demolished compounds, visited the French and American commanders
and met with President Amin Gemayel of Lebanon.

President Mitterrand declined to answer questions, but Lebanese officials said
that the French President's trip was aimed at ''reassuring'' Mr. Gemayel on
France's commitment to keeping its 2,000-man force in Lebanon.

At the United States compound, cranes and bulldozers razed the remnants of the
building that had housed roughly 300 marines.



Seabees Join the Search

Seabees, aided by teams of rescue workers from several countries - many of them
volunteers - used picks, shovels, and finally their hands to remove twisted
pieces of debris from the bodies of victims.

''The shock of the attack wears off only until you go down and look at that
building again,'' said Sgt. Hartman Slate, one of the rescue workers. ''Every
time you see it, it is a whole new shock. Everyone is very subdued now,
wondering who did it, wondering if we will retaliate. But how can you retaliate
against a phantom?''



Find Letters and Photographs

The Seabees spent the morning picking up scattered letters and photographs -
pictures of the marines and sailors with their girlfriends and families - to
help them identify who was in the building at the time of the attack.

Capt. Wayne Jones, a Marine spokesman, said that five bodies had been removed
and taken to ships today.

Captain Jones said that rescue workers had found today the marines' medical and
dental records along with their personnel files in the rubble of the compound.
The records would help identify the victims, he said.

The Lebanese Government, meanwhile, announced today that President Gemayel would
arrive in Bern, Switzerland on Oct. 29 for talks with Swiss officials, and would
then go to Geneva on Oct. 31 for the opening of Lebanesenational reconciliation
talks.

The formal announcement, Government officials said, improved prospects that the
meeting of the major factions in the Lebanese war would take place as planned.

News of Mr. Gemayel's trip was widely publicized tonight by the state- run radio
in an apparent effort to bolster hopes here that, despite the devastating
attacks on the American and French forces, progress towards national
reconciliation was still possible.

Earlier, Lebanese Government officials expressed concern that the bombings, with
the heavy loss of life, might weaken the resolve of France and the United States
to keep forces at their current levels in Lebanon.

Lebanese officials added they did not know whether Greece and Italy would send
observers as pledged to the Shuf mountains to help monitor the cease- fire.

200 Marines on Way to Lebanon

President Reagan declared today in Washington that United States would not
abandon its role here because of terrorism. To emphasize the point, a Marine
spokesman here said that 200 marines were ''already on their way'' here to
replace those killed or missing in action.

Captain Jones said that the task of identifying the bodies was complicated by
the timing of the attack. Because the Mercedes truck carrying the explosives had
crashed into the compound at 6:20 A.M. on a Sunday, many of the marines had been
sleeping or taking showers and were not wearing their dogtags when the attack
occurred, he said.

Marine spokesmen said that Gen. Paul X. Kelley, Commandant of the United States
Marine Corps, was on his way to Beirut for a personal inspection of the bombing,
the deadliest attack on American armed forces since the Vietnam War.

No Information on Terrorists

United States officicals said they had no more information today about which
group or individuals carried out the attack.

Col. Timothy Geraghty, the Marines' commander in Beirut, said only that the
attack had been ''well planned, timed, and coordinated.''

A liaison officer from the Lebanese Army, Hishan Jaber, described the attack as
''the perfect crime.'' The Lebanese officer said he knew the building well and
never anticipated that it would be the target of an attack because it was so
well fortified.

The Lebanese press, radio and television were filled today with speculation
about the identity of the attackers.

Caller Identifies Attackers

Agence France-Presse reported it had received an anonymous call Sunday night
from a member of the ''Free Islamic Revolutionary Movement,'' a hitherto unknown
faction, who claimed responsibility for the bombing. The caller identified the
drivers of the booby-trapped vehicles as Abu Mazen, 26 years old, and Abu
Sijaan, 24, the agency said.

The caller proclaimed support for ''greater Syria,'' and asserted that his group
would not stop such attacks until Beirut was ''back under the control of Moslem
revolutionaries and the struggling democratic youth,'' the agency reported.

Two right-wing Christian Phalangist radio stations - the ''Voice of Lebanon''
and ''Free Lebanon Radio'' - have blamed Syria for the bombings. As evidence,
they cited the recently intensified campaign in the Syrian press against the
United States. The Voice of Lebanon also asserted that Iranian intelligence
officers had helped plan the attack.

United States Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger said Sunday that
''intelligence reports'' and''circumstantial evidence'' suggested that Iran was
involved. United States officials have previously blamed Iranian extremists for
the attack on the United States Embassy here last April. No arrests or formal
charges have been made in connection with that attack.

''Everyone here is pointing fingers at everyone else,'' said one foreign
official. ''But no one knows very much for certain at this point.''

Al Anwar, a conservative, pro- American newspaper, called the attack ''Pearl
Harbor - 1983,'' and a cartoon in the newspaper featured a drawing of the
battleship New Jersey, which is deployed off the the coast of Lebanon, with its
guns covered in cobwebs. An editorial accompaying the cartoon urged the United
States either to act more firmly in Lebanon or to leave.

Developments in Lebanon About 1,800 marines aboard ships in the Atlantic due to
replace those now off-shore.  MIDEAST TALKS Lebanese President Gemayel
reaffirmed plans to convene reconciliation conference in Geneva next week.
ISRAELI AID Israeli offers of rescue and medical aid turned down.  MITTERRAND
VISIT President Mitterrand in Beirut for seven hours. French toll placed at 23
dead, 15 wounded, 36 missing.  GUILT DENIED Syria and Iran denied role in
bombings.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Beirut; photos of rescue efforts in Beirut

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
AN ACT OF WAR

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 779 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, Oct. 24


The carnage of American and French troops in Beirut was not an act of terrorism.
It was an act of war.

Nor was this a Gulf of Tonkin incident, engineered to justify American combat in
a war against an identified foe. It was an assault carried out by a
still-faceless enemy to force the United States to either retreat or take sides
openly.

The fact that so much slaughter could be achieved so easily against American
arms is a demonstration that the Marines' stated mission as a ''peacekeeping
force'' in Lebanon is a self-induced delusion. They could not have been
surprised so savagely had they taken wartime security precautions.

Regardless of Washington's intentions, the marines are not in Lebanon as
friendly neighborhood cops. They are in territory part friendly, part hostile,
where it is almost impossible to tell which is which. As long as they remain,
they must be allowed to deploy and protect themselves appropriately. They are in
a war zone. No peace exists to be ''kept'' and they are too few, too lightly
equipped, to impose a truce.

Serious questions can be asked whether they should have been sent in the first
place. But they are now there and they have been wantonly bloodied. That has
created new stakes for the United States that can only be ignored at great peril
to American policy around the world.

The Marines must not now be withdrawn. It would be a major defeat. But neither
can they stay, in their current murky context. Washington urgently needs a lucid
understanding of what it can do in Lebanon, and what is required to achieve the
possible.

It is not possible for the United States to resolve the longstanding, murderous
quarrels of the Lebanese. In 1958 President Eisenhower sent 30,000 United States
troops to Lebanon in more favorable circumstances. That cooled things for a
while, but the issues haven't really changed. The difference is that the scope
of the conflict has broadened and the firepower of the participants has
increased dramatically.

Whether it is possible to maintain the ''sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity'' of Lebanon, which the United States has set as its goal,
is not a question Americans can or should try to answer. That is the first point
to recognize.

Lebanon itself is not of strategic importance nor vital interest to America. If
it could be insulated from the much wider conflict in the Middle East, the
United States could depart. That is not possible in the existing situation. It
is more self-delusion to think that pressing for ''national reconciliation
talks'' among the Lebanese will work the miracle. Talks are useful, but they
cannot be decisive.  Since the prime American goal now must be to create a
situation where withdrawal is honorably possible, the political and military
effort has to be directed at insulating Lebanon. The difficulties are extreme.
But anything less will only compound the trouble.  Nothing is to be gained by
pretending to ignore the fact that the Marines, and the rest of the
multinational force, are in Lebanon because of last year's Israeli invasion.
Even Israelis are coming to realize how terribly misguided their Government was
in thinking it could impose the creation of a sturdy ally instead of a weak
nonbelligerant that way.  Therefore, nothing is to be gained by imagining that
some kind of ''strategic consensus'' with Israel could tranquilize Lebanon and
ease America's burden. It would be a formula for increased involvement and even
less control of events.  Nor should the Israeli-Lebanese agreement, which
provides for complete Israeli withdrawal, be undone. It should never have been
negotiated in the way it was, but it now exists and should not be jettisoned.
Instead it should be put into effect.  Israel should be brought to recognize
that its precondition of complete Syrian withdrawal is neither reasonable nor
feasible. It did not go to war to force Syria out of Lebanon. It cannot expect
an American-sponsored semi-peace with Lebanon to achieve that.  Some assurances
that southern Lebanon will not again be occupied by hostile outside forces are a
legitimate Israeli requirement. But the longer the Israeli occupation lasts, the
more hostility it is provoking among the local population. The United States aan
and should do all possible to enable the Lebanese Army and the United Nations
forces to neutralize the area in return for an Israeli withdrawal. Quiet probes
in Damascus might well bring Syrian support for such an agreement.  The kind of
''strategic cooperation'' the United States is entitled to from Israel now is to
leave Lebanon so America can find its own way to leave Lebanon to itself.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SOME DEMOCRATS WANT MARINES OUT

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 998 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 24


Several House Democrats rebelled against their party leaders today and said they
would offer a proposal to cut off funds for the Marine Corps contingent in
Lebanon and to force the President to bring the troops home.

The lawmakers said they would offer their plan as an amendment either to a
military spending bill due to come to the House floor Tuesday, or to some other
available legislation. Congressional leaders expect the measure to fail, but
they said it reflected both outrage in Congress about the attack on the marines
in Lebanon and a growing dissatisfaction with the Reagan Administration's
policies in the Middle East.

Representative Samuel S. Stratton, a Democrat from upstate New York who is
sponsoring the fund cutoff, said: ''I don't like to see marines wasted. If
you're smart, you know when to cut your losses. That's what we didn't understand
in Vietnam.''

But many lawmakers argued that withdrawing the troops now would be ''the worst
possible thing we could do,'' in the words of Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. ''It
would be heartwarming to the terrorists of the world,'' he added.

Should Not Leave, Baker Says Howard H. Baker Jr. of Tennessee, the Senate
majority leader, sounded a similar theme when he said of the troops: ''We should
not leave at the point of a gun. I stoutly resist the idea that we should
unilaterally and immediately remove them.''

But even supporters of the President, such as Senator Baker, say there has been
a ''vast change'' in the mood of Congress in the last three weeks, since it
approved legislation authorizing the President to maintain the marines in
Lebanon for 18 months. Accordingly, Mr. Baker said, a basic re-evaluation of the
American position in the Middle East is likely.

In an attempt to find a middle ground between the current military presence in
Lebanon and a total withdrawal, many Congressmen suggested today that the United
States explore ways of replacing its troops with those from other countries, who
might be less tempting targets.

''Not many people are talking about unilateral withdrawal,'' Senator Baker said
in an interview. ''But a lot are talking about how we can spread the load and
share the burden of responsibility.''

The Administration sent Secretary of State George P. Shultz and Secretary of
Defense Caspar W. Weinberger to Capitol Hill today to answer questions and try
to calm the revolt brewing among many members of Congress. According to
lawmakers who heard them, the two officials argued strenuously that the presence
of American troops in Lebanon is necessary to preserve stability not only in
that country but throughout the Middle East.

Bipartisan Policy Cited

That argument has strong appeal to members of Congress, such as Representative
O'Neill, who believe firmly in a bipartisan foreign policy and in the use of
American power in critical parts of the world. At a news briefing, Mr. O'Neill
defended the President's policy and said, ''We're committed to the Middle
East.''

Like the Administration, Mr. O'Neill casts the struggle in Lebanon as a battle
between Washington and Moscow. He said today that if the troops were withdrawn,
''It would be a victory for our adversaries, particularly Russia and Syria,
which is acting as a satellite of Russia.''

Senator John Tower, the Texas Republican who heads the Armed Services Committee,
added that withdrawal of the marines would open up a vacuum in the Middle East
and ''could mean another war.''

But that line of argument perturbed many lawmakers who feel that it commits the
United States to open-ended involvement in the Middle East. In a dramatic moment
today, Representative Sam Gibbons, a Florida Democrat, took the House floor and
said, ''I have only three words to say: Lebanon, Reagan's Vietnam.''

Many lawmakers came out of the Administration briefings with deeper anxieties
about the Middle East. In their view, the Administration simply repeated the
arguments it used three weeks ago, without taking the new conditions into
account.

''Very frankly, the Administration is not saying much at all,'' said
Representative Jim Courter, a New Jersey Republican. ''In my view, the
Administration doesn't have 20 votes in Congress for keeping the marines there
in their present location.''

Shocked Voiced on Security

Many lawmakers expressed shock that security arrangements were not tighter in
Beirut, and they demanded the troops be deployed in a more secure area.
Representative G. V. Montgomery, a Mississippi Democrat, suggested that they be
removed to naval vessels stationed offshore.

Tonight, Mr. O'Neill met with a group of Democrats assigned to monitor the
events in Lebanon and said afterward that the safety of marines in Lebanbon was
''our No. 1 one priority.'' He said the lawmakers had some ''tough questions''
about the collapse of security in Beirut and would meet again after the Marine
Corps Commandant, Gen. P. X. Kelley, returns from his visit there.

A senior Democrat in the House, who did not want to be quoted by name, said
angrily, ''I think the marine command has some serious questions to answer about
the deployment of the marines.''

Representative Dick Cheney of Wyoming, the third-ranking member of the House
Republican leadership, said after the briefing: ''I don't come away reassured.
Obviously, a lot more thought needs to be done.''

Mr. Cheney, like many lawmakers from both parties, says the Administration must
provide a more acceptable rationale for keeping the troops in Beirut. ''It's
imperative that the Administration explain what they're doing there and why, and
how the marines related to that,'' he said.

''A few weeks ago,'' he added, ''people had a lot of questions, but they didn't
voice them. But the massacre has led a lot of members to ask questions they
didn't previously. There's no consensus yet on a change in policy, but there are
a lot of questions, and a lot of people re-evaluating their positions.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of George Shultz

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FAMILIES AWAIT WORDS TELLING OF LIFE OR DEATH

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1272 words


The names of men killed in Sunday's terrorist attack in Lebanon began reaching
grief-stricken families in the United States yesterday, but hundreds of families
continued to wait in an agony of uncertainty for word on the fate of their loved
ones.

As military officers and chaplains started calling at the homes of those who
lost sons, husbands, fathers or brothers, the tense wait was ended by a knock on
the door, a brisk salute and the quietly spoken words: ''I regret to inform you.
. . .''

''I saw the uniform - at that point I knew why they were here,'' said James J.
Langon 3d of Lakehurst, N.J., whose son, Lance Cpl. James J. Langon 4th, a
Marine cook, was killed in the attack.

''As soon as I saw those two marines coming up to the door I knew,'' said Letha
Kimm of Atlantic, Iowa, after learning that her son, Sgt. Edward Kimm, 33 years
old, was dead. An older son, Clarence, was killed in Vietnam in 1967, she said.


Believed in His Mission

''We're so proud of him,'' Jean Camara, of Hinton, W.Va., said of her son, Cpl.
Mecot E. Camara, another of those killed. She said her 22-year-old son, who was
married and the father of an 18-month-old boy, strongly believed in the marines'
mission in Lebanon, but it was a belief that she did not share.

''I feel that the boys should be brought home,'' she said last night, her voice
breaking with emotion. ''There have been too many American boys lost. But that
was not my son's position, and I respected that. It's because of him and people
like him that America is a great country.''

Of the 192 marines and sailors known dead, many were still unidentified
yesterday, partly because personnel records were lost in the explosion that
destroyed the Marine barracks in Beirut. The Pentagon released the names of 12
of the dead whose families had been notified.

The notification process was being carried out by 30 teams of officers and
chaplains working in 12-hour shifts, and it was expected to take several days.



The Anguish of Doubt

For dozens of the families, the hours of tension were broken with word that a
marine or sailor had been wounded but was alive. But for most of the hundreds of
families, there was no news - a mixed blessing that kept hopes alive but also
preserved the anguish of doubt.

The family of 24-year-old Lance Cpl. Thomas Alan DiBenedetto of Mansfield
Center, Conn., was one of the first to be notified of a death. No statements
were issued by his father, Dr. Anthony T. DiBenedetto, vice president of
academic affairs at the University of Connecticut at Storrs, and his mother,
Rose Marie DiBenedetto.

But some grieving families spoke of their lost loved ones.

''It's like a bad dream,'' said Shirley Trahan of Lafayette, La., who had waited
up all night with her husband, Percy, for news of their son, Pvt. Lex David
Trahan. At 5 A.M., she said, three marines arrived to informed them of his
death.

Last Letter to Mother

''He was going to be 20 on Jan. 14,'' Mrs. Trahan said. ''He was an only child.
I don't think they would have sent him there, but since he volunteered they let
him go. And him being an only child I knew I had to let him go sooner or later.
I told him he was mature enough to make his own decisions. I told him, 'Son,
you're grown now.' ''

The last letter from Pfc. Rui A. Relvas to his mother, Josephine, in
Philadelphia, arrived at noon yesterday, several hours after she learned from
two Marine officers that he had been killed. On the back of the envelope,
Private Relvas, who had been scheduled to come home Nov. 10, had written: ''From
Lebanon. I love you.''

Clutching a picture of her son, Mrs. Relvas, dressed in black and crying, read
some of her son's last words. ''Don't write any letters after 10th of November.
Will see you.''

''And now,'' she said, ''I'll never see him again.''

The family of 21-year-old Pvt. Michael Devlin of Westwood, Mass., received word
of his death in the morning from two officers and a local minister.

His brother, Richard, 28, told of the letters that Private Devlin, who was due
home in three weeks, had been writing home lately.

Told Us Not to Worry'

''He was becoming concerned as sniper fire increased, and rocket fire was
plaguing them,'' Mr. Devlin said. ''He was concerned, but he wrote that he felt
he was very safe and told us not to worry.''

In Rockford, Ill., Dorothy Olson told of the letters she had received from her
stepson, Lance Cpl. John Tishmack, 19, of Minneapolis, one of those killed. ''In
his last letter, he was just telling us about what he was doing and that he
would be coming home in November.''

Kathy Cain was at home in Camp Lejeune, N.C., when she learned around 9:30 A.M.
of the death of her husband, Hospitalman Jimmy Ray Cain, 20, of the Navy. Family
members said he was near the end of a three-year tour of duty and planned a
medical career.

Mrs. Cain called her mother-in-law, Doris Collins of Gardendale, Ala., who
collapsed and was taken to a hospital by friends and family members who had
waited with her through the night.  When she returned home later in the morning,
a Navy officer was waiting to inform her officially of the death.

While there was little to ease the suffering of those who were notified,
military officials said medical personnel and psychiatric counselors would be
made available to aid any of the families.

In some homes, the day's tension was broken by sobs of relief and laughter as
word was received of a marine or sailor who was safe or wounded but alive.
Usually the news came by telephone, but in some cases an officer brought word.

Jane Diaz of Chicago, the wife of Cpl. Steven Diaz, got a 3 A.M. visit from
Marine officers, who told her that her husband was wounded but alive.

'No Business Being There'

''They should all get out of there,'' Mrs. Diaz said later, referring to
Americans in the multinational force in Lebanon. ''They have no business being
there.''

For a few families, the news that a relative was alive came by chance - in
pictures in newspapers or on television.

In Poughkeepsie, N.Y., Greg Boone, an editorial assistant at a newspaper,
recognized Lance Cpl. Morris Dorsey, 20, in a press photograph. They had
attended school together. Mr. Boone took the picture, showing Corporal Dorsey in
a stretcher, to his family, whom he found huddled around a television set hoping
for news.

''That's my son!'' Katie Moody shouted. ''He's alive! He's alive!''

Charles and Ann Madaras of Potomac, Md., saw their son, David, in another press
photograph, and Rose and Bennie Harris of Woonsocket, R.I., saw their son on
television as he was being carried away from the devastation on a stretcher.

But for most of the families of the marines and sailors in Lebanon, there was no
word, and the long day of terrible doubt became an effort to keep the fear and
anguish at bay. Many prayed. Many filled their time with the routine of chores.

''I've been working around the house, cleaning up and trying to keep busy,''
said Harold Montgomery, a bank officer in Austin, Tex. ''We sort of figure no
news is good news.''

''It's agonizing just waiting like this,'' said Charles Cavarello of Johnston,
R.I., whose son Michael is a lance corporal in Beirut. ''You just sit here
waiting to see if a Marine Corps staff car drives up. There isn't anything else
you can do.''

Many of the families, tormented by uncertainty, made frantic calls to
Washington, to be told they would be notified only in cases of death or injury.
There would be no announcements about personnel who were unhurt, Government
officials said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of marines preparing list of casualties

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

MITTERRAND VISITS BEIRUT BARRACKS

BYLINE: By JOHN VINOCUR

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1046 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Oct. 24


President Francois Mitterrand flew to Beirut today to inspect the destroyed
French paratroop barracks there, then returned home tonight to a country
saddened by French losses in Lebanon but not pressing for the withdrawal of its
troops.

Expressions of grief and outrage were repeated about the bombing Sunday that
killed 23 French soldiers and left 36 missing, but there were few calls to pull
out the French force, whose continued presence in Lebanon was promised tonight
in a statement by Mr. Mitterrand. The casualties were the heaviest taken by
French troops since the end of the Algerian War more than two decades ago.

Mr. Mitterrand's unexpected trip to Lebanon - he left from Paris at 2 A.M. this
morning - was regarded in part as an attempt to head off possible opposition to
continued French participation in the multinational force by the Communist
Party, a Government coalition partner, and by the left wing of the President's
Socialist Party.

Only Limited Criticism

By the time of his return to Paris at 7 P.M., Mr. Mitterrand appeared to have
succeeded in turning the French role in Lebanon, in the near future at least,
into a fait accompli. His trip and the French troops had gained the support of
the conservative and moderate opposition parties, if in a grudging context, and
had roused only limited critical comments from the left.

''On Monday,'' wrote Agence France-Presse, ''French public opinion did not
follow in the footsteps of American public opinion, still traumatized by the
Vietnam War and quick to question the utility of the marines in Beirut.''

Because most of the French casualties involve conscripts who had volunteered for
service in Beirut with their parachute regiment, it seemed likely that the
effect on opinion here of the new deaths would be more palpable than the 16
suffered in Lebanon earlier in the year, mainly by members of the Foreign
Legion.

But French correspondents interviewing families of the dead tonight were
reporting only about sorrow and not making clear the extent of parents' and
friends' anger, if any, with the Government and its policies.

A Historic Role

Looking pale and somber, Mr. Mitterrand read a brief statement to reporters
tonight at Elysee Palace, re- emphasizing, in relation to his decision to keep
French forces in Beirut, that France had a long historic role as a protector and
benefactor of Lebanon.

''I say to everyone that a country is great by the force of its spirit, by its
resolve and by the friendship and respect that it merits,'' the President said.
''That's why in Lebanon, France remains and will remain faithful to its history
and its engagements.''

Mr. Mitterrand went on, ''In defending as it does elsewhere the principles of
national independence and the balance of forces in the world, France is
defending nothing else than peace.''

Aides to the President said his staff had been in contact with the White House
and had agreed to a meeting this week at a still undecided place to discuss the
future of the mulitnational force with the three other participants - the United
States, Britain and Italy.

One Cabinet-level adviser dismissed as ''flatly wrong'' a French news account
that the Government was concerned about possible American reprisal attacks that
could serve as a serious provocation in the area. ''So far,'' the adviser said,
''coordination with the Americans is perfect.''

No Moves of Affix Blame

The French were avoiding fixing blame for the bombing attacks at the American
and French headquarters. Although Mr. Mitterrand's aides did not say it
directly, it was thought that they believed little could be gained by affixing
responsibliity for the attack if nothing effective could be done to punish the
perpetrators.

Mr. Mitterrand was expected to be careful in coming days to distinguish the
independence of the French role in Lebanon from that of the United States in
order avoid attacks from the left coinciding with the Socialist Party convention
at the end of the week.

The French presence in Lebanon, however, appeared unthinkable without that of
the United States alongside it. Because of this, the Government was faced with
the task of coordinating its position with the Americans, who it considers to
have taken sides with the Government of President Amin Gemayel, and maintaining
the stance that the French troops are allied to none of the warring groups in
Lebanon.

Mr. Mitterrand's position had the support of the countries main editorial
voices. Le Monde criticized what it called American mistakes and the United
States' failure to make its peace plan work in the region, but added, ''This
crime is a horrible blow for the France and the United States, for whom dignity
and good sense rule out capitulation.''

'Thing You Must Never Lose'

Serge July, editor of the left-wing daily Liberation and one of the most
influential French political commentators, said the Government's task in
justifying its presence would be a difficult one. He stressed, however, that
''repatriating the troops after this wound is simply surrender, it's losing face
in a region of the world where above all it's the thing you must never lose.''

At the same time, the general tone of French commentary emphasized the
difficulties of situation, stressing that chaos and the desintegration of
Lebanon could follow a withdrawal of the Americans and the French. Such a
situation was described as a potential domestic political disaster for the
Mitterrand Government.

One of the strongest statements in favor of maintaining French troops in Lebanon
came from Jean-Marie Cardinal Lustiger, the Archbishop of Paris, who said he
hoped the ''test French public opinion is now undergoing will not lead to a
cowardly abandoning of the goal of peace.''

Opposition to the continued French presence came from the country's largest
labor union, the Communist-led General Labor Confederation, and from the
Communist Party and political groups to its left.

Mr. Mitterrand, in his seven-hour stay in Beirut, inspected the ruined French
headquarters and met with the French commander to discuss means of improving
security for the French forces. He also talked to Mr. Gemayel and paid a
condolence visit to United States Marine headquarters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of President Mitterrand

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
U.N. Chief Says Plight Of Cambodia Is Worse

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 171 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 24


The situation in Cambodia is deteriorating in the absence of progress toward a
peaceful settlement of the Vietnamese occupation, Secretary General Javier Perez
de Cuellar said today.

In a report to the General Assembly, Mr. Perez de Cuellar said the interest of
the Cambodian people would be ''best served by a peaceful solution reached
through a process of negotiations.

''I am convinced that the continued absence of concrete progress toward that
goal can only generate further tension and bring about a new deterioration of
the situation,'' Mr. Perez de Cuellar said.

The assembly will debate Cambodia on Tuesday.

Soviet-armed Vietnamese troops invaded Cambodia in late 1978 and overthrew the
Government of Pol Pot. At least 180,000 Vietnamese troops are occupying the
country.

The assembly voted three resolutions, in 1979, 1980 and 1981, calling for
withdrawal of foreign troops from Cambodia, the restoration of sovereignty and
territorial integrity and the rights of Cambodian people to self- determination.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM EDITORIALS ON THE BOMBING OF MARINE HEADQUARTERS IN ;
BEIRUT

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 964 words


The Philadelphia Inquirer

Tragically it is time to recognize that there are honorable tasks on this earth
that cannot be completed. That if there were 16,000 U.S. Marines committed to
peacekeeping in Lebanon - instead of the 1,600 who were there before 6:20 Sunday
morning and those who now remain alive - they could not impose order, political
stability, on the warring, hating, barbarous factions that are there. Nor,
finally, could 160,000.



The Boston Globe

Whatever comes of investigations, grieving American families know only that
their loved ones died in a helpless way in a seemingly hopeless cause.



The Central Maine Morning Sentinel, Waterville, Me.

All the choices are bad, but we think those which include leaving the Lebanese
to fend for themselves are worse than those in which we stay.



The Kansas City Times

If the President cannot outline the need for American troops in Lebanon and
explain why they must stay there for a while in the light of the present rate of
sacrifice, then the Marines might as well come home now. What happened in
Vietnam a decade ago has not been forgotten by forces in the world that would
gain immensely from American isolationism. The country waits on Mr. Reagan for
information, reassurance and direction.



The Milwaukee Sentinel

The opportunity for an honorable withdrawal may, in fact, have passed. It is
tragic folly, however, to leave our men in Lebanon under the vulnerable
circumstances that now exist. Practically speaking, the proximity, numbers and
experience of Israeli forces give them a much better chance to put a lid on the
current situation in Lebanon. And given the history of U.S. assistance to the
Israelis, it is only fair that they be called upon to assist our Marines.



The St. Louis Post-Dispatch

Sending in the Marines was a gamble that could only pay off in the original
terms of helping to establish a peaceful Lebanon, if indeed that is possible. At
this point, the administration ought to be clear on what it really wants in that
tragic little country.



The Atlanta Constitution

If the choice is to pack up and leave, then the consequence easily could become
a Syrian-Israeli war over Lebanon - in the short term less costly of American
lives, of course, but risking in the long run an extremely dangerous U.S.-Soviet
confrontation in which neither superpower feels it can afford to see its
regional client humiliated, or even frustrated. And in the course, Lebanon would
be even more grievously bloodied than it already has been. In such set of bad
choices, and active U.S. role would appear to be more responsible, not least for
the Lebanese, who otherwise face the prospect of interminable, multisided civil
war and probable partition.



The Lincoln (Neb.) Journal

For the mourning moment, with flag at half-staff, it is steady as she goes for
the United States and the Reagan Administration. But the urgency for diplomatic
progress is now in sharper focus than ever.



The Minneapolis Star and Tribune

Despite the sorrow, the peacekeepers will continue - for a time - trying to
maintain an island of reason in Lebanon's seas of madness. But Sunday's tragedy
adds bloody weight to the argument that the time should be short.



The Washington Post

For a power with America's responsibilities, it is inconceivable to hand the
bombers the victory they sought by pulling the Marines out. American influence
throughout the region could collapse.



USA Today

We are caught in a cruel vise. We cannot flee Lebanon and leave it to the
vultures who now rejoice over the torn flesh of our fallen troops. Nor can we
turn our Marines into warriors killing in the name of peace. We must, of course,
continue to press for the involvement of a United Nations peacekeeping force
that would allow us to withdraw.



The St. Paul Pioneer Press

We're not ready yet to join the chorus of those calling for the President to
bring back the Marines. With reconciliation dialogue expected to begin soon in
Geneva, there remains hope that the warring factions can at least begin to lower
the tensions and move toward a stable government.



The Baltimore Sun

Any U.S. withdrawal under pressure from Lebanon could unleash conflicts and
upheavals beyond prediction. Therefore, the Reagan Administration must redeploy
and protect the Marines in Beirut in ways that constitute a show of strength,
not weakness - and in ways that reassure a troubled people.



The Sacramento (Calif.) Bee

The tragic death of more than 200 U.S. Marines and French soldiers emphasize
anew the need for the White House to spell out clearly to Congress and the
American people just why the Marines are remaining in a dangerous, exposed
defensive posture that will inevitably cost more lives.



The Anniston (Ala.) Star

Should the Marines remain in Beirut? Only if the situation allows the
international force to perform its original function. The Lebanese factions are
scheduled to meet in Geneva this week to try for some sort of national
reconciliation. If this process begins and seems to hold some hope for peace and
unity the Marines should remain and help. If, however, the meeting doesn't take
place, or fails in its purpose, the Marines should come home. They can make no
contribution during continued civil war in Lebanon.



The Greensboro (N.C.) Daily News

If the President does not change course he risks a Vietnam-style commitment.
Instead of using the Marines to help carry out his Middle Eastern policy, he may
begin to shape his Middle Eastern policy around the Marines. The President can
avoid that tragic state by extricating the Marines from Lebanese soil as quickly
as it can honorably be done.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
MARINE OF A NEW ERA

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 618 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 24


Sen. Paul Xavier Kelley, Commandant of the United States Marine Corps, is known
as a committed officer who genuinely cares for his troops.

He has a flair for language and is never afraid to say what he feels. General
Kelley displayed both of these qualities in remarks to reporters before taking
off for Beirut from Andrews Air Force Base outside Washington this morning.

''I've been a marine for all of my adult life,'' General Kelley said. ''And,
yesterday, I have to say to you in all sincerity and honesty, was the hardest
day of my life.''

'Pay Respects to Our Dead'

General Kelley, sent by President Reagan to Lebanon after the suicide terrorist
attack on the United States Marine base in Beirut, defined his mission as ''what
any commander would do as a marine, that's to go and pay my personal respects to
our dead, to visit with some of those who have been seriously injured, and also
to visit with those that will remain.''

He added, ''I would simply ask that all Americans this evening, with bended
knee, thank God that this country of ours can still produce young Americans who
are willing to lay down their lives for free men everywhere.''

General Kelley, a 54-year-old Bostonian, is a tall, barrel-chested man with
thinning reddish hair closely cropped up the sides of his head and a gravelly
voice that can usually be heard without benefit of microphone. He is known
throughout the military service as ''P. X.,'' a play on the military jargon for
post exchange.

He is married to the former Barbara Adams and they have a married daughter.

Product of Korea and Vietnam

The general, who became Commandant of the Marine Corps on July 1, represents a
new era in the nation's top military leadership, an officer who is a product of
the Korean and Vietnam wars. Unlike his predecessor, Gen. Robert H. Barrow,
General Kelley did not serve in World War II.

He was commissioned a second lieutenant in June 1950, just as the Korean War
broke out. He did not see action in Korea as he was assigned to the Second
Marine Division at Camp Lejeune, N.C.

From August 1965 to August 1966, General Kelley fought as a battalion commander
in Vietnam, earning promotion from major to lieutenant colonel and winning four
combat decorations, including a Silver Star, a Legion of Merit and two Bronze
Stars. In 1970 and 1971, as a colonel, he commanded a regiment in Vietnam and
won his second Legion of Merit.

General Kelley also has wide experience in other branches of the military
service.

Served With British Commandos

As an exchange officer he served with British commandos in Aden, Singapore,
Malaysia and Borneo in 1960 and 1961. He was the senior Marine Corps
representative in the Army's Infantry School at Fort Benning, Ga., from 1966 to
1968, and was a ''Distinguished Graduate,'' the military equivalent of high
academic honors, of the Air War College at Maxwell Air Force, Ala., in 1969.

In 1980, as a lieutenant general, he was named the first commander of the Rapid
Deployment Force, since renamed the United States Central Command, at MacDill
Air Force Base, Fla. The new force, which includes Army, Navy, Air Force and
Marine Corps personnel, is intended to defend United States interests around the
Persian Gulf if military force is needed in that region.

He was promoted to general and became Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps
in July 1981.

Among the new Commandant's first actions was to visit the marines in Lebanon,
where he warned the militant Lebanese factions ''not to twist the United States'
tail too hard'' and thus force the marines to retaliate.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of General Paul X. Kelly

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

DEMOCRATS EXPECT TO CAMPAIGN ON LEBANON ISSUE

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 758 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 24


Aides to Democratic Presidential candidates and party officials said today that
in the aftermath of the bombing of the Marine headquarters in Beirut the Reagan
Administration's policies in Lebanon would serve as a major issue in the
campaign.

Although Democratic Party officials had expected Central America to dominate
foreign policy issues in the campaign, the devastating attack in Beirut, in
which at least 192 American servicemen died, led virtually all Democratic
candidates to re-evaluate their strategies and to criticize the role of the
United States in Lebanon.

Perhaps the most outspoken Democratic Presidential aspirant, Senator Ernest F.
Hollings of South Carolina, said today that the ''deployment of American troops
in this type of situation borders on the criminal.''

'Sitting There, Hunkered Down'

''All they are doing is sitting there, hunkered down at the end of a runway,
waiting to be killed,'' he said. ''We are showing not our mettle but our
stupidity. Even in war you do not deploy your soldiers in such suicidal
situations.''

Several other candidates echoed comments by Senator John Glenn of Ohio that the
Reagan Administration must ''present to the American people and the Congress a
clean and well-defined statement of our mission in Lebanon, including the likely
scope and duration of our role.''

Unlike Mr. Glenn, however, such candidates as former Gov. Reubin Askew of
Florida and Senators Gary Hart of Colorado, George McGovern of South Dakota and
Mr. Hollings urged the withdrawal of American troops from Lebanon. ''Our marines
there are more target than deterrent,'' Mr. Askew declared.

Senator Alan Cranston of California urged the withdrawal of the Marines ''to a
more defensible position offshore.'' He said: ''We should not immediately
abandon the peace efforts in Lebanon. But it is absurd to think that 1,200 U.S.
Marines pinned down at the Beirut Airport can achieve the Reagan
Administration's goal of establishing a sovereign Lebanon free of all factional
strife.''

Mondale Withholds Comment

Former Vice President Walter F. Mondale, one of the Democratic Party's leading
Presidential contenders, took a cautious stance and refrained from public
comment today. Mr. Mondale canceled a luncheon speech before Jewish leaders in
Washington and met with advisers throughout the day to weigh a response, which
he will probably make Tuesday at a news conference in Chicago. The advisers
included Robert Hunter, a Middle East specialist who served on the National
Security Council in the Carter Administration.

Maxine Isaacs, Mr. Mondale's spokesman, said that the candidate wanted to
refrain from making a comment ''for a day or so, out of respect for the marines
who were killed.'' She added: ''He doesn't sense any public receptivity to
engage in a policy debate today. His views and disagreements are known.''

Several weeks ago Mr. Mondale said that in Lebanon ''we have troops but no
policy,'' and urged ''negotiations and compromise from Lebanon's principal
political and religious groups to broaden the base'' of the Government of
President Amin Gemayel.

Major Issue, in Party's Eyes

Bernard Aronson, director of policy for the Democratic National Committee, said
party officials were convinced that the Administration's policies in Lebanon
would emerge as a major issue in the Presidential campaign.

''The conduct and purposes of the Reagan foreign policy have been a developing
issue in this campaign, and the latest events in Lebanon will accelerate that
trend,'' Mr. Aronson said.  ''If there's one lesson of the Vietnam War, it is,
when you project American forces abroad you need to define a clear goal, muster
the resources to achieve it and explain your purposes in a way that wins support
from the Congress and the American people.

''In many arenas, and most visibly in Lebanon, the Administration has failed to
do any of these things,'' Mr. Aronson said.

Mr. Glenn, who canceled a day of campaigning in Georgia and flew to Washington
to attend closed briefings and meetings of the Foreign Relations Committee, said
U.S. forces must be ''realistically sized'' to carry out their mission in
Lebanon, and urged the use of United Nations and multinational forces to
''internationalize the situation.''

In an interview, Mr. McGovern said: ''The Administration's policy is to be
resolute. Well, resolution isn't a policy. It's a style, a performance mode.
Resolute for what? What are we resolved to do? That's the unanswered question.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 26, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AGONY OF LEBANON IS FELT IN CONNECTICUT

BYLINE: By SUSAN CHIRA, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 764 words

DATELINE: NAUGATUCK, Conn., Oct. 25


Schoolchildren passed around Dwayne Wigglesworth's picture and talked about why
people were killing one another in Lebanon. Older men talked about why the young
always had to die, and young boys talked about whether they would have to fight,
too.

Lance Corporal Wigglesworth, 19 years old, died Sunday in Beirut, a victim of
the terrorist bombing against the Marines. Today, as word of his death spread,
people here thought of how they could comfort members of his family, who live in
this town of nearly 30,000. Neighbors and strangers called the Wigglesworth
home, offering help or bringing food.

The fighting in Beirut came home to this town Monday morning, when three marines
in dress blues knocked on the door of the Wigglesworths' home to tell them what
they had been praying not to hear.

''The first reaction is anger, hatred, all the frustration,'' said Henry
Wigglesworth, Corporal Wigglesworth's father. ''There are a lot of whys, a lot
of questions, and we haven't had the answers yet to give anybody else.''

The Wigglesworths have seven other sons and one daughter. Robyn, 21, is a marine
stationed in Japan. Gary, 22, is in the Army, stationed at Fort Bragg, N.C.

Gary and Dwayne spent the last month before Corporal Wigglesworth was sent to
Beirut ''fishing and enjoying each other,'' their father said.

Today Robyn arrived home to be with his family, and Corporal Wigglesworth's
death was the topic of conversation at shoe stores and stationers, at schools
and at City Hall.

''It's not only people outside that we don't know getting killed,'' said Paul
DeFranzo, 18. ''It's somebody from your own hometown. It makes you think even
harder.''

''I feel sorry for people who have to suffer because it's in the family,'' said
Robin Henao, a 13-year-old seventh grader at the Hillside Middle School. Her
teacher passed Corporal Wigglesworth's picture around her social studies class
and read them news of Lebanon from the newspaper.

Five flags surrounded the war memorial in the center of the Town Green. On the
memorial are inscribed the names of other Naugatuck residents killed in foreign
wars. Scores died in World War II, five in Korea and six in Vietnam. For many,
the new death brought with it memories of other times local boys had died, of
other times of waiting to hear news of relatives.  ''When something like this
happens, it brings back all you've been through,'' said Daisy Ostrander, who has
lived here for 42 years.



'It Really Tears People Apart'

She remembered neighbors putting gold stars in their windows to honor their sons
or husbands who died, and packed memorial church services. She remembered
waiting in the days before Japan's surrender for news of her husband, on his way
to Japan on a battleship. Her husband and four brothers served in World War II,
and one brother served again in Korea.

''Whether it touches you personally or not, it really tears people apart,'' she
said.

Early this morning, Joseph Rossi, owner of Rossi's shoe store, discussed how to
help the Wigglesworths with Tom Hennick, editor of The Naugatuck Daily News. Mr.
Hennick said he had thought the town might want to contribute to a scholarship
in Corporal Wigglesworth's name, or see if the family needed other assistance,
but he said he would not approach the Wigglesworths until they had had time by
themselves.

For now, Mr. Wigglesworth said, the only help he is asking is for neighbors to
let their State Representatives know whether they believe the Marines should be
in Lebanon.

''We feel the public is the same as us,'' he said, ''that we shouldn't be there
in this kind of fish-in-the-barrel situation.''



Struggling to Make Sense

Perhaps because the death had come to someone they knew, people struggled to
make sense of the killing in Beirut. At the shoe store, Peter Muhall fitted
customers for shoes while talking about Lebanon.

''My brother's a marine, and he cried over this,'' said Rita Pascel. ''He won't
even listen to the radio now.''

''Do these men know what they're fighting for?'' Mr. Muhall asked.

''I don't know what we're there for,'' Mr. Rossi said. ''It'll never be solved
because it's religious. It's something we didn't go to war for.''

''It's like Vietnam,'' Mrs. Pascel said.

George Kwasniewski, a former marine, came by to fix a leak in Mr. Rossi's roof.

''Everyone feels bad,'' he said. ''I was 19 when I was in the Marines. They
should either protect them and let them fight, or they should take them back.
You can read it in the newspaper, but this brings the reality back home.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Dwayne Wigglesworth (page A7); photo of George and Walter
Kwasniewski and Joseph Rossi (page A7)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 26, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

1,900 U.S. TROOPS, WITH CARIBBEAN ALLIES, INVADE GRENADA AND FIGHT ;
LEFTIST UNITS; MOSCOW PROTESTS; BRITISH ARE CRITICAL

BYLINE: By MICHAEL T. KAUFMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1631 words

DATELINE: BRIDGETOWN, Barbados, Oct. 25


An assault force spearheaded by United States troops invaded Grenada before dawn
today and soon seized both of the island's airfields. But the advance of the
invaders, who included contingents from seven Caribbean nations, was reportedly
slowed in the afternoon by heavy fire in the capital.

According to military and intelligence sources in the Caribbean, the initial
landings were made by helicopter. Fire from armed Cubans met those landing at a
jet runway being completed by Cuban workers at Point Salines, four miles south
of St. George's, the capital.

In the initial contact, 12 Cubans were killed and 24 captured, according to
officials of the Barbados Government, one of the contributors of troops to the
invading force.



Russians Reported Seized

The United States contingent consisted of marines and army rangers. At least one
marine was reported here to have been killed; in Washington the Defense
Department put the number of Marine dead at two.

Radio stations here reported that 30 Soviet advisers to the Grenadian Government
had been seized. But officials here said they could not confirm that report.

By this afternoon, a source who had returned from Grenada reported that the
invading force had established a perimeter that included the southern half of
St. George's. The part of the city held by the multinational force included the
deep-water harbor, the Prime Minister's residence and the Grenada Beach Hotel,
the former Holiday Inn, which had been occupied by Cuban workers and Cuban
troops.

Prime Minister Edward P. G. Seaga of Jamaica, whose country also had troops in
the invading force, told the Jamaican Parliament in Kingston in the afternoon
that ''all major objectives'' had been secured. He identified these as the two
airfields; the two campuses of the St. George's University School of Medicine,
where about 500 Americans are enrolled; the power station, and the broadcasting
station. He reported also that three civilians had been killed.

Military analysts here, however, said it was likely that Cuban troops, whose
numbers have been variously estimated between 500 and 1,000, had retreated into
the heavily populated northern sector of the city, where any combat would
involve sniper fire and house-to-house fighting.

The assault force that landed at the Point Salines airstrip moved to the capital
in armored cars and jeeps. But its advance was reported slowed in the afternoon
when it came under fire from the area of the central post office, which lies
across the half-moon harbor known as the Carenage.

Some fighting was reported at Fort Rupert, the Grenadian Army headquarters on a
steep hill above the port. But reports received here conflicted on whether the
installation had been seized from Cuban and Grenadian forces.  Firing was also
reported from Fort Cedric on the outskirts of the city.

A second part of the invading force was positioned at Pearls Airport, 13 miles
north northeast of St. George's. This force was expected to advance toward the
south.

Figures on Force Differ

According to information available here, the assault was staged by at least 500
United States marines and army rangers and 300 soldiers from Barbados, Jamaica,
Antigua, St. Vincent's, St. Lucia, Dominica and St. Kitts- Nevis, with about
1,500 Americans in a backup force offshore. These figures differed from totals
given in Washington by Government officials, who said that about 1,300 marines
and rangers landed in Grenada and were later reinforced by 300 Caribbean troops.
The officials said that 600 marines remained in reserve aboard the helicopter
carrier and amphibious ship Guam.

The invasion force was reportedly assembled on short notice from bases more than
a thousand miles apart. Some of the United States troops reportedly came from
Puerto Rico, some from Panama. Trucks and armored vehicles as well as concertina
tents were flown to the Grenada headquarters from both Barbados and Trinidad.
Armored cars and jeeps were flown to Barbados in an almost nonstop shuttle
beginning this morning from Fort Polk, La.

Jamaican troops arrived in Barbados aboard an Air Jamaica airliner.

Trinidadian Leads Force

The Grenada operation, which was set in motion Monday after consultations here
between Prime Ministers Seaga of Jamaica, Eugenia Charles of Dominica and J. M.
G. Adams of Barbados and the United States Ambassador, Millard Bish, was
commanded by Col. Ken Barnes, a Trinidadian serving in the Jamaica Defense
Forces.

At dawn today, Colonel Barnes was aboard the United States aircraft carrier
Independence but soon shifted over to the Point Salines airfield on Grenada,
which is now the headquarters for the multinational force.

Additional troops and equipment, including a portable radio station, were flown
to the island early this morning. The United States is supplying most of the
materiel as well as the bulk of the forces.

On Monday, hours before the invasion, a Cuban vessel, the Vietnam Star, which
had been tied up in the St. George's harbor, pulled out to sea, and Western
sources here speculated that it might have taken some Cuban troops as well as
some of the hard-line Grenadian Marxists whose power struggle with the leftist
Prime Minister, Maurice Bishop, precipitated the chaos on the island. Mr. Bishop
and more than 40 other Grenadians, including most members of his Cabinet, were
killed by Grenadian troops last Wednesday.

According to sketchy reports from Grenada being relayed here by Barbadian
military spokesmen, the resistance to the invading force was conducted today
mostly by Cubans. Mobilization orders have been broadcast over the last two days
by the official Radio Free Grenada, but only a few Grenadian miltiamen
reportedly have responded.

The station went off the air today after broadcasting the news that the island
had been invaded. It came back on briefly on a new frequency, leading Caribbean
broadcasters in Barbados to believe that it had moved to the Soviet Embassy,
which is in the northern part of St. George's. But broadcasts halted again this
afternoon.  Today's invasion was applauded by officials of the Organization of
Eastern Caribbean States, which had appealed for United States help in dealing
with Grenada, and by groups of Grenadian exiles.

''All we have wanted was a free Grenada and it appears that we now have a
Grenada that is free,'' said a spokesman for the Grenada National Democratic
Movement who held a news conference here to discuss the island's eventual return
to democratic and civilian rule.

Vaughan Lewis, the director general of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean
States, said the military action had been taken because the countries of the
region had grown alarmed ''at the military buildup in Grenada'' which he said
posed a threat to the stability of the region. He said the countries had called
for help from the United States in accordance with the terms of a treaty
empowering them to organize their collective defense.

It was decided Monday to alert units for a possible invasion after United States
diplomats who had visited Grenada returned with reports that the Revolutionary
Military Council there appeared to have retreated from earlier pledges to
facilitate the departure of those Americans, Britons and Canadians who wished to
leave.

Change of Mind Reported

According to a source close to the Government here, the United States diplomats
had been told over the weekend that foreigners would be free to leave on
commercial flights. By Monday, the Grenadians had reportedly changed their minds
and said that six- hour advance notification had to be given for any flights.

They also said that their forces would not be able to guarantee the safety of
the foreigners during the 13-mile ride to Pearls Airport. According to the
source, it began to appear to some Americans that because of the very weak hold
of the Grenadian military, which had scant public support, the Grenadian
officials were moving toward effectively keeping the foreigners as hostages,
either to permit the Cubans and Soviet advisers time to extricate themselves or
to shore up the faction-ridden and chaotic Government.

In his televised statement in Washington this morning, President Reagan alluded
to the question of the thousand Americans on the island by saying the United
States had moved to ''restore order and democracy.'' He made it clear that there
were political considerations in the American participation and that these had
as much to do with the decision as the safety of the Americans, most of whom are
students at the St. George's University School of Medicine.

Here in Barbados, the initiative has been received with great enthusiasm. All
day, radio talk shows have been carrying messages of congratulations phoned in
by people all over the Caribbean. Calls to people in Grenada, made at random and
broadcast on the radio, drew invariably happy responses from people who said
they looked upon the invasion as a rescue.   SUB GRENADA TYPE for big ed Puerto
Rico and Barbados: 1,200- member Marine unit reportedly assembles in Panama and
in Puerto Rico, while 700 Army Rangers are said to leave from Barbados; 300
soldiers are provided by Organization of Eastern Caribbean States.  Pearls Field
and Point Salines: 500 marines arrive at international airport. Simultaneously,
1,000 Army Rangers land near Point Salines, where 600 Cubans are building a
second airfield. 600 marines remain on helicopter carrier offshore.  St.
George's: Invaders reportedly seize most of southern half of capital, where
Cubans had been living.  True Blue: The St. George's Medical School campus there
is secured by invaders, and Cubans reportedly retreat north.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Prime Minister J.M.G. Adams (page A17); photo of President
Reagan and Eugenia Charles; photo of Gen. Hudson Austin; map of Grenada

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 26, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FEAR IS COMMON THREAD THAT RULES IN LEBANON

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 877 words

DATELINE: BEIRUT, Lebanon, Oct. 25


The Lebanese people have responded to the bombing attacks Sunday on the
headquarters of the American Marine contingent and the French force here with
intense sorrow and despair. But the strongest emotion in this long-beleaguered
city appears to be fear.

What they fear depends on who they are, where they live and what their political
and religious affiliations are.

Despite President Reagan's strong declaration that the United States was
committed to keeping its contingent in the multinational force here, many
Lebanese said in interviews today that they were afraid America would tire of
its involvement and abandon them.

''It would be very dangerous - a disaster for us, really - if the United States
forces left,'' said Lina Murad, 19 years old, a student at the American
University of Beirut. ''Who would protect us then?''

No 'Margin of Security'

Others said the bombing incidents terrified them because the attacks had proved
that no one, not even a superpower, was invulnerable in Beirut.

One Arab analyst said that what the death of more than 200 American marines
''says to us is, my God, if they can't defend themselves, how will they ever be
able to defend us?'' He said that earlier ''some of us had deluded ourselves
into thinking that the American presence provided a margin of security.'' But
that myth, he said, has been shattered.

Some expressed fear that the United States would retaliate for the terrorist
attack in a way that would lead to an increase in the violence here.

''We all want America to continue to play its very useful role here,'' said Sam
Seblani, a spokesman for Amal, the Shiite Moslem organization that is a party to
the cease-fire agreement, ''but rash retaliation could create enemies here, not
friends.''

Might Create a 'New Vietnam'

''Expanding their presence could be very dangerous for them, and might wind up
creating a new Vietnam here,'' Mr. Seblani added.

Some viewed the bombing attacks as an indication that the Lebanese conflict had
already been expanded into a contest between the superpowers.

Adnan Kassar, president of the Chamber of Commerce of Beirut, said:

''No small group could have planned an operation as precise and ambitious as
that. Maybe the Soviet Union was involved. That would mean that this was no
longer a regional conflict but an international confrontation. That makes many
of us in the business community very anxious.''

Mr. Kassar also expressed fear that the attack would destroy business confidence
that was required to rebuild Lebanon. Confidence plummeted with the bombings
along with the Lebanese pound, he said.

But, he said, President Reagan's declaration of support for keeping marines in
Lebanon helped raise the value of the pound from 5.28 to the dollar two days ago
to 5.16 today. He termed the continued presence of the multinational force,
especially its American contingent, ''critical to economic recovery.''

Meeting in Geneva

Many businessmen and spokesmen for political groups expressed concern about the
impact of the bombing incident on Lebanon's future, and specifically, on
prospects for the national reconciliation talks among representatives of the
Government of President Amin Gemayel and Lebanon's warring factions scheduled to
open in Geneva on Monday.

''We're still very afraid that the meeting will not take place,'' said Mr.
Kassar.

A Lebanese Christian spokesman said that whoever was responsible for the bombing
attacks - ''and we believe that it was the Syrians'' - made it clear that they
were ''willing to go to great lengths to prevent national reconciliation from
taking place.''

''If the meeting does not take place, or if it does not succeed,'' said Mr.
Seblani, the Amal spokesman, ''the bombing raid clearly signals that the
military route will be taken.'' He added, ''This time, the fighting will be even
more fierce, because every side is extremely well armed now, and because it will
be a fight for our survival.''

For a few Lebanese, the bombings and the publicity they received stirred
resentment.

'They Died for an Abstraction'

A man identifying himself only as Mohammad said that on the day of the attacks
''the Israelis killed three Moslems and wounded 22 in Sarafand in southern
Lebanon.'' But he said the talk was only about the marines.

Other Lebanese said they had grieved deeply over the incident.

''I felt even sorrier for the marines than I do for us,'' said Alia Naser, 18, a
student at the American University of Beirut. ''This wasn't even their country.
They died for an abstraction called peace in Lebanon.''

Have Lebanese become inured to the violence and death here? Was this just one
more bombing - albeit a large one - in a seemingly endless series of terrorist
attacks?

''No one in the world can become inured to death on this scale,'' said Kamal
Salibi, professor of history at the American University of Beirut. ''I've lived
through nine years of it. Every incident is worse than before. The more it
happens, the less you can stand it, the more your nerves are rattled, the more
you know that it has become a way of life.''

''Yes, you learn to live with the danger, but that doesn't make it any more
palatable,'' he added.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 26, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

INVASION TROOPS TRAINED TO MAKE SURPRISE RAIDS

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 446 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 25


The United States troops who invaded Grenada early this morning consisted of
marines and Army Rangers, units trained for such operations. Rangers are
soldiers specially trained to fight in small groups and to undertake surprise
raids in any terrain or weather.

Government officials said in press briefings today that about 700 Rangers and
1,200 marines of a Marine amphibious unit landed in the island. The officials
said some of the Rangers parachuted into the Point Salines area near the
southern end of the island. If so, this would be the first combat jump by United
States airborne troops since the Vietnam War, when such jumps were a sparingly
used tactic.

The marines were landed by helicopter in a more conventional air-mobile assault,
officials said. Some Rangers were taken in by planes after the Point Salines
airstrip had been secured by paratroops. About 600 marines remained in reserve
on the helicoper carrier and amphibious ship Guam.

2 Ranger Battalions

There are two operational Ranger battalions in the United States Army, the First
Battalion stationed at Fort Stewart, S.C., and the Second Battalion stationed at
Fort Lewis, Wash. Together, the units make up the 75th Ranger Regiment, which
represents all the operational Ranger troops in the Army.

Many other officers and enlisted men in the Army go through the nine-week Ranger
training course and are then assigned to more conventional units. There are also
mobile Ranger training teams that give special training to troops in infantry
and armored divisions.

The Rangers' name is derived from Roger's Rangers, a group of expert woodsmen
commanded by Maj. Robert Rogers in the French and Indian Wars. The term was
subsequently applied to United States military units from time to time in the
Revolutionary War and in the 19th century.

In World War II, six Ranger battalions were formed to undertake operations
similar to those of the British commando units. Ranger companies were
reactivated in 1950, but then for a time Ranger-trained troops were scattered
throughout regular units rather than in Ranger units.

The Rangers are light infantry who carry little in the way of heavy support
weapons. All are jump-qualified parachutists. Those in Ranger units or training
units wear a distinctive black beret when not in combat.

The Marine amphibious unit that is fighting in Grenada had been scheduled to go
to Lebanon and relieve the Marine unit in Beirut. An amphibious unit has five
tanks, five 155-millimeter howitzers, eight 81-millimeter mortars and four Cobra
helicopter gunships. The infantry companies are also equipped with amphibious
armored personnel carriers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 26, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

DEFENSE DEPT. SAYS THE MARINES AND RANGERS QUICKLY ACHIEVED INITIAL GOALS



BYLINE:
By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1183 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 25


Defense Department officials said today that the 1,900 United States marines and
Rangers who invaded Grenada early this morning had quickly achieved their
initial goals and had suffered ''minimal'' losses of two dead.

It remained unclear late today how long it might take the invading force to
achieve its ultimate goal of full occupation of the 20-mile-long island, which
has a population of 110,000. Pentagon sources said the force had run into some
stiff pockets of resistance, including several armed Cubans.

Extremely tight secrecy surrounded the invasion and not until 9 P.M., more than
15 hours after the start of the invasion, did the Pentagon issue is first combat
communique.

'Operation Will Continue'

The communique said: ''United States armed forces, in conjunction with forces of
other countries of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean Countries, have just
concluded their first 12 hours of operations in Grenada. Resistance has been
encountered, but most objectives have been taken. Consideration for the
operational security of the mission prevents release of detailed plans,
objectives and the total for U.S. personnel ashore. As of 3 P.M. today, we can
confirm 2 American military killed and 23 wounded. Over 200 armed Cubans have
been taken prisoner. The operation will continue.''

The force's initial goals were the island's two main airports and the campus of
a university where about half of the 1,000 Americans in Grenada have been
studying. There were no reports of injuries among the students.

One of the airfields, at Point Salines on the southern end of the island, has a
10,000-foot runway, built by Cuban workers sent to Grenada by Fidel Castro.
United States military officials viewed the strip as a potential threat to
stability in the Caribbean because they said it could be used by any plane in
the Soviet military.

Debris Cleared From Runway

The strip was seized by a force of 700 Rangers, according to Pentagon officials.
They said the initial group dropped in by parachute, secured the airport
perimeter and then cleared off some obstructions that had been put on the runway
so that the remaining Rangers could be brought in by plane.

When the Rangers ran into antia ircraft fire as they went in, the officials
said, it was supressed by a supporting flight of AC-130 gunships, four- engine
transports fitted with rapid-firing machine guns. Once the airport was secure,
the officials said, the Rangers began to push toward the capital of St. George's
and the university campus, more than five miles to the north.

The second airport, at Pearls on the northeastern coast, was seized by marines
who went in by helicopter from an invasion fleet of about a dozen Navy ships.
There were about 600 marines in that force, with 600 others remaining behind on
the ships to serve as reinforcements. Initial reports were that the
reinforcements were not needed.  The fleet included the aircraft carrier
Independence, which normally carries about 70 combat planes, as well as a
cruiser and several destroyers capable of providing supporting gunfire for
troops ashore. There were no confirmed reports of naval guns or carrier planes
having been used. The marines were supported by their own helicopter gunships.

Carribean Troops Take Part

As soon as the American force achieved its initial goals, Pentagon officials
said, 300 troops from the seven Caribbean nations were moved in. The officials
said those troops would probably be used as security forces.

Defense Department officials were under orders from Gen. John W. Vessey Jr.,
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, not to talk about the invasion except in
the broadest terms. In the final hours leading up to the invasion there was so
much secrecy that at one point Pentagon officials put out misleading and
contradictory information about the disposition of some of the Navy ships
carrying the Marine landing team.

Throughout most of the day, there were periodic reports - all unconfirmed - that
the American troops were down to cleaning out isolated pockets of resistance,
that several American helicopters had been shot down, that at least one American
unit was under under heavy mortar attack and that carrier air strikes had been
called in.

1,200 Grenadian Soldiers

Arrayed against the invasion force, Pentagon officials said, were 1,200
Grenadian soldiers and at least 2,000 armed militamen.

Some of the 600 Cubans on the island, perhaps 50 of them military advisers, also
engaged the Americans at one point, Pentagon sources said.

The Pentagon sources said some of the Cubans were eventually overrun and
captured. According to an unconfirmed report, at least three Cubans were killed.

The Pentagon sources also said American troops had taken 30 Soviet Embassy
personnel into temporary custody in St. George's.

Preparations for a Week

Preparations for the invasion had secretly been under way for the better part of
a week, and possibly longer, officials said.

Some Government officials said the Navy conducted an exercise in the Caribbean
about two years ago that had almost the same scenario as the invasion today.
That exercise called for an invasion by marines and Rangers of an island on
which some Americans were being held against their will. As in today's
operation, the initial goal of the exercise was the island's major airports.

The Rangers involved in today's invasion were members of the 75th Ranger
Regiment, stationed at both Fort Lewis, Wash., and Fort Stewart, S.C. In
preparation for the attack, they were flown first to United States military
installations in Puerto Rico and then, after a brief rest, were flown directly
to Grenada.

The marines, members of the 22d Amphibious Unit, took a more circuitous route.
Initially, Pentagon officials said, they were to go, along with the carrier, to
the Mediterranean to relieve the Marine force stationed in Lebanon. The fleet
sailed from Norfolk, Va., on Oct. 17 and made a brief stop at Morehead City,
N.C., to pick up the troops, who were at nearby Camp Lejune.

Diverted to Grenada

A Navy announcement at the time said the marines were headed for Lebanon. But at
the end of the week, word leaked out that it had been diverted toward Grenada.

Navy sources said the diversion was only a precautionary move. But that
assertion began to be questioned late Monday when a group of fully armed marines
unexpectedly flew into the Barbados airport on a transport plane, then just as
mysteriously left by helicopter.

Asked Monday about the marines in Barbados and the progress of the fleet of
ships headed toward Grenada, Pentagon officials said they could not comment on
the Barbados incident. As for the fleet's progress, they said it had changed
course and was again headed toward Lebanon.

Today's invasion marked the 11th time since World War II that marines have gone
ashore on foreign soil in an effort to restore peace or protect lives. For the
Rangers, it was their first combat parachute operation since the Vietnam War.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 26, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

TOLL IN BEIRUT BLAST EXCEEDS ANY SINGLE VIETNAM INCIDENT

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 521 words


The death toll from the terrorist attack on United States marines in Beirut is
far greater than in any similar incident in Vietnam.

In fact, on only one day in the entire Vietnam War did the nationwide total of
American casualties exceed the 216 American marines, sailors and soldiers
reported killed so far in Beirut on Sunday, according to Defense Department
records. An estimated 20 to 30 bodies were reported still buried under the
rubble in Beirut.

The largest number of Americans killed on a single day in Vietnam occurred Jan.
31, 1968, at the start of the Communists' nationwide Tet offensive, when 246
Americans died. On Feb. 23, 1969, 208 Americans died in action in Vietnam.

But none of the Vietcong terrorist incidents, some of which contributed to the
Johnson Administration's decision to increase American intervention in Vietnam,
were on the scale of the Beirut attack.

American Compound Destroyed

In perhaps the most politically significant terrorist incident in Vietnam,
Vietcong guerrillas infiltrated and blew up a United States compound at Pleiku
in the central highlands in the early morning of Feb. 7, 1965. Nine American
servicemen were killed and 107 were wounded in the attack and 10 aircraft were
destroyed.

McGeorge Bundy, President Johnson's national security adviser, was visiting
Saigon at the time and used the attack to urge the President to begin bombing
North Vietnam. American bombing raids, from a carrier in the South China Sea,
followed within hours.

The Johnson Administration and United States officials in Saigon had earlier
been angered when two Vietcong saboteurs blew up the Brinks Hotel in Saigon on
Christmas Eve, 1964. Two Americans were killed and 58 wounded in that incident.

In a new book, ''Vietnam: A History,'' by Stanley Karnow, the author tells of
interviewing one of the saboteurs during a 1981 visit to Saigon, now known as Ho
Chi Minh City. The former guerrilla, Thanh Xuan, said he had been given his
orders by an intermediary the month before.

Mingled With Soldiers

The two men reconnoitered the target, mixing easily with the crowds that filled
the busy street outside, and noting that South Vietnamese officers mingled
freely with the Americans. After buying South Vietnamese uniforms on the black
market, Mr. Xuan said, his comrade disguised himself as a South Vietnamese army
major, while Mr. Xuan dressed as his chauffeur. They filled the trunk of their
car with explosives.

Then, on the afternoon of Dec. 24, in Mr. Karnow's account, the ''major'' drove
up to the Brinks Hotel and asked to see an American colonel that Communist
intelligence knew had left Vietnam.

After telling a desk clerk and a policeman they would wait for the colonel to
return, the two men calmly walked to a nearby cafe and awaited the powerful
explosion.  In June 1965, Vietcong terrorists also planted a mine at a floating
restaurant in Saigon, killing 44 people, including 12 Americans.

But after the Tet offensive in 1968 the Vietcong were severely weakened and the
number of terrorist attacks in the cities fell off sharply.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 27, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. BARS COVERAGE OF GRENADA ACTION; NEWS GROUPS PROTEST

BYLINE: By PHIL GAILEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1474 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 26


For the last two days, the Reagan Administration has barred reporters from
Grenada and imposed extraordinary restrictions on news coverage of the military
invasion of that Caribbean island.

As the military operation by United States and Caribbean forces continued for a
second day, President Reagan said through a spokesman that reporters would be
allowed onto the island when American military commanders determined that
conditions were safe for them. Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger said he
hoped the island could be opened to reporters as early as Thursday.

Until late this afternoon, when Secretary Weinberger and Gen. John W. Vessey
Jr., Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, provided the first detailed briefing
of the operation at a news conference, reporters here and elsewhere had found
themselves relying heavily on ham radio operators and Radio Havana for reports
on conditions on the island.

It was ham radio operators who reported today that six journalists, including
four Americans, had landed on the island in a chartered fishing boat. First
reports said the journalists had been taken to the St. James Hotel in St.
George's, the capital, but later reports said at least four of them had been
taken from the island by American forces to the carrier U.S.S. Guam.

Meanwhile, the Federal Communications Commission moved to clamp down on ham
operators, who have been providing much of the information to the press and the
public about the situation in Grenada. William Russell, a spokesman for the
commission, said some of the operators had been using unauthorized frequencies
to pick up broadcasts from the island, and that the commission had started
monitoring operators for such violations.

Defense Department officials who spoke on the condition that they not be named
said that Britain's tight control over press coverage of its war with Argentina
over the Falkland Islands last year had made an impression on some American
military commanders, particularly General Vessey. He has told reporters in the
past that he believes there is too much news coverage of the military.

''The President and Secretary Weinberger are backing their commanders on this
thing,'' one Defense Department official said.

During the war over the Falklands, British reporters were allowed aboard British
ships in the early days of the war, and were eventually allowed onto the islands
with the invasion force. Their reports, however, were censored by British
authorities.

There was no United States censorship in the Vietnam War. To get credentials
from United States military authorities, reporters had to sign a pledge not to
disclose in advance troop movements, exact casualty totals and certain aspects
of military operations.

At today's news conference, Mr. Weinberger said the operation's military
commanders had decided they did not want reporters along, and he added that he
''wouldn't ever dream of overriding a commander's decision.'' He added, ''Their
conclusion was that they were not able to guarantee any kind of safety of
anyone'' because of uncertainty over what kind of conditions they might
encounter.

'Need for Surprise'

Asked if there was concern about how the public might react to television
coverage of the fighting, General Vessey said: ''I think one of the most
important reasons that we didn't is the need for surprise in this operation. We
were going in there very quickly and we needed to have surprise in order to have
it successful.''

The only pictures of the fighting in Grenada so far have been made by Defense
Department photographers with the invasion force. The film is expected to arrive
in Washington by Thursday night at the earliest, and the Pentagon will then
decide which pictures will be released.

Some of the country's major news organizations, including most of the television
networks and wire services, had protested the news coverage restrictions in
letters to President Reagan and other Administration officials.

In a letter to Mr. Weinberger, Edward M. Joyce, president of CBS News, wrote,
''I would like to protest the attitude expressed by your Public Affairs office
as indicated in the statement to our correspondent Bill Lynch that 'we learned a
lesson from the British in the Falklands.' ''

Howard Simons, managing editor of The Washington Post, said: ''I'm screaming
about it because writing letters takes too long. I think a secret war, like
secret government, is antithetical to an open society. It's absolutely
outrageous.''

Mr. Simons said one of his newspaper's reporters, Edward Cody, was among the six
journalists who reached Grenada by boat. He said he had been told that Mr. Cody
had been taken off the island to the carrier Guam. Also reported to be on board
the carrier were Don Bohning of The Miami Herald, Morris Thompson of Newsday and
Bernard Diederich of Time magazine. The identities and whereabouts of the other
two journalists in the group could not be established.

Strenuous Protests

Seymour Topping, managing editor of The New York Times, said, ''We have
strenuously protested to the White House and the Defense Department about the
lack of access to the story in Grenada by our correspondents who are waiting on
Barbados. We also are disturbed by the paucity of details about the operation
released by the Pentagon at a time when the American people require all the
facts to make judgments about the actions of our Government.''

President Reagan said reporters will be allowed on Grenada as soon as conditions
there are calm enough to be ''consistent with safety requirements agreed to be
the Defense Department,'' according to Larry Speakes, the chief White House
spokesman. Mr. Speakes relayed that word this afternoon, after he had agreed to
take a request directly to the President from the White House press corps that
reporters be permitted into Grenada.

Mr. Speakes said that another concern had been that ''the presence of media
there could distract commanders.'' That view was echoed by a senior Defense
Department official, who said that the invasion was a commando- type operation
that does not lend itself to what he called ''the tender loving care and feeding
of the press.''

Acrimonious Briefings

Mr. Speakes' afternoon briefing was no less acrimonious than the morning
session, as reporters asked for details on the invasion and were referred to the
Pentagon. In particular, the reporters were frustrated in their attempts to
track details of the Administration's reported eleventh-hour diplomatic response
to possible attempts by the revolutionary council on Grenada to discuss
safeguarding the Americans there.

Confusing and fragmentary information was offered, and Mr. Speakes, complaining
about the accuracy of some news reports, ultimately refused to take additional
questions from one reporter he considered annoying. ''I'm tired of dealing with
you,'' he said.

''You're carrying your management's water on this thing,'' he said to another
reporter, who had asked why reporters could not go to the island.

News reporters were concerned at having been misled by the White House's flat
denials of initial invasion reports, a situation Mr. Speakes said was not
intentional. He was asked whether the Administration policy was to be selective
in telling the truth. ''The policy of the White House is to tell the truth,''
Mr. Speakes replied.



'Damn Few Precedents'

Jerry W. Friedheim, a former Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs,
said ''there are damn few precedents'' for continuing the news restrictions
beyond today. Mr. Friedheim, who is now executive director of the American
Society of Newspaper Editors, said news coverage of the invasion would make it
easier to the Administration to win public and Congressional support for the
operation.

Mr. Friedheim said that the Kennedy Administration, in a post-mortem of the
Cuban missile crisis, concluded that it had made a mistake by not allowing
reporters aboard the ships involved in the blockade of Soviet vessels headed for
Cuba with missiles.

There was no press coverage of the Bay of Pigs invasion, primarily because of
the nature of the operation. It was a covert, CIA-supported effort using Cuban
exiles.

In 1965, however, when President Johnson sent marines into the Dominican
Republic, there was press coverage from the beginning.

A former senior Defense Department official in the Carter Administration, who
spoke on the condition he not be named, said, ''I can't recall an overt military
operation of this sort not involving some sort of press coverage, at least a
press pool. This is very unusual.'' Television news organizations this week made
the events in Grenada and Lebanon the subjects of instant foreign policy
analysis. Page C31.



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of the Caribbean, showing route of some journalists

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 27, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ESSAY;
TWO-FRONT PEACE

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 808 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 26


American military power is winning a victory in the Caribbean after suffering a
humiliating defeat in Lebanon.

The Grenada operation was well- conceived militarily (enough force in a
contained area, with adequate reserves ready to conclude a clear mission) and
well-planned diplomatically (with a request for action by neighboring islands,
and their local Caribbean forces participating).

The justification given was imminent danger to a thousand Americans after a
Communist clique murdered the Government leaders, but a better reason became
apparent after we landed: The resistance put up by hundreds of Cuban soldiers
shows that Grenada was already under the military domination of another country,
with more troops probably on the way. That island (its name from the Latin
granum, meaning grain, which led to ''pomegranate'' and then to the similarly
shaped ''hand grenade'') had already been invaded; our objective, as in Lebanon,
is to get foreign forces out and leave.

The only lapse of judgment apparent in this necessary regional defense was in
the Pentagon's unprecedented decision to bar reporters from covering a U.S.
invasion. That stamps every move after the initial landing as secret, makes
suspect every Pentagon press release, and plays into the hands of the defeatists
and isolationists horrified by every use of fire to fight fire.

''We don't have enough men to protect television cameramen, lighting crews and
the like,'' Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger tells me. ''I don't want to
do anything that weakens the ability of our men to do the job.'' Asked if the
presence of reporters weakened General Eisenhower on D-Day, the unflappable Cap
says: ''It's not a matter of censorship. I just don't second-guess our
commanders in the field.'' In this case, the commander who preferred freedom
from the press seems to have been Adm. Wesley McDonald.

Otherwise, the operation to free Grenada is worthy of respect, in contrast to
the anger that should be directed at the Defense Department for the incredibly
complacent and tragically incompetent planning for U.S. Marine security at our
base in Beirut.

After a car bomb destroyed the U.S. Embassy there, and with our forces under
sniper fire, it was logical to assume that Syrian-directed forces would try to
blow up our headquarters with their usual technique. Instead of dispersing our
men within a ''hard'' defense perimeter and setting up adequate barriers at
entry points, as Americans learned to do in Vietnam, we relied on mere chain-
link fences and wrought-iron gates that never could stop a truck. There are
reports that our guards were told not to carry loaded weapons.  We paid for this
bungling with over 200 lives. The smoothover began with Secretary Weinberger's
statement that ''nothing can work against a suicidal attack like that,'' and his
dispatch of the Marine commandant to inspect Marine security. As expected, Gen.
Paul Kelley arrived in Beirut spouting the party line that ''if you have a
determined individual who is willing to . . . give up his life,'' the terrorist
will succeed - ''so let's not blame the security measures.'' Asked about this
rush to no judgment by the investigator, the Secretary of Defense snaps: ''If
you're asking if I have a court-martial proceeding under way to get some of the
men who weren't killed, the answer is no.'' He adds, less testily, ''I'm not
prejudging anything, but I'm not interested in a sensational procedure. We will
put into effect several recommendations he brings back.'' Proof that the
security measures were to blame, along with the Syrian controllers of Iranian
and Libyan terrorist groups, will be seen in those new security measures,
including armored cars blocking entry points. Did we really have to wait for a
military defeat to become prepared?  The bombings of U.S. and French
headquarters were not senseless, cowardly attacks on civilians; on the contrary,
they were deliberate military actions directed at military targets with a
mission of driving non- Arabs out of Lebanon. If the Department of Defensiveness
cannot recognize its own failures, and is unwilling to correct the top brass
responsible, then Congress should step in.The victory in Grenada is taking place
after the defeat in Beirut; the ability demonstrated by the U.S. to react to
provocation militarily will not be lost on the Syrians.  In Lebanon, our mission
should not be to find a fig leaf of a decent interval to withdraw our forces, as
the fainthearted wish us to do. Instead we should be ostentatiously realigning
ourselves with our only reliable Mideast ally, Israel, to serve warning to the
users of terrorists that bloodshed will not go unpunished nor further buildup
for occupation tolerated.  That is when our easy victory in Grenada will help us
redeem our terrible defeat in Beirut.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 27, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEAR U.S. MARINE BASE, MEMORIAL FOR THE FALLEN

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 637 words

DATELINE: JACKSONVILLE, N.C. Oct. 26


The man was close to tears, but he had telephoned the local radio call-in show
this morning because he wanted to say how proud he was of the United States
Marines and President Reagan.

''After what happened in Beirut, we had our backs against the wall,'' said the
caller.''But with this thing in Grenada, it looks like we're coming out fighting
again. We're going to show them if you push us, we'll come right back and get
you.''

Michael Shadeed, who is the host each weekday morning on the ''Ask Your
Neighbor'' program on radio station WJNC, agreed.

''At this point, I don't really give a damn what the rest of the world thinks,''
Mr. Shadeed said. ''We're tired of getting kicked around and pushed around by
those little podunk countries down there.''

Pride and Delight Voiced

Most of the callers today and Tuesday, like many others across this community
made up largely of military personnel and retirees from the nearby Camp Lejeune
Marine Base, say they are proud and delighted that President Reagan is putting
his foot down in the Caribbean.

The news that marines were on the move and in action in Grenada seemed to serve
as elixir for many who were troubled and dismayed over the terrorist bombing
Sunday in Beirut, where more than 250 military personnel, most of them marines,
were killed.

That incident stirred mixed feelings and even some bitterness among marines and
their families here, who believe the marines' role in the international
peacekeeping force in Lebanon has put them in a vulnerable position. Instead of
being able to fight back, as they are trained to do, the marines have had to
stand by helplessly while unseen foes pick them off.

But the fighting in Grenada appeared to be viewed differently. ''It's just a
matter of letting them do the job they are trained to do,'' said Mr. Shaheed in
an interview. ''This is part of the gung- ho tradition of the Marines, and I
think people here are proud.''

Kind of Public Catharsis

For many, Mr. Shadeed's program has helped provide a kind of public catharsis of
some of the grief and frustration evoked by the Beirut bombing. Some merchants
who buy advertising time in the show yielded their spots this week, to allow
more time for callers.

Marine and Navy personnel assigned to Beirut are stationed here at Camp Lejeune,
and many have families in the Jacksonville area, where the grief over the
incident has been especially sharp.

Many are still awaiting word from Beirut, as attempts to identify casualties
have been slowed by the fact that many men were asleep and not wearing dog tags
at the time of the explosion. The blast also destroyed personnel records.

Still, the news that husbands and sons are in combat in yet another little-
known corner of the world has added to the worry of families and friends.

''The tears just came when I heard he might be in Grenada,'' said Nancy Hunt,
whose husband, Thomas, is with the 22d Marine Amphibious Unit, which is in
action in the Caribbean. ''We have only been married for two months.''

Preference for Grenada

But like the families of many marines there, Mrs. Hunt and others say they would
rather their husbands were in Grenada than Beirut.

The marines left here last week as replacement troops for the units currently in
Beirut but were diverted to the Caribbean to take part in Tuesday's invasion.

''I am concerned about my son-in- law, but I know it's his duty,'' said C. C.
Welbourne, a retired sergeant who is a 27- year veteran of the Marine Corps and
was wounded on Iwo Jima. ''It's his job to protect those Americans down there,
and if they'd have me back, I'd want to be down there too.''

Mr. Welbourne's son-in-law, Dennis Huff, is a gunnery sergeant with 19 years of
service himself, including duty in the Vietnam War.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 27, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

More Than 600 Vietnamese Reach Indonesia on Freighter

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 160 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, Oct. 26


More than 600 Vietnamese have arrived in Indonesia aboard one of the biggest
refugee vessels to leave Vietnam since the exodus of 1979, a United Nations
official said today.

Philippe Labreveux, head of the Jakarta office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, said 605 refugees landed Oct. 17 at Galang Island
near Singapore aboard a 500-ton freighter.

He said, however, that this did not appear to herald a new wave of departures
from Vietnam and that the number of refugees was still dropping.

Diplomatic sources said two-thirds of those aboard the freighter had paid up to
about $10,000 each to Vietnamese officials for permission to leave aboard the
same vessel back in 1979.

They had planned to sail for Australia but were kept waiting four years, by
which time the condition of the ship had deteriorated, the sources said. Most of
the refugees have relatives in the United States, Canada, France and Australia,
the sources said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 27, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

OUTDOORS;
SALMON FISHING OVERLOOKED

BYLINE: By Nelson Bryant

SECTION: Section B; Page 23, Column 4; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 720 words


Tugged by the choices available to

him at this time of year, waterfowling, bowhunting for deer, pursuing ruffed
grouse over the hills or woodcock in the alder swamps, the New York State
sportsman often forgets the first-rate fall and winter angling for coho and
chinook salmon and brown and rainbow trout in the rivers and streams entering
Lake Ontario.

Although trolling the main body of the lake for salmon tends to be fruitless by
the first of October, many of those fish are now being taken both in the river
mouths and farther upstream. This is also the time when shallow trolling along
the lakeshore for both rainbows and their migratory counterparts, the
steelheads, is often at its best. And brown trout may also be taken along the
rocky shorelines by both casting and trolling. A fairly recent successful
innovation has been jigging for salmon with heavy spoons.

Acutely aware of all this is Capt. Bill Kelly of Rochester, a charterboat
skipper and vice president of the Lake Ontario Charterboat Association, who a
few days ago boated a 43- pound male chinook on 15-pound test line.

For the most part, those in his profession must be content to guide their
clients to the fish. The day the captain caught his big salmon, he had two
clients aboard. They had already caught a 22- and 24-pound chinook and told him
to take the next fish because they wanted to see how a captain did it.

Mr. Kelly was trolling a Grizzly balsa wood plug in a deep hole about a mile and
a half up the Genesee River.

''I agreed that I would fight the next fish and about two minutes later it
hit,'' he said. ''The rod popped up,'' - he was using a downrigger - ''and the
line burned off the reel. That fish ran over 300 yards upriver then turned and
did the same thing in the opposite direction. It took me about an hour to boat
him.''

For a few intoxicating hours, he

thought he might have a new International Game Fish Association (I.G.F.A.) line
class world record, as well as one of the many $1,000 cash prizes offered by
Berkley and Company. The company, manufacturer of monofilament fishing line, is
handing out the prizes to anyone who breaks an I.G.F.A. line class or all-tackle
record while using either of two lines Berkley puts out: Trilene XT World Record
or Trilene XL.

The I.G.F.A. 1983 yearbook lists a 42-pound-7-ounce chinook caught in Alaska as
the one Mr. Kelly had to beat, but a check with the organization revealed that a
64-pounder caught in Oregon had supplanted the Alaska fish.

Mr. Kelly, a Vietnam veteran who specialized in airborne assaults, including
parachuting, teaches a fishing class at a nearby community college once a week.

He notes that in his area a second big spawning run of coho salmon is expected
soon as well as great numbers of steelheads.

The steelheads always make their upriver spawning runs later than the salmon. On
the Salmon River in Pulaski, for example, what is probably the best fishing of
the year for the species in any Lake Ontario tributary occurs during the second
and third weeks of November. This can be done with flyrods, spinning or bait
casting gear. The Salmon River experienced an enormous run of cohos this fall,
the fish averaging about 10 pounds each.

The coho run in the Salmon River was so heavy that, in the first two weeks of
October, state fishery personnel transported between 1,500 and 2,000 salmon that
had reached the hatchery area back down to the mouth of the stream in order to
give river anglers another shot at them. A state record for coho, 26 pounds, was
established by a Salmon River angler this fall.

Charter rates for good-sized boats along the lake are comparable with those
charged for saltwater angling. Kelly's rates begin at $220 for one to five
anglers in his 25- foot boat for six hours. His telephone is (716) 865-3845, and
he can also put one in touch with other members of the aforementioned charter
boat association.

Various areas along the United States portion of the lakeshore maintain
around-the-clock fishing conditions hotlines. From the west end,
county-by-county, they are Niagara (716) 433l-5606; Orleans, (716) 589- 9211;
Monroe (716) 467-7320; Wayne (315) 483-4454; Oswego (315) 342-5873 and Jefferson
(315) 782-2663. These reports vary greatly county-by- county in timeliness and
relevant detail.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 27, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

TV: REPORTS AND DEBATES ON CRISES

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 31, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1044 words


IN theory, news is first; then

there is analysis. On television

this week, however, the two

marched hand in hand. Lebanon and Grenada, one a tragedy, the other a military
operation, were reported, discussed and instantly made the subjects of foreign
policy debate. On occasion, it was like a public exploration of the national
psyche.

CBS broadcast the first report of the Beirut disaster on Sunday at 2:28 A.M. ABC
and NBC had the story soon after. The death toll would mount steadily in the
days to come, but most of the details were known at once. Consequently,
television turned not so much to reporting the story as to explaining it. It was
clear there had been a disaster, but what did the disaster mean? Moreover, what
would happen next?

Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger was the first policy maker to be
questioned. On ''Face the Nation,'' at 10:30 A.M. on CBS, he said the immediate
problem had to do with protecting the Marines. He was followed by Rafic
Jouejati, the Syrian Ambassador to the United States. ''The Marines are our
brothers,'' Mr. Jouejati said, and grew testy when he was contradicted. It was
an insight into Middle East negotiations.

NBC was next with ''Meet the Press,'' with Senator Sam Nunn, Democrat of Georgia
and a member of the Armed Services Committee, who would become almost ubiquitous
on television, and Eric Rouleau, a correspondent for Le Monde. A half- hour
later, Henry A. Kissinger was questioned on ABC's ''This Week With David
Brinkley.'' Mr. Kissinger spoke about the ''balance of power.''

''I have been saying for months,'' he said, ''we either have to do more or
less.'' He seemed to suggest that the Marines should either be withdrawn or that
their numbers should be increased, and in a way it was the real beginning of the
debate. Mr. Weinberger had said on CBS that strengthening the Marines, ''adding
to their number,'' would not help them ''perform their mission.''

The next night, Tom Brokaw, the NBC anchor, referred to the Beirut bombing as
''the greatest foreign policy crisis of the Reagan Administration.'' A day
later, Dan Rather of CBS would report that Grenada ''has powerfully overshadowed
the Beirut tragedy.'' Both were right. Television focuses on a single issue at a
time, and on Monday all of television, cable and network, had been full of the
crisis.

In an interview on the Cable News Network that day, Senator Ernest F. Hollings
was passionate. In recent television appearances, the South Carolina Democrat,
who is seeking the Presidency, has been magisterial. Beirut, however, seemed to
upset him. He accused ''stripe-pants diplomats'' of placing the Marines in a
vulnerable position.

''We're like children - Tinkertoying around in the Mediterranean with all those
carriers and stuff,'' he said angrily. He did not sound magisterial, and it was
refreshing, a suggestion of how the debate sounded away from television, in the
corridors on Capitol Hill.

On the same program with Mr. Hollings, however, Senator John W. Warner,
Republican of Virginia, appeared with photographs of the Beirut airport,
solemnly explaining how the dynamite had been placed, and earnestly referring to
Lebanon as ''that little country, a symbol of peace and freedom.'' On the
''McNeil/Lehrer Newshour'' on public television, Mr. Nunn said he wanted the
United Nations or ''third-world'' forces to occupy Beirut. At the same time, he
seemed to favor a joint United States- Israeli task force.

Meanwhile, television picked up a new thread to the story: the families of the
Marines in Lebanon. It was virtually impossible to watch any news program
without seeing film of mothers, fathers and wives awaiting word, or receiving
word, about their sons or husbands. Much of the film was extraordinarily moving.
Families sat on sofas next to pictures of the Marines. Mothers read aloud from
their letters. Fathers had tears in their eyes.

Few parents who were interviewed seemed to doubt the correctness of United
States policy. On ABC's ''Nightline,'' Lynn Sherr, temporarily replacing Ted
Koppel, tried hard to get a father and mother from Moorestown, N.J., to compare
Lebanon to Vietnam.

''Peace comes very high, and we know someone has to pay with their lives,'' the
father said instead. He spoke with dignity; his faith seemed complete.

Grenada burst onto television early Tuesday. At 6:07 A.M., ABC reported that the
Marines had landed at a Grenada airport. At 6:30, NBC said the State Department
had confirmed that an invasion was under way. No reporters or cameras
accompanied the invasion, of course. If Beirut was a story without action,
Grenada was action without a way of televising the story. Again, television
turned to analysis and discussion.

NBC was particularly commendable that morning, expanding the two-hour ''Today''
by a full hour so that it could show President Reagan's news conference. Dr.
Charles Modica, the chancellor of St. George's Medical College on Grenada,
appeared on NBC at 9:25 A.M., his first television appearance of the day. He
expressed cautious doubts about the invasion, saying that he did not think the
medical students had been in danger, and became an instant celebrity, sought
after by other television programs. He appeared live and on tape throughout the
afternoon and evening.

Participants in the Grenada debate, meanwhile, were firmer and more ideological
in their positions than were the people who spoke about Lebanon. Sometimes,
however, they seemed to be quoting one another. On CNN, Senator Lawton Chiles of
Florida, a Democrat, said he had heard someone say that the Administration was
''looking for a war we can win.'' Minutes later, an expert from the Institute
for Policy Studies said, ''We're looking for a war we can win.'' The phrasing,
repeated on other programs, suggested that television was feeding on itself.

In fact, it was understandable if it did. The stories had been pervasive on
television. In general, the Grenada coverage had more reporting errors than did
the Beirut coverage - on the size of the opposing forces, for example, or on
whether one, two or three American helicopters had been forced down - but this
was because Grenada was a different kind of story.  It was one of American
television's better weeks.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition


;
LEST WE BLUNDER INTO WAR IN THE MIDDLE EAST

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 444 words


To the Editor:

To paraphrase Clausewitz, war is an extension of the political process. With
Sunday's horrifying massacre of Marines in Beirut, resulting in the largest
number of American dead since Vietnam, the American peacekeeping operation in
Beirut is slipping into that of a war operation. It is indeed time to
re-evaluate our political position vis- a- vis the Middle East before we are
engaged in an unqualified war.

When are the leaders of this country going to realize that all disputes in the
Middle East are intrinsically entwined, as are the peoples of the Middle East?
As an example, Camp David did not, could not, succeed because it attempted to
arrive at a solution that did not encompass all concerned parties. In the same
way, no solution to the Lebanese problems can be manipulated without an
understanding and concern for other Middle East crises.

The situation in Lebanon is only part of the greater parameter of Middle East
dissent. Can a solution be achieved without solving the Palestinian problem,
without coming to a resolution between Arabs and Israelis, without resolving
American and Soviet desires for areas of influence in the area? Of course not.
What happened to the Geneva peace conference? Why isn't there a greater outcry
for getting

all

 parties in the Middle East together to negotiate solutions? It won't be easy
and it won't come quickly, but isn't a conference better and more realistic than
just blundering into a war?

As someone who has a brother in the Marines, I am terrified and I am angry. I
demand, and feel I have a right to demand, that leaders begin formulating
realistic political solutions to the situation as it is, not how Americans want
it to be.  Furthermore, if marines continue as peacekeepers, we must do our
utmost to protect them. Perhaps we can't have them depart from Lebanon now
because it would be too akin to a surrender to terrorism, but we can certainly
do more to protect them. More to the point, mere retaliation for our current
anger will not solve any of the underlying problems.  My heart goes to those
killed and to their families. God knows my family doesn't want to receive that
visit that all military families dread. And let's not forget that we aren't only
talking of American dead, but also French, Lebanese, Palestinians, Israelis,
Arabs.  When is this country going to wake up and realize that we cannot
continue drifting? We can't solve the problems of the Middle East piecemeal. Now
more than ever it is time for an overview and a structured framework for our
policies in the Middle East.

MANUELA H. REYNOLDS New York, Oct. 24, 1983

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
SETTING THREE TRAPS

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 825 words


In the most agonizing week of Ronald Reagan's Presidency, he is setting for
himself three dangerous but still avoidable traps:


* His statements have not left the nation a plausible line of retreat from
Lebanon.

Instead, he declared that keeping the Marines there ''is central to our
credibility on a global scale'' because ''if others feel that they can
intimidate us and our allies in Lebanon they will become more bold elsewhere.''

This reflects the fear of most Presidents that if they withdraw even from
untenable and unwise positions, the U.S. will appear to be - in Richard Nixon's
phrase - ''a pitiful, helpless giant.'' Permeating the Johnson and Nixon
Administrations, that attitude needlessly prolonged the war in Vietnam for five
years.

Yet Mr. Reagan is unconvincing and inconsistent in explaining why the Marines
are in Lebanon. They are variously described as a peacekeeping force, when there
is no Lebanese peace to keep; as providing support for the Gemayel Government,
which governs nothing; and as protecting Israel's northern border, which Israel
protects for itself.

Such reasons may justify the risks and casualties of a small U.S. presence in
Lebanon, but they do not require the nation to pledge its ''credibility on a
global scale.'' So the President has gone further, suggesting that the Marines
are carrying out an American ''duty . . . to stop the cancerous spread of Soviet
influence'' and to prevent the Middle East from being ''incorporated into the
Soviet bloc.''

If so, then Mr. Reagan and the nation have been drawn like pitiful, helpless
giants from the small beginnings of a peacekeeping force into perhaps the
ultimate superpower confrontation. More likely, such talk is intended to justify
the Marine presence to the American public - an effort that will make it harder
for Mr. Reagan to withdraw from Lebanon if the time comes.

And it may. To keep American forces there could require that they move actively
into a civil war that could spread uncontrollably into international conflict;
or it might demand commitment of larger forces, bringing higher risks; or it
could bring an unacceptable toll of American casualties. Any of the above would
lead to Congressional efforts to force a withdrawal; that, too, would damage the
''credibility'' Mr. Reagan wants to guard.

It's neither folly nor cowardice to cut losses before they become intolerable;
and good sense will earn more credibility than useless bravado anyway. The clear
lesson of history, graphically taught in Vietnam, is that the President - in his
own mind and on the public record - should leave open the possibility of
prudent, even strategic withdrawal from Lebanon.

* By proclaiming that the U.S. intends to ''help in the restoration of
democratic institutions in Grenada,'' Mr. Reagan heightened suspicions about his
motives and may have set himself a larger task than he knows. Secretary Shultz,
more responsibly, said the objective - other than aiding Caribbean allies and
protecting Americans - was to ''establish again governmental institutions
responsive to the will'' of the island's people; the government they choose, he
said, is ''entirely up to them.'' Mr. Shultz thus cast the invasion in its best
light, as a regional security action to promote Grenadian self-determination - a
formulation that won't silence criticism but that if followed, and if buttressed
by quick American military withdrawal, is defensible. But by promising democracy
''at the point of a bayonet,'' as Senator Moynihan put it, Mr. Reagan lent
credence to charges of American imperialism and to fears that he may have the
same medicine in mind for Nicaragua.  To the extent, moreover, that his
objective is ''democratic institutions'' rather than self-determination, he may
also have committed the U.S. to a long, difficult trial. Grenadians might, after
all, choose some form of Marxism or Socialism, as do many other poor countries;
and they won't necessarily accede quickly to the wishes of the nations that
invaded them.

* Mr. Reagan's activist and confrontational foreign policy - engaging the nation
in the Caribbean while Central America is in turmoil and before the Beirut body
count is complete - may risk more than it can gain. ''We cannot pick and choose
where we will support freedom,'' he said after the Beirut bombing. ''We can only
determine how.'' The nation should have learned better than that, in the bitter
years since it welcomed John Kennedy's pledge to ''pay any price, bear any
burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe to assure the
survival and the success of liberty.'' Mr. Kennedy came to know that U.S. power,
like Soviet power, is limited and finite; and the hard lesson of his time, as of
Ronald Reagan's, is that Americans do have to ''pick and choose'' where they can
most effectively ''support freedom.'' Neither arms nor words can make it
otherwise.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

OPERATION ON GRENADA: HOW FORCES PERFORMED

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 860 words


MilitaryAnalysis

With resistance on Grenada apparently lessening, United States intelligence and
operations officers are about to reassess the strengths and weaknesses of the
armed services that took part in the invasion of the island.  One question
likely to be raised, according to an officer who did not wish to be identified,
is why it took the Americans more than two days to defeat a thousand Cubans and
a Grenadian Army of just over 2,000 soldiers. After the 800 men of the 82d
Airborne Division landed Wednesday, there were nearly 3,000 American soldiers
and marines deployed, backed by helicopter gunships.

The 300 men contributed by seven Caribbean nations were reportedly used for
police duties.

A military rule of thumb is that an attacking force should have a superiority of
3 to 1. The Americans, in numbers at least, had no such advantage when they
landed. But they did have more and better weapons and had undergone long
training.

Error in Intelligence Is Seen Some officers suggested that there had been an
intelligence error. American officials said about 1,000 Cubans had been
discovered in Grenada, 400 more than were said to have been engaged in building
the Point Salines Airport. The Cubans proved to be well-trained and fought
stubbornly.

Some of them were construction workers probably drawn from the Youth Labor Army,
a component of the armed forces that numbers 100,000 men. But the soldiers who
gave the Americans the most trouble apparently were regulars stationed in
Grenada.

Some informants said the large amounts of military equipment and ammunition
found in Grenada were evidence that Cuba intended to strengthen its garrison.
The conclusion they drew was that the American invasion had come just in time.

The Cubans apparently lacked the one weapon that could have checked the assault.
They reportedly did not have, or at least did not use, portable, heat-seeking
antiaircraft missiles.

Copters Operate With Impunity

As a result, American helicopter gunships were said to have operated with
impunity, destroying, with heavy casualties, the main Cuban position at the
Point Salines airfield, at the southwest tip of the island.

The Grenadian Army had reportedly been equipped with Soviet-made mobile
antiaircraft guns. But these were not employed either against the helicopters or
against the transports that fed the attacking forces with ammunition,
reinforcements and supplies.

Another factor likely to be studied is the behavior of troops who had previously
had little or no combat experience.

Many senior noncommissioned officers had served in the Vietnam War. So did many
of the officers from the rank of major up. But the enlisted men of that war have
been replaced by volunteers, most of whom have entered the Army and the Marine
Corps in the last four to six years.

Officers say that these men are ready for any mission. But the officers point
out that the first shock of combat is likely to slow reactions and occasionally
force mistakes.

Best Units in West Germany

The consensus among the Atlantic allies is that the United States Army's best
units are with the Seventh Army in West Germany. One exception is the 82d
Airborne Division, which is considered one of the best such divisions.

The Americans did fight under a handicap. Strongpoints in the area of St.
George's, the Grenadian capital, such as Fort Frederick and Richmond Hill
prison, could have fallen earlier had the invaders been able to call in bombers
or use heavy artillery. But senior officers ruled out the use of such weapons to
avoid killing civilians.

The helicopter gunships gave the infantry the support it needed when it faced
Cuban strongpoints. C-130 and C-5A transports landing at the new Point Salines
Airport provided logistical support.

In this respect it was a picture book operation. Officers say the operation
would have been more difficult and the role of the United States Air Force more
constrained if Soviet-made MIG jets had been deployed on the new airstrip or
antiaircraft missiles had been used.

Cuban Threat Called Averted

Defense officials said that, if the United States had not invaded Grenada and
Cuban planes had begun to use the 9,000-foot runway at Point Salines, the
strategic balance in the Caribbean could have changed. Fighter operations could
then have expanded to cover Central America and parts of northern South America.
This, the officials said, would have required a reinforcement of United States
Air Force resources in the area.

Some allied officers questioned the size of the American force deployed and in
reserve. They used the word ''overkill.''

But Americans responded by pointing out that no country ever lost a battle by
being too strong. In the case of Grenada, the Americans argue, the vigor of the
Cuban resistance showed that the Pentagon was correct in employing a relatively
large force with abundant reinforcements.

No one, an officer said, has forgotten the lesson of the abortive rescue attempt
in Iran in April 1980. That lesson, he said, was ''too little and too late.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of St. George's Grenada, showing battle sites

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

79 FEARED LOST ON U.S. SHIP OFF CHINA

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 536 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Friday, Oct. 28


A United States oil drilling ship that broke its moorings in a typhoon and
disappeared early Wednesday in the South China Sea has apparently been found
sunk with no survivors spotted so far, Western oil industry sources said here
today.

The ship, the 5,930-ton Glomar Java Sea, had been leased by the Atlantic
Richfield Corporation to look for oil under a contract awarded by China. Its
last position given was southeast of the Chinese island of Hainan.

The New China News Agency, in confirming reports of the ship's disappearance,
said Thursday that 79 persons were aboard the drilling ship. Other sources have
put the number at 80 or 81.

The ship was spotted 300 feet below the surface of the water, the sources said.
A lifeboat was also seen, but there was no indication that it held any of the
crew.

Richard Vermier, a spokesman for the Global Marine Drilling Company, which owns
the ship, said in Houston Thursday that 42 Americans were aboard. But the
industry sources today said about 25 were Chinese, suggesting that the number of
Americans might have been higher.

The ship, which had stopped drilling before it was hit by the tropical storm,
reported in its final radio message on Wednesday that it was listing to 15
degrees starboard. A vessel from Singapore subsequently reported picking up a
faint distress signal, which indicated that the ship was about 60 miles off
course.

The Chinese had mounted an extensive search for the vessel, dispatching 11 naval
and commercial ships as well as some aircraft. They were joined by at least one
United States Navy reconnaissance plane from the Philippines.

The location where the drilling ship apparently sank has not been disclosed, but
the industry sources believed it was near the 3,500-square- mile block that
China awarded to Arco for drilling 13 months ago. The New China News Agency
suggested yesterday that the ship might have been carried by winds and currents
toward the waters claimed by Vietnam southwest of Hainan.

The 400-foot ship, which is capable of drilling to a depth of five miles, was
dispatched to Chinese waters after Arco in September 1982 became the first
United States oil company to be allowed by the Chinese to drill for offshore
oil. It crossed the Pacific and arrived last January.

The Chinese press reported earlier this week that in the last six months, Arco
completed two exploratory wells south of Hainan, one of which was expected to
yield 1.2 million cubic meters of natural gas a day.

The China National Offshore Oil Corporation was quoted by the New China News
Agency Thursday as saying that the drilling ship had disappeared in ''a typhoon
of hurricane force.''

''Judging from the wind and water flow at the time, it said, the American
drilling ship most probably has drifted west of the Yingge Sea,'' the New China
News Agency reported. The Yingge Sea is the Chinese name for the waters south of
Hainan and west of Vietnam.

China decided to invite Western oil companies in to explore for offshore oil to
accelerate its modernization drive and generate more hard currency. Over 40
foreign oil companies have done exploratory work off China's coast though not
all have been awarded contracts.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Glomar Java Sea; map of South China Sea, showing location of
oil drilling ship

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 29, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. PRESS CURBS: THE UNANSWERED QUESTIONS

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 942 words


NewsAnalysis

WASHINGTON, Oct. 28 - Major news organizations across the country say that the
Reagan Administration's restrictions on reporting in Grenada are preventing
crucial information on military activity there from reaching the press and the
public.  Three days after the United States and Caribbean invasion of Grenada,
only small pools of reporters accompanied by military escorts are being allowed
to visit the island, and they are on a set itinerary. No reporters are being
allowed to remain on the island.

According to Comdr. Ron Wildermuth, director of the Information Bureau of the
Atlantic Command, who is in Barbados, Vice Adm. Joseph Metcalfe 3d, who heads
the 20-ship task force offshore, determines daily what reporters should see in
Grenada ''based on how safe he thinks it is over there.''

''Today there are 4 escorts and 24 reporters; they left at 12:15 P.M. and
they'll come out at 5,'' Commander Wildermuth said. ''Yesterday we had a pool of
12 reporters. They went to a Cuban storage area, viewed Soviet and Cuban weapons
and ammunition and supply. After that they went to a Cuban billeting area and
viewed some hostages and interviewed some American students.''

To reporters trying to describe the situation in Grenada, many pivotal questions
remain unanswered.

What is the degree of Cuban and Soviet involvement in Grenada? What is the level
of fighting? How many military and civilian casualties have there been? How have
American paratroop ers, soldiers and marines conducted themselves? To what
degree are the military forces of seven Caribbean nations involved with the
United States in the invasion? What do the Grenadian people think about the
American invasion? What do they think about the Cuban forces that may now try to
continue guerrilla activity in the island's hilly interior? Is there any
confusion among the American forces about their role or about who are enemy
forces and who are friendly forces?

Reporters and editors point out that it is unlikely that these questions and
others could be answered or even addressed in a guided five-hour tour by
military officers.

The Administration says it decided to restrict first-hand coverage because of
concern for the safety of reporters, but there are doubts in news organizations.
What seems evident to them is that in an Administration that has proved shrewd
and effective in past public relations efforts, officials are loath to repeat
the experience of the Vietnam War, when unrestrained newspaper and television
coverage resulted, in some ways, in turning public opinion against the war.

To newspaper readers and television viewers, there might seem to be only a
marginal difference between a carefully guided tour of a battle zone by military
officers and free access to the area with public-affairs officers supervising
and watching the reporters.

But to reporters the difference is fundamental and raises questions about the
difference between coverage of this military action and coverage of Vietnam,
Korea, World War II and other military actions going back many years over the
country's history.

Why the questions about the invasion would remain unanswered goes, in some ways,
to the root of how a reporter works.

In Vietnam, for example, virtually any accredited reporter could move around the
country on Government transport, seated beside soldiers and marines. Outside
major cities such as Saigon and Da Nang, reporters wanting to fly from one area
to another would linger at airstrips like hitchhikers, inevitably catching lifts
aboard aboard transport planes or helicopters. Army and Marine Corps public
affairs officers in the field often smoothed the way for reporters to move
around, sometimes warned about the dangers of a situation but rarely tried to
keep the journalist from covering or photographing a firefight.

At least 53 reporters died in Southeast Asia between between 1961 and 1975.
Reporters, who volunteered to go to Vietnam, and news organizations and networks
made it clear that the military bore no responsibility for the safety of
journalists. In fact, to gain accreditation as a reporter, which enabled
journalists to travel around Vietnam on military flights, one signed a waiver
releasing the Government from financial responsibility in the event of death or
injury.

How Information Was Gathered

The way reporters in Vietnam gained their information, which was transmitted to
the United States, was strikingly different from the way reporters are picking
up information about the invasion of Grenada.

In Vietnam, sleeping in the same barracks with troops, eating in mess halls with
lieutentants and majors, working beside soldiers in firefights, flying low in
helicopters over Vietcong territory, talking to peasants and local officials,
picking up information along the way, visiting military hospitals and talking to
doctors, reporters gleaned a sense of the war that would have been impossible
had they been carefully escorted by military officials.

For reporters it is the unexpected moments that often result in the most
accurate and informative articles for readers. One longtime war correspondent
who also covered the 1973 Middle East war recalled how he managed to meet Maj.
Gen. Ariel Sharon, who had commanded a division in crossing the Suez Canal.

General Sharon invited the reporter to his trailer and sat up part of the night
drinking cognac with him and detailing his triumphal military strategy. It was a
widely published article that would have been unthinkable had the reporter been
accompanied by an escort on a carefully planned battlefield tour.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of U.S. troops guarding three Grenadian prisoners

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 29, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

OBSERVER;
LIGHTS! ACTION! RESPECT!

BYLINE: By Russell Baker

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 745 words


In Washington there was a crisis of respect. Men who thought of themselves as
men deserving respect met at the White House. ''We are men of respect, yet we
get no respect,'' they acknowledged.

It was true. Everywhere the world saw evidence of disrespect and laughed and
said, ''The White House men are paper men of respect.'' And when it was noted
that Jeane Kirkpatrick, who is a member of the group, was a woman, the world
said, ''And Mrs. Kirkpatrick is a paper woman of respect.''

It was bad. In the first place it was a bad phrase, a weak variation on Mao
Zedong's phrase about America being a paper tiger. But Mao was dead, and the
world had no great phrasemakers left, but only Margaret Thatcher and men named
Helmut and Moscow commissars who, reliving the early days of American
television, talked like John Cameron Swayze.

But if the phrase was bad, its meaning for the world was worse. If the world
gave no respect to Washington men of respect, what hope was there for the
eventual triumph of school prayer on earth?

And everywhere disrespect was upon the face of the globe. In Lebanon the Marines
were devastated by obscure Islamic sects. In Nicaragua insolent Latin
revolutionaries cried ''Fie to your gringo C.I.A.!'' and preached the doctrine
that Babe Ruth was no better than Roberto Clemente.

Even in America there was no respect - no respect even from Dr. Spock, who was
always being arrested for climbing military fences to show how little he thought
of the White House's thermonuclear umbrella.

At the White House there was lamentation and fear for the future of the race,
and they studied the enviable success the old men of Moscow had enjoyed at
getting respect for clues about how the thing might be done.

''We could shoot down a big jetliner full of civilians to show the world how
nervous and paranoid we are,'' someone said. This was quickly rejected. The
Russians had already done it. No American man or woman of respect wanted to
flatter Moscow by copying its methods.

''Suppose we invade Mexico,'' was the next proposal. It was just different
enough from the Russians' invading Afghanistan to pass for an original idea, at
least in a world with a 15- minute attention span.

The overruling objection? Angry Mexican guerrillas might retaliate by destroying
Acapulco, thereby depriving Henry Kissinger of a lovely winter vacation spa.
Anyhow, Mexico was even bigger than Vietnam. At the mention of Vietnam everybody
shuddered. Invading Mexico looked like a ''no-win'' adventure. What was needed
was a ''can't- lose'' expedition.  ''Some place we can conquer and straighten
out for democracy in a couple of days so we can show how tough we are without
getting bogged down in a real fight'': that was the consensus. An island seemed
ideal, but Australia was ruled out because it was too big and Coney Island
because after the conquest the President might be expected to go there for a
triumphal ride on the Ferris wheel, which would make him look like too much of a
good-time Ronnie to suit his political advisers.  That's when when attention
focused on Nantucket. Only 15 miles long and 3 miles wide, it could be mopped up
in a few days. The Pentagon could persuade Martha's Vineyard, Block Island and
Cape Cod to form a Northeast Tourist Resort Defense Alliance. The alliance would
ask Washington to help it invade Nantucket and stop the Government there from
infecting the rest of the area with a dangerous philosophy that all streets
should be paved with cobblestones.  ''Dangerous?'' asked the President.  ''There
may be some students from the Rhode Island School of Design on Nantucket,'' said
Secretary of Defense Weinberger. ''We would certainly want to rescue them from
an island where their cars are being shaken to pieces by a Government that makes
them drive on cobblestones.'' The President's mind wandered as if often did
since the release of ''The Right Stuff.'' Wouldn't he need a new movie of his
own to wage a successful re-election campaign? Something with the flavor of the
great Southwest starring somebody like the late Warner Baxter as the young
Reagan. There would be the sound of mariachi music. What was that great mariachi
song?  He hummed softly as the National Respect Council awaited his decision.
Ah, that was it - ''Granada.'' ''All right,'' said Secretary Weinberger, ''let's
get cracking on this right away.'' And so we had the Grenada war, and Nantucket
still has its cobblestones.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 29, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

MILITARY VS. PRESS: TROUBLED HISTORY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 647 words


The Reagan Administration's restrictions on news coverage of the invasion of
Grenada has its immediate source in the military's resentment about broadcast
and published reports on the Vietnam War.

But military antagonism toward the press can be traced at least as far back as
Gen. John J. Pershing's campaign in the Philippines in 1901 and 1902 against
insurgents in the southern island of Mindanao when the War Department banned
American coverage of harsh measures against villages believed to be housing Moro
rebels.

Since the Vietnam War, officers and civilians in the Pentagon have been studying
the best means of dealing with print and broadcast journalists in a limited war
such as the Grenada operation. Their main target has been televison.

They say the nightly pictures from the Vietnam front brought home the terror of
that war to civilians and did more than any other kind of reporting to bring
about what they describe as an erosion of the war will of the American people.

Tapes Show Arms Caches

Significantly, the first television tapes furnished by the Department of Defense
on the Grenadian situation dealt not with the fighting on the island but
supported one of the Administration's chief reasons for the invasion. The tapes
showed large caches of arms and equipment that were said to have been stored in
Grenada by the Cubans for future use.

But no independent reporters were on hand to question the Army spokesmen who
said the weapons stores could arm 8,000 to 10,000 guerrillas. Other estimates
from Pentagon sources not connected with dealing with the news coverage were
that the weapons would have equipped two Cuban infantry battalions in addition
to troops that fought the Americans, or roughly a total of 3,000 men.

Britain's campaign against Argentina in the Falkland Islands last year
stimulated American planning of news coverage in a limited war. This planning
did not focus on the Grenada operation but was intended to cover such
contingencies as a war in the Persian Gulf or an extension of the fighting in
Lebanon.

When the Joint Chiefs of Staff began to plan the Grenada invasion, discussions
between British and American public relations officers about the Falkland
campaign became more detailed. At the same time and at a higher level, public
relations officers at Supreme Headquarters Allied Forces Europe at Casteau,
Belgium, began to think about the handling of news coverage in possible crisis
situations involving the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Warsaw Pact.


Falklands 'a Useful Pointer'

Discussions between these officers and civilians who had been war correspondents
disclosed no great animus toward the press. Rather, they revealed perplexity
about handling the press in a situation in which complete censorship would be
difficult to invoke and even more difficult to enforce.

A former public relations officer said ''the Falkland business gave us a useful
pointer'' on how a limited war operation might be handled. He noted that the
British kept the number of correspondents with the task force down to a minimum
and were discreet about the information they passed out. He said also that they
actively censored pictures and dispatches going back to London.

The difference between the Falklands and Grenada is that no reporters were
allowed to land with the first wave of American troops.

In the Falklands, some war correspondents were permitted to accompany the troops
that marched across East Falkland Island and attacked the Argentine positions.

In World War II correspondents accompanied troops on major commando landings and
in the invasions of North Africa, Sicily, Italy and Normandy. In those
situations, commanders were protected by complete military censorship. With the
exception of two weeks in Algiers, reporters were free to send stories on
political events.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of journalists boarding transport in Barbados

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 29, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

POLL SHOWS SUPPORT FOR PRESENCE OF U.S. TROOPS IN LEBANON AND GRENADA

BYLINE: By DAVID SHRIBMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1506 words


Substantially more Americans approve of the presence of American forces in
Lebanon than was the case a month ago, according to a New York Times/ CBS News
Poll taken after the bombing attacks Sunday in Beirut.

At the same time, while those questioned approved of the presence of American
forces on Grenada, less than a third believed that sending troops was the best
response to the crisis on the Caribbean island.

The poll reflected rapid shifts in public opinion as developments in the two
areas unfolded and as new information became available. The survey was taken as
the death toll rose in Lebanon, as American forces consolidated their position
on Grenada and as President Reagan, in a televised address Thursday night,
sought the support of the American people for his policies in both places.

However, the poll, a sample of 1,093 adults interviewed by telephone on
Wednesday and Thursday, indicates that 50 percent of Americans do not believe
that the marines can help keep the peace in Lebanon. It also indicates that 45
percent of the public blames poor security measures for the death toll in
Beirut.

Marine Role in Lebanon Favored

Even so, 48 percent of the public now approves of the presence of marines in
Lebanon. Only 36 percent approved in a Times/CBS News Poll in late September.

The percentage of the respondents who approve of the President's overall
performance rose slightly, to 49 percent from 46 percent last month, but Mr.
Reagan thus far has not become the beneficiary of the sharp upturn in approval
that Presidents often enjoy after a foreign crisis. The approval rating of
President Kennedy rose after the Bay of Pigs invasion, and that of Presidents
Ford and Carter rose after the Mayag"uez incident and the seizing of the
hostages in Iran, respectively.

Although developments in the Middle East and the Caribbean appeared to have had
no significant impact on percentage of Americans who approved of the President's
overall handling of his job, the poll indicated that a bare majority of
Americans were uneasy about President Reagan's ability to act in a crisis.

The poll results, once again, seemed to underline the differences in how men and
women view the President and his conduct of foreign policy. Men, by a margin of
62 percent to 29, approved of sending American troops to Grenada, but only 41
percent of women approved while 43 percent did not.

Impact of President's Speech

Those questioned were generally more receptive to many of the President's
policies on Thursday night than on Wednesday, but the difference appeared to be
attributable less to Mr. Reagan's speech on Thursday night than to the
accumulation of news accounts. For example, the percentage of the sample who
believed that Americans were in danger in Grenada jumped from 51 to 65 between
Wednesday and Thursday night, but there was no statistically significant
difference between the opinions of those who heard Mr. Reagan's speech and the
views of those who did not.

Despite the fact that by heavily overlapping pluralities those questioned
supported the presence of American troops in Lebanon and Grenada, a slight
majority of Americans, or 51 percent, said they believed that President Reagan
was too quick to get American military forces involved in international
problems. Only slightly more than a third, or 34 percent, said they believed
that President Reagan tried hard enough to reach diplomatic solutions to such
problems.

At the same time, 39 percent of the sample said they had ''confidence in Ronald
Reagan's ability to deal wisely with a difficult international crisis.'' But 52
percent said they were ''uneasy about his approach.''

Moreover, 51 percent of Americans believed that President Reagan's advisers were
making the key decisions about serious international problems. Only 34 percent
believed that President Reagan is in charge and makes those decisions.

Issues Divide Men and Women

Grenada was not the only issue that divided men and women sharply. It was shown
on the question of overall handling of his job. Men, for example, approved of
the way Mr. Reagan has performed in office by a 54-to-35 ratio, while the rate
of approval among women was only 43 to 39.

Issues involving war and peace have traditionally produced large differences
between the sexes. That distinction showed again here. Men, by a rate of 55
percent to 38, approved of dispatching troops to Lebanon. Only 41 percent of
women agreed, while 48 percent did not.

Those questioned, however, appeared to be split about what the United States
should do now in Lebanon, with 21 percent saying that the marines should
continue their role there, 31 percent saying that the number of marines should
be increased substantially so they can attack hostile forces and 35 percent
saying that they should be withdrawn. This is similar to poll findings during
the Vietnam war when the alternatives of escalation or withdrawal often drew
more support than a maintenance of current policy.

Meanwhile, 39 percent of the sample said the attack on the marines demonstrated
that there is no safe defense against acts of terrorism. Thirty-four percent
said they believed the Government has adequately explained why American forces
are in Lebanon, an increase over the 23 percent who felt they had heard an
adequate explanation last month.

Knowledge of Grenada Indicated

Americans showed a surprising degree of knowledge about Grenada, with 61 percent
being able to locate it in the Caribbean. That far exceeded the 38 percent in a
Times/CBS News Poll taken in November 1979 who could identify the countries
involved in the talks on limiting strategic weapons and the 25 percent in a poll
in June who could identify which side the United States backed in El Salvador.

Half of the public, or 51 percent, said they believed that other Caribbean
nations wanted the new Government in Grenada overthrown because it was
threatening their security, and 58 percent said they believed that Americans in
Grenada were in danger before American troops were sent there. By two-thirds
majorities, the respondents said that they thought that the troops had been
deployed to stop the spread of Communism in the Caribbean and that they believed
Cuba planned to take over the island of Grenada and use it as a military base.

The sample was generally evenly split in its assessment of what the best
response to the coup in Grenada would have been, with 24 percent preferring to
try to work things out with the new leaders, 31 percent preferring to watch the
situation a little longer before acting and with another 31 percent preferring
to send troops.

The respondents were also evenly divided in their evaluation of the rationale
for sending troops to the island, with 41 percent saying they believed that it
was done as a show of American strength in the wake of the bombing in Beirut and
with 38 percent saying they believed that it was done because it was necessary
at the time.

Americans of different political philosophies showed little disagreement in
their approach to the Grenada crisis. Dispatching troops to Grenada immediately
after the coup there two weeks ago was approved by 30 percent of people who
consider themselves moderates, 31 percent of those who consider themselves
liberals and 35 percent of those who consider themselves conservatives.

The invasion of Grenada had no statistically significant effect on the rate of
Americans who believe that the United States should help to overthrow the
Government of Nicaragua, which fell from 23 percent in June to 22 percent this
week.


The latest New York Times/CBS News Poll is based on telephone interviews
conducted Wednesday and Thursday with 1,093 adults around the United States,
excluding Alaska and Hawaii.

The sample of telephone exchanges called was selected by a computer from a
complete list of exchanges in the country. The exchanges were chosen so as to
insure that each region of the country would be represented in proportion to its
population. For each exchange, the telephone numbers were formed by random
digits, thus permitting access to both listed and unlisted residential numbers.

The results have been weighted to take account of household size and to adjust
for variations in the sample relating to region, race, sex, age and education.

In theory, in 19 cases out of 20 the results based on the entire sample will
differ by no more than 3 percentage points in either direction from what would
have been obtained by interviewing all adult Americans. The error for smaller
subgroups is larger. For example, the margin of sampling error for people polled
on either Wednesday or Thursday is plus or minus 4 percentage points.
Differences of 6 percentage points or more between the findings for the two days
are statistically significant.

In addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any
survey of public opinion may introduce other sources of error into the poll.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: table of Americans' foreign policy attitudes; graph of views of Reagan
and of U.S. troops in Lebanon

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 29, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

OFFICIALS RAISE POSSIBILITY OF A LONG GUERILLA WAR

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 684 words


Military

 Analysis

American military sources said yesterday that serious consideration must be
given to the possibility that some Cuban troops in Grenada might fight a
protracted guerrilla war against the United States invasion forces.

United States officers on the island have revised their estimates of the number
of Cubans in Grenada, where earlier this week the total had been estimated at
1,000, including workers who before the invasion had been building an airstrip
at Point Salines.  Yesterday the figure was put at 1,100, with more than 600
being held prisoner.

Three hundred or more were said to be in the hills near Pearls, the commercial
port on the northeastern coast, and the rest in hills near the Point Salines
airfield at the southwestern tip of the island.

A War of Harassment

Given adequate weapons and ammunition, the American military sources said, the
Cubans could carry on a war of harassment based on the positions they are
believed to hold in the hills that run from near the capital, St. George's,
northeast of Point Salines to well beyond Pearls Airport.

The sources said they could not say whether the Cubans had the resources to
conduct a guerrilla campaign. But officers in both Grenada and Washington have
said that one of the surprises of the operation was the quantity of Cuban
munitions found on the island.

Some North Atlantic Treaty Organization officers said they could not understand
why this should be a surprise. Grenada, they said, has been under satellite
surveillance since late last year and there have been abundant opportunities to
infiltrate agents into the academic population and tourist groups.

The Cubans still fighting, some military analysts said, may not be aware of the
order given by Fidel Castro, the Cuban leader, that they cease their fire. But
the informants also raised the possibility that the Cuban military had planned
to cope with an invasion by selecting special units to carry on the fight in the
hills.

Grenadians Might Join In

Although military attention yesterday centered on the Cubans, some sources
speculated that, if the fighting went on, individual soldiers from Grenada's
People's Revolutionary Army might join the Cubans in the hills.

British sources put the strength of the Grenadian force at about 2,100 men and
said it was organized in two infantry battalions, one field artillery battery
and one antiaircraft company. Reports from Grenada said, however, that the
Grenadians did not offer coherent opposition to the invaders and that their fire
discipline was faulty.

One foreign military attache said he thought the United States forces would be
reluctant to use heavy bombing against guerrillas because of the negative effect
this might have on public opinion in the United States. An alternative, he said,
might be to go in with squads of infantry and take the guerrillas group by
group.

The Problem of Resupply

Military sources interviewed said that, on the basis of current information, it
appeared that the Cubans in the hills might be limited to the ammunition and
other supplies they carried with them.

Should the Cuban Government decide to try to keep up a guerrilla operation, the
sources said, it would be faced with the problem of resupply, with United States
Navy vessels likely to intercept any Cuban supply ships. The informants said
they thought resupply by air drops would be almost impossible because of the
difficulty of knowing the exact locations of any guerrilla bands.

Some sources suggested that, despite any difficulties, the Soviet Union might
urge Mr. Castro to keep resistance alive with the aim of trying to do something
toward balancing the American military gains in the Caribbean.

Most sources interviewed said they thought guerrilla resistance might continue
for only about a week if the Cubans were not resupplied. The efforts to wipe out
the remaining resistance, the sources said, could be expected to be demanding
ones, comparable to the sweeps that were conducted against the Vietcong in
Vietnam.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of the Caribbean, detailing islands and armed forces; photo of the
invasion of Grenada

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 29, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NO WORD ON FATE OF SHIP OFF CHINA

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 457 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Oct. 28


Uncertainty continued to surround the fate of an American oil drilling ship that
vanished in the South China Sea on Wednesday after it was ripped from its
offshore mooring by a tropical storm.

The ship, the 400-foot Glomar Java Sea, was leased by the Atlantic Richfield
Company to explore for oil south of the island of Hainan in Chinese waters.

The China Nanhai Western Petroleum Corporation, which oversees drilling in
Chinese waters of the South China Sea, said 79 people were aboard, 33 of them
Chinese and 46 of them foreigners, presumably largely Americans.



Report of a Sighting

Some industry sources said the ship, which is owned by the Global Marine
Drilling Company in Houston, was sighted sunk in 300 feet of water and it was
not known whether there were any survivors.

But other Chinese and American oil specialists and some diplomats called the
report of a sinking premature. ''There is no confirmation of any finding,'' an
American diplomat said. ''As far as we know, it's still lost.''

The China National Offshore Oil Corporation announced this evening that a
Chinese helicopter had found a white lifeboat at 8:30 A.M. today and thought it
might belong to the missing vessel.  Chinese ships have been sent to retrieve
it, the official New China News Agency said.

(United Press International reported that the lifeboat was recovered and was
from the Glomar Java Sea.)

A Chinese tugboat using a depth-finding device also reported locating an
underwater object about 330 feet long, 165 feet wide and 66 feet high near the
site where the ship had been drilling.

This could have been the object that was taken earlier for the sunken ship, but
the Chinese corporation stopped short of linking it to the Glomar Java Sea.
Chinese ships have been sent to take further measurements, the press agency
reported.

Vietnam Searches, Too

There was other speculation here that the drilling ship, which was listing about
15 degrees when last heard from, had been blown west into Vietnamese waters. A
report from Hanoi said Vietnam had told the Chinese Embassy that two Vietnamese
naval vessels were joining the search. Peking and Hanoi have each accused the
other of encroaching on its maritime territory in the disputed waters of the
South China Sea.

The New China News Agency said 11 Chinese naval and commercial ships and several
aircraft were searching the area. The United States also reportedly sent one
Navy reconnaissance plane from a base in the Philippines.

The ship, a self-propelled semisubmersible oil rig, was leased by Arco because
of its ability to drill to a depth of about five miles. It crossed the Pacific
without incident to go into service in the Chinese waters last January.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 29, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ

BYLINE: By Linda Amster

SECTION: Section 1; Page 47, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 587 words


Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.  Answers appear on
page 55.

1. This college student is celebrating an unexpected homecoming. What are the
circumstances?

2. A human chain of from 170,000 to 220,000 people snaked across fields and
hamlets in West Germany, linking Stuttgart with Neu Ulm, 64.8 miles away. What
was the purpose of the line and of what event was it a part?

3. A Senate vote of 54 to 40 seems to have clinched the fate of an energy
project that has been debated since its authorization in 1970. What project is
it and what was the decision?

4. Ron Dixon won the New York City Marathon by using a strategy that was
slightly off-color. Explain.

5. Another New York marathon last weekend, an 11-hour gala, was marked by runs
instead of running. What event was it?

6. A Federal Judge voided a New Jersey statute that he said was an ''obvious
attempt to cross the forbidden line.'' What statute was it?

7. The death toll from the terrorist attack on United States marines in Beirut
greatly exceeded the toll from any single terrorist incident against Americans
in Vietnam. True or false?

8. Jan and Stan Berenstain are two authors who have capitalized on a honey of an
idea. Explain.

9. Two of three Carter appointees to a Federal commission who were recently
dismissed by President Reagan have filed a lawsuit against him in an effort to
block his action. From what commission were they dismissed?

10. A (small/substantial) number of patients who undergo coronary bypass surgery
could safely avoid the operation and perhaps avoid it entirely, according to the
findings of a 10- year national study.

11. The faculty at the Jewish Theological Seminary of America made a decision
that will alter a tradition of Conservative Judaism. What was the decisions?

12. LaMarr Hoyt, who quipped, ''I get no respect,'' got proof of respect for his
24 victories for the Chicago White Sox. Explain.

13. Almost all of the 30 member nations of the Organization of American States
(condemned/supported) the invasion of Grenada.

14. Reubin Askew is more impressive than the six other Democratic Presidential
candidates, relatively speaking. Explain.

15. Two to three children under 6 years of age are dying each (day/ week/month)
in New York City as a result of parental abuse or chronic neglect, according to
a recent study.

16. A commodity that has usually soared in price in international crises has
lately remained stable. Which commodity is it?

17. The passports of the people who attended a recent gathering in Madrid were
once marked ''Not valid for travel to Spain'' because of their membership in the
group that held the reunion. What group was it?

18. Even though they are breaking the law, some Federal agents have begun
carrying weapons because of violent situations they have encountered since the
agency began its criminal investigation program a year ago. What agency is it?

19. Cookie-Cutter, Megamouth, Cigar and Goblin are the names of bizarre
specimens of the deep. To what species do they belong?

20. New York City's Police Commissioner, Robert J. McGuire, released a 95-page
report that he said would enable the public to ''make up its own mind.'' What
report was it?

21. X represents the unknown in Nynex, a holding company, and the other letters
represent the names of the two companies it will join Jan. 1. What companies are
they?

22. A luxury box remains a symbol in the struggle between the New York Jets and
New York City over Shea Stadium. Why?


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of college student arriving from Grenada

TYPE: Question

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 30, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

1,200 MARINES TO QUIT ISLAND FOR BEIRUT DUTY



BYLINE: , Special to the New York Times
By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 635 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 29


Defense Department officials said today that most of the 1,200 United States
marines in the 6,000-member Grenada invasion force had been replaced by Army
troops and would head for Lebanon in the ''next few days'' to relieve the Marine
force stationed there.

Marines made up the major part of the force in the early hours of the operation.
As soon as initial objectives had been achieved, 5,000 Army paratroopers from
the 82d Airborne Division began moving in to relieve them.

Most of the 700 Army Rangers who participated in the initial assault also have
been relieved, the Pentagon officials reported.

The officials said the relief action by the 82d paratroopers not only would free
the marines for use in Lebanon but also would give one of the Army's premier
units combat experience. The relief of the Rangers was necessary, they added,
because Rangers are too lightly equipped for sustained combat.



Fleet Diverted for Invasion

The marines, members of the 22d Marine Amphibious Unit, operate from a fleet of
five support ships. In all, there are 1,800 marines on the ships, 1,200 of whom
went ashore in the invasion.  According to Pentagon officials, the fleet was at
sea and headed across the North Atlantic toward Lebanon when it was diverted to
take part in the Grenada invasion.

''Now they're about to resume their journey,'' a Defense Department spokesman
said today. ''They'll leave in the next few days and should arrive there in
about two weeks.'' The marines currently in Lebanon are members of the 24th
Marine Amphibious Unit, which is part of the multinational force that is trying
to keep the warring factions in Lebanon apart. They have been under considerable
military pressure and lost more than 200 men when a terrorist bomb exploded in
their barracks.

Relief Scheduled Before Invasion

Their relief by the 22d Marine Amphibious Unit was scheduled well before that
incident, however, and, despite the diversion by the 22d to Grenada, apparently
will take place just about as scheduled. Marine Corps plans call for relief of
units assigned to Lebanon every six months.

A few hours before the start of the Grenada invasion, Pentagon spokesmen
insisted that the 22d Marine Amphibious Unit was still headed across the
Atlantic toward Lebanon. The spokesmen have since said that they were never
informed by the Pentagon's operations room that there had been a change of
course.

Defense Department officials would not discuss whether the carrier battle group
that accompanied the marines to Grenada also would sail east with them to
Lebanon to relieve the carrier group that is supporting the marines in Beirut.
The group includes the carrier Independence, a guided missile cruiser and four
destroyers and frigates.

Cuban Ship at Anchor

In another development, Navy officials reported that a Cuban ship that was asked
to leave St. George's harbor when the invasion began was still anchored 12 miles
off the island.

''We're not sure what it's doing there,'' one official said. ''She left when
requested. But she dropped anchor the minute she reached international waters
and there's not much we can do about that. She could be serving as a radio relay
station, though there's not much Cuban radio traffic left.''

The ship is the Vietnam Heroico. According to Navy records, she is 430 feet
long, has a capacity of 13,000 cubic feet of cargo and 218 passengers, and made
a number of trips to Angola during the early Cuban military involvement there.

The Navy officials said they did not known when the ship arrived at St. George's
or what it carried. United States intelligence sources have reported some
military equipment was brought to Grenada by ship shortly before the invasion,
but they have not specified which vessel was involved.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of member of 75th Rangers and family in Georgia

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 30, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CASEY SEES A SOVIET CHALLENGE

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 285 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 29


William J. Casey, the Director of Central Intelligence, said today that the
United States had failed to properly confront the challenge of the Soviet Union
in developing countries and now must adopt ''a realistic counterstrategy.''

''It is past time for the American Government - executive branch and Congress -
to take the Soviet challenge in the third world seriously and to develop a
broad, integrated strategy for countering it,'' Mr. Casey said in a speech
prepared for delivery at Westminster College in Fulton, Mo. A text of the speech
was released by his Washington office.

Mr. Casey said the United States must raise the priority of developing nations
in its foreign policy, advise them ''firmly but tactfully'' about the need for
standards of human rights and honesty in government and mobilize what he called
''our greatest asset in the third world - private business.''

It was at Westminster College in Fulton that Winston Churchill delivered his now
famous speech in which he coined the phrase ''Iron Curtain'' in reference to the
Communist bloc countries of Eastern Europe, and Mr. Casey referred to that
speech today.

The Director said that since Mr. Churchill's day, new Communist threats have
sprouted around the world, from Vietnam to Africa to Central America.

Mr. Casey said that beginning in the mid 1970's, the Soviet Union undertook a
strategy aimed at developing countries. ''And their strategy has worked,'' Mr.
Casey said.

''How much more alarmed would Churchill be if he looked around the world today
and saw how the Soviets have grown in strength and how far they have extended
their power and influence beyond the Iron Curtain he so aptly labeled,'' Mr.
Casey said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 30, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHEN THE FAMILIES' LONG WAIT ENDS

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 24, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 917 words


Bruce and Joyce Hastings had been bitterly opposed to the intervention of
American troops in the ancient hatreds of Lebanon. Last week two marines in
fatigues, accompanied by a local police officer, knocked on the door of their
home in Seaford, Del., and confirmed their worst fears.

Their son, Lance Cpl. Michael Allen Hastings, 21 years old, was missing in the
Beirut disaster, the visitors reported. That left the parents with scant hope.
Michael had recently written them that he was no longer wearing his
identification tags when he slept because they bothered him; the Pentagon had
cited that practice as a main reason identification of the dead was such a
wearying process.

In addition, the Hastingses knew that their son had been spending much of his
time on on the first floor of the flattened building, whose upper stories
collapsed in the terrorist bombing a week ago today.

As the grieving parents went into seclusion, the young marine's half- brother,
27-year-old Raymond T. Absher, talked to reporters. ''They didn't say he was
dead,'' he said of the Marine Corps visitors. ''They said he was missing. You
always got to hope when it's your brother, someone you pushed around in a baby
carriage.'' Mrs. Hastings had worked in a petition drive against the Marine
Corps presence in Lebanon. After several attempts to get news of her son, a
Marine Corps office in Washington told her on Monday that he was not on the
casualty list as it stood at the time.

Watching President Reagan on television that day, Mrs. Hastings commented: ''I
wouldn't accept a call from him because I couldn't say what I want without going
to jail. I don't want condolences. I want my son home.''

Yesterday Corporal Hastings was still listed as missing. The missing are now
presumed dead and included in the official death toll.


''It's hard to believe that a country of such beauty could be so torn by war,''
read the letter, postmarked Oct. 14 in Beirut. ''I'm just glad the U.S. is a
long ways away from here.''

The writer was Pfc. Timothy McMahon of Austin, Tex., 19 years old when he died
in that truck-bomb carnage two days later. Writing to a friend at home, he
remarked: ''People can't be happy living lives one day at a time, enjoying every
minute with someone they love. They would rather throw away today and live for
tomorrow. I guess that swould be O.K., but pretty soon the today's are gone and
tomorrow isn't worth looking forward to.''

In Austin, the marine's stepfather, Herbert Persky, shared Private McMahon's
observations with reporters. ''From human interest, its a message,'' Mr. Persky
said. ''He put it all in perspective to a friend.''

Mr. Persky said Private McMahon was ''all Marine, all-American'' who came from a
Marine Corps family. Mr. Persky retired from the corps in 1977 after more than
20 years of active duty and Private McMahon's father had been a marine for 13
years before he died in an automobile accident.


Just before he left for Lebanon last May, Gunnery Sgt. Edward Kimm of Atlantic,
Iowa, sat down with his daughters to tell them what can happen when a soldier is
sent to a danger zone.

''He said that if two men, two marines, came to the door of our house, then he
would be dead,'' said 9-year- old Christina Kimm after the two men had made
their visit to the home of Sergeant Kimm's former wife, Janet, in Lincoln, Neb.
When they arrived, the only one at home was 7-year-old Anna Kimm.

''I think the girls are trying to block it out,'' Mrs. Kimm explained as the
children huddled by her in her home, which now had a black ribbon tied to the
front door. ''I've been trying to get them to break down and get it out of their
systems.''

''I told the girls their father died for his country, his beliefs, his rights,''
Mrs. Kimm said.

Sergeant Kimm, 33, enlisted in the Marines not long after his elder brother,
Clarence, was killed in Vietnam in 1967.


For the 258 people living in Harpers Ferry, Iowa, the Beirut bombing was
eclipsed when word came that, an ocean away, one of their own was among the
fallen on the island of Grenada. Pvt. Russell L. Robinson, a 22- year-old Army
Ranger from the small dairy town, was reported dead Thursday.  His friends knew
him as a young man who believed in God and country, who always stood ready to
lend a hand, who was thinking of making the military a career. His mother, Lois,
said she had not known he was one of the men ordered to invade the island.

''She put out great tenderness to others; now she's got to let the tenderness of
others come to her,'' the Rev. Joseph Heinneman of St. Joseph's- St.Ann's Roman
Catholic Church said of Mrs. Robinson. ''Everyone knows everyone else, and they
share the sorrow.''


Alice Blocker of Yulee, Fla., said officers drove up to her home to inform her
that her son, Lance Cpl. John W. Blocker, was confirmed dead as a result of the
Beirut explosion. ''When they came, I couldn't believe it,'' she said. ''I was
so sure he was alive, I was writing a letter to him when they drove up.''
Corporal Blocker was 19 years old.


The parents of Navy Hospitalman Bryan L. Earle in Painesville, Ohio, were
awaiting word of his wedding to a young Lebanese in Beirut when the news of his
death arrived. His stepfather, Miguel Vargas, said Hospitalman Earle, 21, had
been married for less than a week to Mishleen Abi Ghanem, 16.

A telephone call from her and her family came Thursday. ''She plans to visit,''
Mr. Vargas said. ''She is welcome.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Cpl. Donald Giblin, brother William; photo of Gen. Paul X.
Kelley, Kia Green, Patricia Briscoe

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 30, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET-CHINA TALKS END WITH LITTLE PROGRESS

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 590 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Oct. 29


A Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister, Leonid F. Ilyichev, left here today after a
third round of talks that failed to resolve any of the issues dividing Moscow
and Peking.

But the talks, which are to continue next March, reflected a more relaxed
attitude on both sides in the dialogue that got under way a year ago.

Qian Qichen, a Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister, who saw the Russian off at the
airport, told reporters that ''there are still big differences'' blocking
normalization.

But Mr. Qian said the latest round of talks, which opened Oct. 6, had been
helpful in fostering understanding.

Peking has said that relations cannot return to normal until Moscow withdraws
its troops unconditionally from Afghanistan, stop supporting Vietnam's
intervention in Cambodia and reduces its forces along China's frontier.

Peking has expressed particular concern about the presence of Soviet nuclear
missiles on the border. Mr. Qian's comments indicated that none of these isues
had been settled.

A communique on the Chinese-Soviet talks said they had ''proceeded in a calm and
candid atmosphere.''

''The two sides found the consultations useful and agreed to hold the next round
in Moscow in March 1984,'' the communique said.  The appearance of a communique
underscored the extent to which a dialogue has developed after ideological
broadsides exchangedin recent years. No communiques were issued after the first
two rounds of talks.

Eastern European diplomats said the Russians were pleased with the way the talks
had been going in that they were reducing the strains in the relationship.

An Eastern European said one side had proposed separating the issue of Vietnam's
intervention in Cambodia for discussion in a separate forum. This appeared to
have been a Soviet proposal that the Chinese turned down.

During the three weeks Mr. Ilyichev spent in China, he also visited Shanghai,
and Mr. Qian accompanied him on a trip through the scenic Yangtze River gorges.
They also laid wreaths at monuments in Chongqing and Wuhan dedicated to Soviet
soldiers killed in China in the common struggle against Japan at the end of
World War II.

While no political breakthrough has resulted from the talks, there has been some
movement in economic contacts. The two sides reportedly agreed to increase their
trade and discussed the possibility of Soviet assistance in refurbishing four
plants that the Russians helped build in China in the 1950's.

However, Chinese officials have said that China has not yet carried out two
earlier accords to reopen border trade in Manchuria and Xinjiang, because of
dissatisfaction with the lack of progress on the political issues.

The most visible dividend of the consultations has been an increase in cultural
and sports contacts. Educational ties have resumed, with 10 graduate students
from each country going to study at universities of the other. A group of 20
Soviet tourists, the first in years, visited China early this month.

Before his departure, Mr. Ilyichev met with Foreign Minister Wu Xueqian, but
there was no evidence that the talks helped lessen differences.

Mr. Wu later told the visiting Spanish Foreign Minister, Fernando Moran Lopez,
that the Soviet Union's military presence in Afghanistan and its support for
Vietnam' intervention in Cambodia threatened world peace, the official New China
News Agency reported.

The agency quoted Mr. Wu as having condemned the ''hegemonistic act'' of the
United States in invading Grenada. China has been highly critical of the
invasion.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 30, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ELECTION NEARING FOR SAN FRANCISCO

BYLINE: By WALLACE TURNER

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 29, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 863 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Oct. 29


Except for some scattered eruptions of passion over a few of the 16 ballot
measures, it would be possible for a visitor to come and go without realizing
that San Francisco is a little more than week away from an election where the
city's most important offices are to be filled.

The dominant politician in San Francisco, Mayor Dianne Feinstein, is not
actively campaigning. Her recent public appearances have focused on the
construction, mostly with private money, of a new domed stadium to replace
Candlestick Park, butt of jokes for a quarter century. Mrs. Feinstein, a
Democrat, has no significant opponent among the five candidates for mayor.

District Attorney Arlo Smith has no opponent on the ballot, and Sheriff Michael
Hennessey is expected to win easily over the one relatively unknown candidate
opposing him in the election Nov. 8.

16 Ballot Measures

The 16 ballot measures to be put to the 371,000 registered voters, 63 percent of
whom are Democrats, reflect the city's political and social makeup and show that
political passion still plays a part in San Francisco. The ballot includes these
measures:


- Shall San Francisco ask the Federal Government to shut off aid to El Salvador
and remove all American military personnel from there? Mayor Feinstein supports
the proposition. The question is a reminder of the big peace movement here
during the Vietnam War.


- Shall San Francisco petition the Federal Government for permission to stop
printing ballots in Spanish and Chinese? The Mayor opposes the idea. While
Supervisor Quentin L. Kopp led the signature campaign that put the measure on
the ballot, his colleagues voted to have the Board of Supervisors on record in
opposition. Of every eight San Franciscans, one is Chinese- American and one is
Hispanic-American. Two out of five are white; one in eight is black. The city's
population is 680,000.


- Shall the city discard an ordinance passed last May that requires employers to
forbid smoking in the workplace if they cannot accommodate smokers without
offending nonsmokers? The tobacco companies are spending huge sums to knock out
the ordinance. Mayor Feinstein wants to keep the law.


- Shall the city development plan be amended to impose height and other
restrictions on new construction? Environmentalists produced this ballot
measure, and it is opposed vigorously by business interests and by the Mayor.

Voting Blocs 'Content'

After 13 years in city office, Mayor Feinstein, 50 years old, has reached a
plateau of power in part because rivals retired or died, and in part because she
made astute political decisions. Serving a term as President of the Board of
Supervisors, she became Mayor after the fatal shootings of Mayor George Moscone
and Supervisor Harvey Milk in November 1978 by a political rival, former
Supervisor Dan White. She was elected to a four-year term in 1980 after two
previous unsuccessful campaigns.  ''I'm impressed with her,'' said Roger Boas,
San Francisco's chief administrative officer, whose job is independent of the
Mayor. He is a former Supervisor, a former Democratic state chairman and an
observer of politics here. ''She communicates well. She handles herself well,
and she works hard at her job.''

Mr. Boas said he finds that Mayor Feinstein has amicable relationships with the
city civil service employees, and that she has managed to satisfy the vociferous
voting blocs that dominate local politics in San Francisco.

''The blacks, the Chinese, the Hispanics and the homosexuals all seem to be
reasonably content,'' Mr. Boas said. ''The business community believes the Mayor
is a steadying force. Only the environmentalists seem to be upset with her
because she's against their plan to impose the height limitations downtown.''

The San Francisco homosexual community, which casts about 15 percent of the
vote, has supported Mayor Feinstein even though she vetoed an ordinance that
would have extended health insurance and other fringe benefits enjoyed by
married people to live-in lovers of both sexes.

The Vice-Presidential Question

The major test for the Mayor came April 26 when a group of a dozen street
people, organized as the White Panther Party, succeeded in bringing about a
special election on ousting the Mayor from office. Their reason was a pistol ban
Mayor Feinstein had proposed that became law until the California Supreme Court
tossed it out on the grounds that the state had pre-empted the field.

Almost every voting bloc in San Francisco rallied to her support. The vote was
81.6 percent to retain the Mayor. She carried every precinct but one, the home
base of the White Panthers, and she lost that one by a single vote.

With the Democratic National Convention scheduled to be held here next July,
there has been inevitable talk of Mayor Feinstein as a Vice-Presidential
possibility. She has endorsed former Vice President Walter F. Mondale for the
Presidential nomination.

She has said that a Jewish woman mayor of San Francisco is a long shot for the
nomination, but that as Mayor of the host city, she will enjoy and profit
politically from a showcase position.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 30, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ISSUES RAISED BY 'UNDER FIRE'

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 9, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1594 words


Richard Bernstein is United Nations bureau chief for The New York Times and is a
former foreign correspondent.




Aside from the ''war is hell'' tradition, there are, it could be said, two kinds
of war movies. One is grand adventure; it is war as an arena for passion,
heroism, patriotism and, as it often happens in the movies, romance. The other
is war as a test of moral fiber, as an individual proving ground where decisions
have immediate and fatal consequences. Most war movies contain elements of both
and so does ''Under Fire,'' a current and controversial example of the genre.
From its opening scenes in Chad, where guerrilla troops with elephants are
attacked by a helicopter gunship painted as a terrifying mask, ''Under Fire'' is
filled with scenes of combat, coarse language, exotic locales, guerrilla
encampments, and two people falling in love - with, in short, much of the action
and romance of revolutionary war.

But the movie is far more about fatal consequences than it is about adventure.
It tells the story of three American journalists who lose all semblance of
professional detachment as they become progressively caught up in the 1979
Nicaraguan civil war that ended in the overthrow of Anastasio Somoza Debayle and
his replacement by the leftist Sandinistas.

The film's central theme comes in the form of a dilemma. Two of the American
journalists are brought by the Sandinistas to a guerrilla encampment where they
are promised they will be able to take the first-ever photographs of one Rafael,
an elusive and charismatic leader who bears more than a coincidental resemblance
to Che Guevara. Rafael, however, is dead, and the guerrillas, to maintain their
momentum toward victory - and to discourage the United Strates from sending more
aid to the Somoza regime - need to persuade the world that he is still alive.
After some wavering, the journalists agree to make a fake photograph showing
Rafael, surrounded by lieutenants, appearing to direct the revolutionary war
from his headquarters. The journalists are convinced that the fake photograph
will help to hasten the revolutionary triumph and to reduce the bloodshed. In
this particular, extraordinary situation, they believe that the truth must be
sacrificed to some higher purpose.

In the end, the lie backfires disastrously. One of the three Americans dies as a
result. Photographs of the guerrilla encampment end up in the hands of Somoza's
national guardsmen, helping them to murder many of the revolutionaries, the very
people the journalists wanted to help. The two surviving journalists emerge a
bit sadder and wiser even as the movie ends with the triumphant entry into
Managua of the Sandinistas.

Given the current situation in Latin America, it seems very likely that the
choice made by the journalists will be hotly disputed by some who see the film.
For one thing, there is the question of political judgment. The film portrays
the Sandinistas - against whom the United States Government is supporting a
guerrilla war - in a favorable light, as idealistic and handsome youths fighting
for the cause of liberation, not hardbitten and ruthless Communists.

Second, there is the question of journalistic ethics. Journalists are familiar
with the way in which emotions can interfere with objectively reporting the
facts. ''Under Fire'' shows that dilemma in extreme form. Is it justified to
throw over the truth altogether in order to serve a political end? Can the
journalist under any circumstances join forces with those he is supposed to be
covering? The questions are complex and difficult. But the film is unambiguously
sympathetic to the choice that the journalists make. Despite the act of
treachery to journalism and to the truth, despite even the disastrousness of its
results, ''Under Fire'' encourages the viewer to feel that the commitment to the
revolution was so true-hearted and well-intentioned that it was the only morally
acceptable choice.

Filmed in Mexico on an $8 million budget, ''Under Fire'' was directed by Roger
Spottiswoode, produced by Jonathon Taplin, and written by Clayton Frohman and
Ron Shelton. Nicke Nolte stars as Russel Price, a celebrated and amazingly
daring magazine photographer. Gene Hackman and Joanna Cassidy co-star as the
other American journalists. Ed Harris appears as an entirely amoral American
mercenary who drifts from war to war fighting for whoever will pay; Jean-Louis
Trintignant is a cynical businessman and double agent who, like the mercenary,
has contempt for both sides.  Producer Jonathon Taplin, explaining the origins
of ''Under Fire'' said that the film reveals an existential dilemma: to act or
not to act. ''We're talking about a classic movie situation.'' he said. ''In
'Casablanca,' we want to know if Humphrey Bogart will make a commitment or will
he sit on the fence. Here we watch Nick Nolte's character move from cynicism to
some sense of commitment.'' Mr. Spottiswoode put it this way: '' 'Under Fire' is
about the complexities of journalism, about journalists coping with the
difficulties of being objective and yet having feelings and sensibilities about
their subjects.''

Mr. Taplin said that the origins of the film came some four years ago during the
early stages of what has become an ongoing reexamination of the Vietnam War. ''I
became fascinated with war correspondents,'' he said. ''At the end of the
Vietnam War, a lot of books were being published,that showed a new type of
correspondent, young guys who were action junkies, guys who just had to be at
the next war and were always taking chances. I came to see these people as new
heroes.''

Mr. Spottiswoode and Ron Shelton, one of the two scriptwriters, made a trip to
Nicaragua itself, where, they said, they talked to journalists, toured the
country and added a number of anecdotes to the script. Among them: a young
Sandinista and lover of American baseball who could pitch grenades with uncanny
accuracy into the midst of government soldiers. Mr. Shelton said that the young
man died during the war but not in the way shown in ''Under Fire.''

As a portrayal of the band of reporters, photographers and others who wear bush
jackets and jeans and roam the world's trouble spots, ''Under Fire'' is
believable. To be sure, there are moments when reporting a war seems a good deal
more romantic and easier than it really is. The most extraordinary action is
always blowing in the path of Nick Nolte who often seems to be about the only
photographer on the scene. But never mind that. When Gene Hackman, deciding to
go to cover the story in Nicaragua, tells Joanna Cassidy, ''It's a neat little
war with a nice hotel,'' he reflects, with due self- mockery, something very
true in the mentality of the television age war correspondent. War is where the
action is in journalism. It helps to make careers.

In ''Under Fire,'' war reporting, to begin with, is just a job, a largely
technical task. In this sense, the dilemma posed in ''Under Fire'' reflects a
genuine problem in the real world. The journalistic technician has feelings,
too. How he should deal with them, how he should react when people are being
killed and he wants it to stop, are not easy matters to decide.

Is the commitment made in ''Under Fire'' the correct one? ''We don't excuse
it,'' Mr. Taplin said. ''We show all of the horrendous consequences of it. One
of the things that I'm proud of is that we show all of the gray areas. We don't
really let anybody off the hook.''

Yet, even with the gray areas, ''Under Fire'' seems to make some implicit
political judgments that are likely to stir debate. The film portrays the Somoza
government and all that have anything to do with it as villainous or, at best,
stupid; the Sandinista revolutionaries are, by contrast, charismatic, courageous
and committed. It is difficult to quarrel with the venality the film shows of
the Somoza government, but its depiction of the Sandinistas is another thing.
This, after all, is the same group - except for a few notable defectors such as
the famous Commander Zero, Eden Pastora Gomez - who in their four years of power
have aligned themselves with Cuba and the Soviet Union, suppressed free trade
unions, curbed their country's best newspapers, indefinitely postponed earlier
promised elections, and forced thousands of Miskito Indians to flee into
Honduras.

In this sense, ''Under Fire'' seems to grow out of the tradition of such other
recent movies as ''Missing,'' particularly in its tender-hearted sympathy for
guerrillas fighting right-wing dictatorships, and its too- facile seduction by
the romance of revolution and revolutionaries.

At the very end of the film, the photographer, looking at the parades of
Sandinistas entering Managua in triumph, says, ''I would do it again.'' It is
doubtful whether many would agree with that judgment. Recent history, after all,
has provided a good deal of evidence that Marxist-Leninist revolutions, however
nice they may sound in theory, generally turn into very nasty totalitarian
states once they succeed. Perhaps, if ''Under Fire'' had included an epilogue
hinting at what has happened after the Sandinista takeover, the film would not
leave the impression of the revolutionaries as simply youthful idealists. That
way, too, the consequences of the journalists' decision - which, after all, was
to abandon journalistic ethics in favor of an intentional lie - would appear in
full tragic dimension, rather than as, at most, simply a well-intentioned and
understandable mistake.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 30, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FROM BEIRUT TO GRENADA, THE PRICE OF POWER RISES

BYLINE: By Hedrick Smith

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1239 words


WASHINGTON IF one central principle has animated President Reagan's foreign
policy, it has been the urge to confront

and contain Soviet Communism. For nearly three

years, that policy has found expression in strident talk about Moscow's ''evil
empire,'' an ambitious military buildup, and the show of American power on
maneuver in Central America.

Now one watershed week of the Reagan Presidency has brought a qualitative
change. The President's tactics have escalated. His policy is now embodied not
just in words and arms, but in combat and casualties. The cost in American lives
has sown seeds for political controversy over the price of projecting power
abroad. It has raised questions as to whether the Administration is trying to
force the country to shed post-Vietnam restraints and assume a worldwide
policeman's role.

This fall, Mr. Reagan's foreign policy has entered a more assertive and
venturesome phase. In Beirut, the painful and still incomplete toll of 229
American marines and sailors lost in the bombing of their barracks-headquarters
last Sunday was an unanticipated byproduct of deepening American entanglement in
Lebanon's factional wars. In Grenada, the smaller but still telling count of 11
dead and 67 wounded - as of late yesterday - arose from a deliberate power
strike.

The initial rationale in both cases was given more sweeping significance as
casualty totals rose. The Marine mission in Lebanon was originally portrayed as
a limited peacekeeping task to buttress the frail Christian- led Beirut
Government. The Grenada invasion at first was justified as a rescue mission for
1,000 Americans and as proper assistance for neighboring island-states
frightened by a brutal leftist takeover. But by week's end, the President
defended both operations as necessary to check Soviet threats.

The Cuban Connection

''The events in Lebanon and Grenada, though oceans apart, are closely related,''
he said in a televised address. ''Not only has Moscow assisted and encouraged
violence in both countries, but it provides direct support through a network of
surrogates and terrorists.'' In Lebanon, the labyrinth of internal feuds went
unmentioned as the President warned against American timidity and withdrawal.
''It won't just be Lebanon sentenced to a future of chaos,'' he said. ''Can the
United States or the free world, for that matter, stand by and see the Middle
East incorporated into the Soviet bloc?'' He made a similar point on the
Caribbean: ''It is no coincidence that when the thugs tried to wrest control
over Grenada, there were 30 Soviet advisers and hundreds of Cuban military and
paramilitary forces on the island.''

In Grenada, the Soviet Union became more involved than Washington bargained for.
Moscow charged that its embassy there was hit by American planes and that one
staff member was injured, though the State Department said the embassy had not
been fired on. A Soviet warning of ''serious consequences'' may have been pro
forma but it underlined the risks of the tactics of force.

There was a touch of John Wayne blowing the smoke from his pistol when Robert C.
McFarlane, the President's usually matter-of-fact national security adviser,
told a huddle of reporters in the White House driveway, ''We got there just in
time.'' Picking up that note in his speech, the President said the American
invasion had nipped a Cuban ''occupation'' in the bud and prevented Grenada from
becoming ''a Soviet-Cuban colony'' that would export ''terror and subversion.''

In terms of power politics, Administration officials can make the case that
America's world position and credibility are bolstered when a President dares to
use armed force as an instrument of policy. Adversaries become more careful and
friends are emboldened. Cuba's Fidel Castro has already been dealt a blow,
losing his Grenada bridgehead and influence in Central America and the
Caribbean.  Nicaragua must now tread more carefully. For an Administration in
need of a foreign policy victory, Grenada offered what Senator Charles McC.
Mathias, Republican of Maryland, called ''a digestible, bite-sized'' target,
although it proved harder to chew than anticipated. With armed Cubans retreating
into the hills, 6,000 American troops could be hard- pressed to quit the island
in ''a matter of weeks,'' as officials predicted.  Moscow may be less impressed
with the power play in Grenada if, as many experts fear, American force proves
impotent in Lebanon. Many critics suggest that in Lebanon, Mr.  Reagan has
engaged military power in the wrong place and that this may eventually
overshadow any short- term gains in Grenada.  Former Secretary of State Henry A.
Kissinger has argued that internal political developments have been eroding the
authority of the Beirut Government and that only substantially larger American
forces allied with Israel could halt the trend toward pro-Syrian elements. Many
in Congress fear that no amount of American force can prop up a Christian-led
Government in a predominantly Moslem country and that as long as American
marines are identified with that effort, they will be the target of Moslem
terrorists.  The President's options are restrained by a wary Congress and
public and by the rising concern of Pentagon brass that military resources are
already overtaxed. Mr. Reagan has put 1,600 marines in Beirut and up to 6,000
troops in Grenada - small numbers among the more than two million people in
uniform. But they are supported by battleships, aircraft carriers and other
offshore protection while many forces are tied up permanently in such places as
West Germany, South Korea and other bases around the world.  The net effect of
commitments in new areas is to create real if unspoken limits on the President's
strategy of force. Strategists contend military resources were stretched thin
even before Mr. Reagan's activism. After the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in
1979, President Carter added the Persian Gulf to the European and Japan- Korea
zones America must defend. By adding Lebanon, Central America and the Caribbean
to the growing list of ''vital interests,'' Mr. Reagan has prompted Congress to
challenge him by moving to invoke a 60-day limit on his use of force in Grenada.

More broadly, the President has risked reviving fears that he is bellicose and
trigger-happy. Britain, France and West Germany, among many others, challenged
the wisdom or legality of Grenada. In the United Nations Security Council, the
United States stood alone. Some Republican senators accused the President of
forfeiting the moral right to attack the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan. House
Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., a stalwart on Lebanon said he was ''frightened''
by Grenada. ''We can't go the route of gunboat diplomacy,'' he warned bluntly.

White House officials last week cited heavily favorable telephone calls and Mr.
Reagan's improved standing in opinion polls as dividends of his boldness. This
is the historical pattern. At the outset of most foreign policy crises, the
public rallies patriotically around the President. It is the long-run assessment
that counts.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of marines patrolling in Grennville, Grenada

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 30, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WAR'S RESIDUALS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 290 words


To the Editor:


Much ink has been spilled on analyses that link our presence in Lebanon with
Vietnam, Munich or some other pivotal place and time. But these are strategic
and tactical considerations. There is another important link, a link to every
war that has ever been fought. This link is the lasting effects on the lives of
those who have had to experience the stress and horrors of battlefield
conditions.

As psychologists, we have spent thousands of hours listening to veterans speak
of the never-ending nightmare that may have happened 15 years ago in Vietnam or
40 years ago in the South Pacific. These experiences retain a quality of
immediacy in the lives of these veterans that has far-reaching effects upon
them. The diaries and letters of veterans of other eras attest to the
unfortunate timelessness of this phenomenon.

A story about Marine sharpshooters in Lebanon that you published the other day
brought this point distressingly home. One sharpshooter said that the first time
he had a human target in the cross hairs of his scope he thought about the fact
that he was about to kill a human being, but the deaths of his buddies quickly
erased any further feeling.

Tens of thousands of G.I.'s in Vietnam faced this same experience, and many of
them today are trying to sort out what it did to them.

When we think about global strategy and national imperatives, let us not forget
that those who do our collective bidding will have to live with the consequences
in a most personal way for the rest of their lives. If we send this generation
to war, let us be sure that it is really necessary for the survival of the
nation.

JOHN N. CORBIN CATHERINE W. CORBIN

Pleasantville, N.Y., Oct. 20, 1983

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 30, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON ;
WHAT WENT WRONG?

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 753 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 29


One of the odd things about the conduct of U.S. foreign and military policy in
the last 50 years is why we are so often taken by surprise.

The tragedy of the marines in Lebanon is merely the latest example. The Pentagon
cannot explain why, after the U.S. Embassy in Beirut was blown up six months ago
by a hostile bomb squad, it was then surprised when a wayward truck was able to
get through the security lines at the Beirut airport, and murder over 200
marines in the night.

The State Department is ''surprised'' when it is asked why the Marines were
there in the first place, or what their mission is there now. It is surprised by
the doubts of the allies over the Reagan Administration's invasion of Grenada,
in violation of its commitments under the United Nations Charter and the
nonintervention promises of the Organization of American States.

The two main charges against the Reagan Administration now are that it is
incompetent militarily, and incoherent politically; that it is unable to defend
its troops, or define what they're doing either in Lebanon or in Grenada.

President Reagan tried to answer the criticism of political confusion by
insisting that both in Lebanon and in Grenada he was opposing a Soviet- backed
conspiracy to take over both countries.  This has been precisely Mr. Reagan's
theme ever since he came to the White House and long before: that all the
foreign problems of this country are the result of the wicked Russians and all
its domestic problems the fault of the wicked Democrats. He is surprised by the
growing opposition to this simplistic nonsense. But in fairness, he is not the
first American President to be startled by events he didn't foresee.  For half a
century, Presidents have been surprised by the very things they have predicted
and deplored. Even in the midst of the brutal Second World War when President
Roosevelt was denouncing the dictatorships in vivid Reagan- style rhetoric, it
never occurred to him that the Japanese would dare to bomb Pearl Harbor and
destroy the U.S. Pacific Fleet, bobbing and sleeping at its docks.

Likewise, President Truman and General MacArthur simply assumed that they could
send American power beyond the 38th parallel in the Korean War and that when our
men approached the Chinese border, the Chinese would not intervene. But they
did, with their massive manpower, and Harry, with his usual common sense,
withdrew.

There were other surprises. President Kennedy, dead now these 20 years, thought
that with a lot of Central Intelligence Agency money, a few airplanes and a
little bit of luck, he could get rid of Fidel Castro. But it didn't work out
that way at the Bay of Pigs.

President Johnson was surprised when he discovered that his modern military
weapons did not compel the peasant armies of North Vietnam to surrender, and, in
a way, President Carter may have made a similar mistake.

The guess here is that the historians will be kinder to Jimmy Carter than were
the journalists of his time. Like other Presidents, Mr. Carter was surprised,
though in a different way.

He was and is a deeply religious man, a true believer, but ironically he was
surprised to find that people of another faith in Iran would capture his Embassy
and take his people hostage for over 400 days. And President Carter was even
more surprised when, finally trying to rescue the hostages, his helicopters ran
into one another in the desert.

So what? I think this country is really good at big things, when the American
people are united and paying attention, but not very good at all with the grubby
details of important things.

The problem around here, and it's probably not much different ''out there,'' is
that we think we can deal with all these problems without fighting. All we have
to do is ''show up'' with all our military power, most of which we can't use.

In diplomatic terms, the important thing is to present an American ''presence.''
After all, everybody knows we're the big boy on the block. Nobody would dare try
to blow up the Marine barracks in Beirut.

That's what General MacArthur thought when he went north to the Yalu River in
Korea, and what General Westmoreland thought when he went north in Vietnam until
he later ran into CBS. And what President Reagan thought when he sent the
Marines into Lebanon and Grenada, and the Navy to stroll off the Caribbean and
Pacific shores of Nicaragua.

Just show the flag! An ''American presence'' will be enough. And sometimes it is
in little islands like Grenada.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 30, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A BITTER PEACE LIFE IN VIETNAM

BYLINE: By Craig Whitney

SECTION: Section 6; Page 24, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6498 words


Craig R. Whitney, an assistant managing editor of The New York Times, was a
foreign correspondent from 1971 to 1980, stationed in Saigon, Bonn and Moscow.
He was in Vietnam from 1971 to 1973.

 S OUR THAI AIRWAYS jet came in for a landing at Hanoi, skimming bomb craters
that had become circular rice paddies, I felt again the cold fear that had been
a fairly constant companion during my two years as a war correspondent in
Vietnam. Now, it was not so much fear of danger as fear of the unknown, of what
I might learn about the fate of the people since American troops left after the
defeat of South Vietnam almost 10 years ago and the country was reunified under
Communist rule.

This was my first trip to Hanoi, and I had no idea how I would be received. My
discomfort rose at the airport's passport-control booth, where uniformed guards
eyed my American passport with what seemed to be special suspicion and
hostility.

But I was wrong. I was just another foreigner.  And, as I was vividly reminded a
few days later during a tour of the military museum in Hanoi, the Vietnamese are
wary of foreigners.

The museum's display begins with ancient Vietnamese insurrections against China
- the Trung sisters' rebellion in the first century A.D. is not even the
earliest - and continues through several rooms filled with pictures of French
colonizers and the battles that defeated them in 1954, through the struggles
with Ngo Dinh Diem and Lyndon Johnson and a succession of American generals in
charge of the American war effort, up to one of the museum's most popular photos
- a massive American pilot being taken prisoner by a tiny Vietnamese
militiawoman. But the museum display does not end with the diorama showing the
evacuation of the American Embassy on the last day of April 1975. An entire hall
is devoted to the attacks by Pol Pot's forces along the Cambodian border with
Vietnam in late l978, the subsequent invasion of Cambodia by Vietnam that
resulted in the overthrow of Pol Pot, followed by the invasion of Vietnam by the
Chinese in 1979, which was intended to punish the Vietnamese for their invasion
of Cambodia.

Here was graphic evidence that the American war, the defeat we are now finally
examining in an outpouring of books and television documentaries,
re-experiencing in movies, novels and memoirs, is an interlude in Vietnamese
history, an epic, tragic interlude that cost more than a million Vietnamese
lives and 58,000 American ones, but an interlude nonetheless. The Vietnam War is
over for us; it continues, for the Vietnamese, with China.

My fear of being singled out was thus unfounded, and I encountered not hostility
but wary curiosity in Hanoi as well as in the cities and battlefields I had
lived in and covered during the war - Quang Tri, Hue, Dong Ha, Da Nang, Saigon
(now Ho Chi Minh City).

What I found was a country with all the trappings and restrictive laws of a
Communist police state, but without its ruthless efficiency. Vietnam is a
backward, contradictory, impoverished country that is 30 years behind the
economic boom and the traffic jams of Hong Kong and Bangkok, exhausted not so
much by the war as by the problems caused by peace. Its leaders seem overwhelmed
by problems of feeding 54 million people without the war's great infusions of
foreign aid and sup

 Page 26 plies; problems of developing a peacetime economy when the per capita
income is only $150 a year; problems of dealing with social and political gaps
that had grown up between North and South during more than 20 years of
partition, from 1954 to 1976; problems of continuing dependence on foreigners -
now the Russians.

According to Western diplomats in Hanoi, there are about 6,000 Russians
scattered around the country, supervising projects and advising on an estimated
$1 billion in aid. I was often mistaken for a Russian in the north, where this
usually meant a reserved smile and a salutation; this mistake was made less
often in the south, where being misidentified as a Russian sometimes meant being
spat upon.

Whatever nationality I was taken for, however, I was officially off-limits for
the Vietnamese. The people are forbidden to talk to any foreigner, and so I
could not visit personal friends, as I had hoped to do - indeed, as I had hoped
beyond all else to do when I first applied to the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry to
make the trip in April.

When my visa was finally granted, toward the end of August, it was understood
that I would put myself in the hands of the Communist authorities, who would
provide drivers and a translator for my two-week stay. I could ask to see war
veterans, village chiefs, hospitals, schools, churches and temples. I could ask
to see ordinary people, scholars and high-ranking officials: Prime Minister Pham
Van Dong, Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach, the Defense Minister, Van Tien Dung;
of these, only Mr. Thach acceded to my wish, promising to see me in New York
when he came for the United Nations General Assembly. I could ask how the people
who had suffered from the American bombing felt about us now; I could ask people
who had been on the losing side how they were being treated by the Communists
now and hope to know whether they were telling me the truth. I

Page 27 could ask to visit one of the ''re-education camps,'' where some 10,000
former South Vietnamese officials are still held (a request not granted) and one
of the new economic zones created to provide jobs in the countryside. And I
could ask to talk to people who were trying to leave the country in order to
find out why so many had already left or wanted to.

I could try, in other words, to answer those questions which had gnawed at me
since Vietnam was lost to us in 1975: to see what had become of the country and
the people I had come to know so well but lost touch with, as all Americans had.





 HE ROAD TO HANOI FROM THE AIRport crosses the Red River on what the French
called the Paul Doumer Bridge - a bottleneck rail and road span whose black iron
girders, cast in Paris between 1899 and 1902, kept supplies coming in from China
through all the years of the war despite countless American bomb attacks. The
bridge became a kind of monument to Vietnamese persistence against all odds. It
is now so overwhelmed by traffic that it lists to one side, and trucks are
permitted to use it only at night, when it is less traveled.

The rest of Hanoi looks as listless as the bridge, as if the city had been in a
time capsule since the French left in 1954 - a sleepy, backward colonial town of
low yellow stucco buildings; narrow streets overarched by the lacy green leaves
of tamarind trees. Water buffaloes plod slowly along the streets, pulling carts
of night soil through silent crowds of cyclists.

Only a few automobiles - Russian Volgas and Zhigulis - honk their way through
the bicycles. The bar at the Thong Nhat hotel, frequented mainly by foreigners,
stocks Vietnamese vodka, apparently for the benefit of the Russian diplomats and
advisers, who appear on the streets mostly on Sundays, looking flushed and
uncomfortable in synthetic clothes not designed for the summer heat and
humidity.

I got occasional hints of uneasiness about these benefactors from the Vietnamese
I talked to. ''Some people think the longer we receive aid from the Soviet
Union, the more difficult it will be to preserve our independence,'' said
Do-Xuan Oanh, a songwriter in his 50's, who said he learned English by listening
to the Voice of America and now heads the Vietnamese-American Friendship
Society, an organization whose sole function is to receive the few Americans who
turn up in Hanoi. A high-ranking official, who said he could speak more freely
if I agreed not to use his name, argued that Vietnam had nowhere else to turn
except to the Russians for its most basic needs, but he said the leaders would
not refuse an opening from a Western country if one materialized. He said that
up to now Vietnam had not granted the Soviet Union any permanent military bases
on its territory, but, he added, ''if a Soviet base constituted a necessity for
our independence, then we would not refuse.'' The Soviets do use the port
facilities at Cam Ranh Bay to stock and fuel their Far Eastern Fleet.

Though three years of military service is compulsory for all Vietnamese men from
age 18 to 35, uniforms do not proliferate in the streets of Hanoi today. The
army probably has its hands full with several hundred thousand troops fending
off attacks from the remaining Pol Pot forces in Cambodia and occasionally
exchanging fire with the Chinese along the northern border.

A few steps from the Government-run Thong Nhat hotel, where the amenities in my
dingy room included a small Russian air-conditioner and a Chinese thermos
bottle, was the state bank of Vietnam. The foreign-exchange department was in an
annex, where I was the only customer. While I waited for my $300 to be converted
into dong, I counted 18 people involved in the transaction, writing down serial
numbers, filling out forms, examining my passport and counting and recounting
both the dollars and the dong. The official conversion rate was 9.954 dong to
the dollar. Outside, on the black market that flourishes in cafes and small
shops, the dollar brings 16 times as much. The Government obliquely recognizes
that the currency is overvalued: Even the hotels it runs convert dong at a rate
five or six times the bank's.

In the shops, quite unlike the Soviet Union, where there are no private stores
anymore, people were selling jewelry, Ming and Ching treasures sold off by
ethnic Chinese and others who fled the country during the worst years of
economic deprivation in 1978 and 1979, clothing, cigarettes and lottery tickets
for private profit.

There were a few cafes where young people gathered to drink coffee, talk and
listen to Western rock music. There didn't seem to be much else to do; the movie
theaters advertised old films from Rumania and the Soviet Union, but were as
dark as the streets much of the time because of power cuts. Some people seemed
to be living on the sidewalks, begging for food, as streams of pedestrians
dressed in drab cotton pants and jackets passed by.

I wondered how this could be the same country that had sent, with iron
discipline, hundreds of thousands of its sons and daughters in their rubber
sandals down the Ho Chi Minh Trail to their deaths. And, in a sense it wasn't.
Ho had inspired the people to those sacrifices while he lived, but now all that
remained of that inspiration were slogans on banners and posters.

The objective was to reunite the country. With that accomplished, Ho's
successors seem to be unable to ignite enthusiasm for any other goal. They were
faced immediately with the problem of feeding the country, and they failed.
After a series of droughts and typhoons in the late l970's, and after the
failure of a drive to collectivize the rice farmers of the Mekong Delta, the
country came close to famine in 1978 and 1979. At the end of that year,
socialism had been undone to the extent of encouraging small private-sector
businesses and letting peasants grow crops for their own use and sale, even on
Government-owned land, an accommodation unthinkable in the Soviet Union.

Thanks to this concession to economic reality, last year the country was able to
do without imported rice for the first time since the war ended. ''We can feed
ourselves now, but at a level you in the West would consider only the bare
minimum for subsistence,'' the high-ranking official told me. ''We hope that in
15 years, we may be able to reach a minimally adequate level.''

Because of the shortage, rice and other foods are rationed, and, this being a
Marxist-Leninist state, apportioned according to need as defined by the
Communist authorities. Laborers in the fields or in the coal mines of northern
Vietnam get rice rations of 26 kilograms a month; office workers in the
Government bureaucracies in Hanoi get 12 kilograms.


The mandates of the class struggle also determine who gets an education: If your
grandfather was a mandarin or an official of the French colonial administration,
you don't get ahead.  One young man, a 24-year-old Vietnam 1st JUMP Page 54 & 56






 said the Government wouldn't let him study foreign languages (apparently a
sought-after field because it provides an opportunity to go abroad, if only to
other Communist countries), taught himself rudimentary French and, with it,
pleaded with me to take a letter out to an uncle he thought was living in the
United States. ''I am always hungry,'' he said.

The Government gives students an allowance of 36 dong a month. The iced coffee
we drank cost 25; a kilogram (2.2 pounds) of pork costs 110. The average civil
servant, I was told, makes 200 dong a month.

Le Mai, a Foreign Ministry official, warned me that I would not find much in the
stores for people to buy, even if they had money. ''You will see we are selling
goods of very poor quality, but we are trying to produce all basic commodities
by ourselves, and you have to start somewhere,'' he said. The main department
store in Hanoi offered a pathetic collection of sprockets, chains, nuts and
bolts for bicycles. A few garishly colored plastic sandals were displayed on
unfinished wooden shelves; they cost 180 dong, or nearly $20. Tin cooking pots
cost 350 dong, more than a month's salary.

Do-Xuan Oanh told me that, because of the continuing pressure from the Chinese,
''it may take a century for us to restore our economy. I do not share the view
that life is only meaningful if it is accompanied by pain and hardship.'' He
made it sound like a dissenting view.

Though I was surprised by how little evidence of damage there was from the
American bombing in the city of Hanoi itself, I asked to meet Vietnamese who had
been through the Christmas 1972 bombing, the heaviest of the war, which
President Nixon had ordered to force Hanoi to accept the terms of a cease- fire.
I was taken to Kham Thien Street, close to the railroad station, and all but
destroyed in a B-52 raid apparently targeted on the station at 10:30 the night
of Dec. 26. The raid killed 283 people and wounded 266.

There is a monument to the victims of the Christmas bombing on the site of a
ruined house. A statue of a woman holding a dead child, it bears the
inscription, ''Indignation at the American aggressors.'' Page 56






Nguyen Van The, a 46-year-old veteran of the North Vietnamese campaigns around
Quang Tri in the South in 1972, was now the Communist Party ward committee
chairman for Kham Thien. He told me how the neighborhood had been rebuilt,
despite the unexploded bombs still beneath the rubble.

He took me to meet Nguyen Thi Mao, widow of a militiaman she said was killed by
the American bombs. She had taken her three children out of the city to safety.
Now tears came to her eyes as she talked, but, she said, ''the war is receding
into the past. Because my husband was a war hero, the Government gave me food. I
could feed my children and they got a good education.'' As we talked on a low
wooden bench behind the bright cotton shirts and dresses she sold to help make a
living, I asked her how she felt about having an American visit her in her home.
''You look very kind,'' she said. ''I was once very angry at the Americans, but
now I hope they do not launch any more wars against us.''


When my Foreign Ministry interpreter and I flew from Hanoi to Da Nang, in what
had been South Vietnam, it was almost like crossing into a foreign country, with
border guards examining my passport and the interpreter's identity papers at
both airports. We were to go in a Volga sedan up the coast to Hue and stay
overnight before continuing north the next morning.  I wanted to go back to
Quang Tri City, which I had last seen on the day of the cease-fire of Jan. 28,
1973. Then, it was a ruined expanse of bomb craters, shattered bricks and pieces
of metal, and dead bodies. Ten years later, riding up the beautiful coastal
highway from Da Nang, I wondered what, if anything, would be left of the most
devastated city in the south.

On the surface, the reconstruction and rehabilitation in the port city of Da
Nang and in the fishing hamlets along the way to the former Imperial capital at
Hue had been impressive. Peasants were planting and harvesting rice in fields
irrigated by newly built canals. The narrow-gauge railroad had been rebuilt and
was now transporting passengers and freight behind Czech-built diesel
locomotives, a sight I had never seen during the war. New homes, even new
Buddhist temples, had been built along the road. Only stones were left where
American bases had stood - Camp Eagle, home of the 101st Airborne Division; the
military airfield at Phu Bai, just south of Hue; the former Marine and Army base
outside Quang Tri.

We turned down a dirt road that led to Quang Tri City. Somehow, that bleak
moonscape of rubble had been resettled and rebuilt with cement and brick houses.
A theater was under construction as well as a district bank. Only a small area
was empty, where there were still too many unexploded bombs in the ground to
make habitation possible, the officials said. It was hardly grand, but it was
life in a place from which I thought human beings had been driven forever. After
the decay and paralysis of Hanoi, this reconstruction was amazing.

We crossed a new bridge to the other side of the river, where I had watched the
North Vietnamese raise their flags on the cease-fire day a decade ago, and
continued north to the village of Dong Ha.

My first visit to Dong Ha was in 1968. I was in the Navy, writing press releases
about coastal bombardment by the ships of the Seventh Fleet, then including the
battleship U.S.S. New Jersey, whose 16-inch guns fired 2,700-pound projectiles.
The Marine base I had visited in my Navy days was gone, but there was a
brand-new railroad depot and a comfortable Government guest house, where I was
received by Duong Tu Anh, like me, a 40-year-old veteran of the war. Mr. Anh
remembered the Seventh Fleet with horror. ''I saw that bombardment with my own
eyes,'' he said, ''and that was the worst year.'' I decided to keep quiet.

After the Americans were gone, the Vietnam 2nd Jump






 North Vietnamese swept south and seized Dong Ha in 1972, and they held it
despite attacks from B-52's at least as severe as those at Quang Tri.

''The South Vietnamese generals said the land was 200 percent destroyed,'' Mr.
Anh said, ''on top and underground.''

Mr. Anh said that more than 2,000 people had been injured or killed by buried
bombs in his district since 1975. For all of the surrounding province, which has
a population of 1.8 million, there had been 5,000 such casualties, according to
the authorities.

I was later taken to a pepper farm established in the mountains to the west of
Dong Ha, on the site of an American artillery position known as Hill 241. It was
a collective, like most of the rice and vegetable farms set up in central
Vietnam since reunification; the people here were less resistant to the idea of
collectivization than the farmers farther south in the Mekong Delta, where even
today only 20 percent belong to collectives, according to officials in Hanoi.

On this pepper farm, one woman carrying fertilizer to the plants asked my
interpreter where I came from and laughed when she found out. ''VC!'' she
exclaimed, pointing to herself. Other members of the collective were former
South Vietnamese Army soldiers. The enterprise sells peppercorns to a
state-owned export firm to earn foreign currency.

The vice director of the farm showed me around and, in response to my question,
said, yes, someone had recently been killed by a mine in the ground - the
4-year-old son of the chairman, who, on the way to a swimming hole, had tripped
over a stone and detonated an antipersonnel mine.

And there is more death in the ground. Defoliants, including Agent Orange, whose
contaminants include dioxin, which is dangerous even in trace amounts, were
sprayed over the entire country from 1962 to 1971. According to Pentagon
figures, the total amount of dioxin dumped on Vietnam may have been at least 375
pounds. An international conference in Ho Chi Minh City last January, which
included Western doctors, agreed on this figure despite some feeling among the
Vietnamese that it should have been much higher.

The A Luoi Valley, which begins at Dong Ha and extends into the mountain ranges
to the southwest, was reduced from triple-canopy jungle to grassland by the
spraying. It is one of the sites where the Vietnamese suspect dioxin and other
chemical poisons to be the cause of an increase in birth deformities in children
of people exposed to the chemicals. In one sprayed village in the Mekong Delta,
Vietnamese researchers have determined that, among exposed subjects, the number
of pregnancies ending in spontaneous abortions was 47.03 percent of the total.
''There are many deformed children here,'' Mr. Anh said, ''but I cannot say how
many.''

Returning to Hue that afternoon, I talked to Nguyen Van Luong, the highest
official of Binh Tri Thien province and one of the rare Southern guerrillas in a
position of authority I was to meet during my brief stay; most of the others
were North Vietnamese. He had been the chairman of the Vietcong organization in
the Dong Ha district in the early 1960's.

''During the war,'' he said, ''I took the name Le Viet Huong. I understand the
Americans promised the people of Dong Ha a five-million-piaster reward for my
head when I was there. I lived underground, in a shelter. Sometimes I would hear
noises above during the day. And at night, when I came out, I would ask my
friends who had been up there. 'Green Berets,' they said. They used long sticks
to probe the shelter, but they never found me.'' (The Phoenix program, run under
American auspices during the war, specifically targeted Vietcong leaders for
assassination.)

Luong waxed nostalgic about the war years, though he was wounded three times:
''When I was in the jungle, I used to go fishing, and we'd have picnics. I had
all my belongings in a backpack. I could go anywhere. When the Americans
launched sweeps to find us, we'd just withdraw and return after they'd gone.

''The Americans who were against the war in Vietnam share in our victory,'' he
went on. ''We have suffered the worst war in modern history, from 1941 to 1975.
Now we are at peace, despite the war on our northern border with China. Let the
Americans know: We defeated the Mongols. We defeated the French. We defeated the
Chinese reactionaries, supported by the Americans. But we know how to
distinguish between the Chinese people and the Chinese leaders, between the
American people and the American authorities.''

As we drove back to Da Nang, I was struck by how quiet the countryside was now.
There was not much traffic, and the pavement was being used by the local farmers
to dry manioc and cassava and even to thresh rice. Military patrols controlled
the entrances to the Hai Van pass, apparently to guard against an invasion from
the sea by the Chinese, who hold the Paracel Islands offshore.

In Da Nang itself, the air bases formerly used by the Americans are now used by
the Vietnamese Air Force. I saw a battery of surface-to- air missiles in an
emplacement near the base I had remembered as Marble Mountain. Foreign Minister
Nguyen Co Thach told me later that they were there primarily to repel any
possible Chinese air attack.

Three Communist journalists I was taken to meet in Da Nang told me there were
110,000 former South Vietnamese soldiers and their families living among them -
like equals, they claimed; no grudges held, no scores settled, no second-class
status.

On my last day in Da Nang, one of my escorts took me aside and revealed that he
had been in the South Vietnamese Army, and that he would leave the country and
move to the United States if he could. His background limited him to a
low-paying job here and would as long as he lived. ''Not enough to eat here,''
he said.


We flew to Ho Chi Minh City - Saigon - on a Soviet-built Antonov turboprop
plane. If Hanoi had been untouched for 30 or 40 years, Ho Chi Minh City looked
precisely the way it had in 1973, when I was last there, except that the streets
were far less congested. The Majestic Hotel on the riverfront had the same fly-
specked 1950's-vintage Pan American World Airways pictures on its walls, though
the hotel was now called the Cuu Long and was state owned.

Many of the restaurants I had remembered from the past were still functioning.
Givral's, the French patisserie, was still baking croissants. The bars that had
lined the downtown streets when the Americans were there had been shut or
converted into antique shops.

On Dong Khoi (General Uprising) Street (Tu Do to the Americans, Rue Catinat to
the French), beggar urchins were selling peanuts and yelling, ''Hey, you!'' just
as they used to when the Americans were there. But now these were not Vietnamese
beggars. I saw with stunned sorrow that many of them had strikingly American
faces - the young Amerasians whose situation in the country is so desperate.

I was surprised in Ho Chi Minh City, as I had been in Hanoi, by what the
authorities allowed to go on under their noses. The first few times I left the
hotel alone and tried to make my way up the street, I was attacked by money
changers offering 170, 180 dong to the dollar, about 20 times the official rate,
and the Amerasian children followed me all the way to the cathedral, asking for
handouts. Other days, the sidewalk was completely clear, the street people
eyeing me nervously from across the road, apparently after a police sweep; a few
hours later, the parasites and black marketeers were back at their usual
positions.

Only once was I made aware of being followed by a plainclothes policeman. He
gave a dirty look to a small Amerasian boy who had been pestering me to buy him
a shirt; the kid then whispered to me, ''C.I.D.,'' the American G.I.'s code for
Military Police narcotics detectives. I felt, and was warned, that the only
possible purpose he could have in following me was to report on any Vietnamese I
spoke with.  Vietnam 3rd JUMP







I tried to challenge this prohibition twice. The first man I visited, a person
with relatives in the United States who had applied for permission to leave
Vietnam to join them, welcomed me to his house in a rainstorm, but nervously
looked out the door and after 10 minutes asked me to please leave before the
police came. Apparently he feared a search and interrogation about my presence.
I went next door to a restaurant, and two plainclothes agents were pointed out
to me. When I left, at the nervous urging of the restaurant owner, they did not
follow me and I assumed my host was getting the questioning he feared. He wrote
later to his family through the censored mail that he was grateful for my visit.

The second time, visiting a widow whose husband had been the night watchman in
The Times's office, my presence caused such a sensation among the hordes of
excited children in the neighborhood that I left her after only a few minutes,
hoping to avoid the arrival of the police. She, too, hoped somehow to emigrate
to the United States.


Ho Chi Minh City, I felt at moments like this, was still an occupied city,
occupied by the Communist Northerners who run the country and still don't trust
the Southern Vietnamese for collaborating with us. But, according to Nguyen Co
Thach, the Foreign Minister, ''there was no bloodbath. We had 1.5 million people
in re-education camps, and 10,000 of them are still there now. But not one of
them was killed in capital punishment. That's no good.'' Perhaps he and Pham Van
Dong and Vo Nguyen Giap, the North Vietnamese commander who won the war, and the
others had seen enough blood and death to reject the idea of a purge.

Stalin would have known how to re-educate these people, and no one would ever
have come back. He would have known how to stop the black market and how to get
the jobless off the streets of Ho Chi Minh City, too. Pol Pot, in Cambodia, and
not Ho Chi Minh's successors in Vietnam, had turned out to be the last true
Stalinist in Asia, contrary to all American expectations during the war.

True, the bloodbath never came. But another kind of death - of any hope of a
decent life here under the new regime - does drive many of the Vietnamese to try
to leave.

When or whether those who apply will get exit visas is hard to tell. Through the
Orderly Departure Program, set up under the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees in 1979, Vietnamese who can get permission from their Government to
leave, and from some other country to let them in, are allowed to leave.

Mr. Tuyen told me that so far the Vietnamese had granted 18,000 exit visas to
people wanting to go to the United States under the program, but up to the time
I talked to him in September, only 12,200, according to American officials, had
been given permission to enter the country. Mr. Tuyen acknowledged that his
office had received 32,500 applications from Ho Chi Minh City alone - equal to
the total number of people who have been allowed out under the program since it
began.

There has been a gradual and steady decline in illegal departures, which have
totaled about one million since 1975, apparently because refugees have been
refused entry in many places. For example, ''boat people'' arriving in Hong Kong
now must choose between moving on to another port or spending the rest of their
lives in a closed refugee camp.

The Communists explain that these people want to leave because they grew
accustomed to artificially high living standards during the American occupation.
But I suspect the real reason is that in Vietnam they simply have no future.

Take the case of a young man who had been studying medicine in Saigon when he
was drafted into the South Vietnamese Army in the early 1970's. After the
defeat, he was no longer eligible to continue his medical studies, because he
had been drafted into the wrong army. His mother was killed in the war with the
French in 195l; his father was killed in fighting with the United States Marines
in 1967; but for being in the wrong place at the wrong time, he was now
consigned to a life as a tour-bus driver at 130 dong a month.

Ly Cong Chanh, a former official of the Provisional Revolutionary Government who
is now vice chairman of the Ho Chi Minh City People's Committee, told me that
there were still more than 200,000 people without jobs. I met one foreign
resident of the city who thought the real figure was much higher, as much as 60
percent of the work force.

Mr. Chanh sounded resigned. ''More than 700,000 people left the city for new
economic zones, or for their native villages, after liberation,'' he said, ''but
about 10,000 of them couldn't survive in the zones and came back. We tell them
that if they stay here, they'll get no house and no job, but we don't move them
out to the countryside by force. If we did, they'd just come back again. It's no
use,'' he said.

I asked to see one of the new economic zones and was taken to a sugarcane farm
called Nhi Xuan not far from Ho Chi Minh City in what used to be an artillery
free- fire zone during the war. It was obviously meant to be a showcase; the
guest book showed a parade of foreign dignitaries, including a number of
predictably enthusiastic Russians.

Still, it was very poor: a line of tin-roofed wooden shacks along an irrigation
canal, packed earth floors, no electricity or potable water except rainwater
from earthenware cisterns. The people grew their own food, and collected rations
- a pound of meat and a pound of fish per month, per family; some people raised
chickens or geese.

This was a model zone built by ''youth volunteers,'' who dug the canals, turned
the sod and built the houses for the refugees who came later. I gathered from
various conversations that many of these volunteers were renegades or former
soldiers or drug addicts given a chance to atone for their misdeeds and find a
better life after two or three years of hard work. The families who came to live
and work on the farm, I was told, got their houses free and an allowance of
20,000 dong to get started.

Mr. Chanh, talking to me later in the ornate 19th-century city hall in Ho Chi
Minh City, told me the authorities hoped gradually to solve the problem of
unemployment there by putting people to work on the few nearby industrial
development projects - a rubber plantation, a hydroelectric dam, the oil
exploration project being worked on with Russian help at the former beach resort
of Vung Tau. But for the most part, the economy of Ho Chi Minh City is still
based on small- scale trading and commerce, a service economy built up during
the boom years when 500,000 G.I.'s were there - 200,000 households in Saigon
still earn their living this way today, according to official Vietnamese
statistics.

''We're trying to reduce them little by little and transform them from trading
to production,'' Mr. Chanh said. ''We have to do this step by step.''

Fits and starts might be a more accurate description of Vietnamese economic
policy since 1975. At first, pledging a gradual transition to socialism, the new
Communist rulers left the farmers and merchants of the South alone. Then, in
March 1978, the bigger trading firms, many owned by Chinese businessmen from
Cholon, were closed and nationalized.

The course was partly reversed again in late 1979 to avert a complete economic
collapse. The latest measures, instituted last May, penalize small businesses
with heavy taxes.

''We have had a lot of experience in war,'' Mr. Chanh said, ''but not in
administering the affairs of a big city like this. We have made many mistakes. I
am 59, and Mai Chi Tho, the chairman of the city committee, is 60. We have to
train our successors, so they won't make the mistakes we made.''

The mistakes have alienated many South Vietnamese who welcomed the Communist
victory in 1975. A few, like Ngo Ba Thanh, a professor educated in Paris and New
York who spent years in jail during the rule of President Nguyen Van Thieu, try
to bridge the gaps in understanding.

''Most of the mistakes that have been made are the result of trying to move too
fast,'' she said, speaking in a rush of fluent English. ''And there are great
differences between the North and the South. I tell the people in the party that
the revolution would not have been won with the party alone. The people played a
great role and must be allowed to continue to play a great role. The party
authorities sometimes claim that they can do anything they want, even if it
violates the laws on the books, because in our system the party plays the
leading role. But it's more complicated than that.''

''Pham Van Dong told me that I had to be very patient,'' she said. ''He pointed
out to me this Cabinet minister who was a rice farmer 40 years ago, and that one
who had been illiterate, and said I should give these people a chance, should be
tolerant of their mistakes.''

She also said she did not agree with many of her friends in the South who
complained about not having a big enough role in the Government. ''We in the
South have lots of experience in overthrowing governments,'' she said with a
laugh, ''not in making them run better.''

Other people in the South Vietnamese educated class aren't as optimistic as Mrs.
Thanh, or as well treated, and many who hated the Thieu regime now say they were
wrong to think that nothing could be worse than the corruption and repression of
that period.

''The Thieu Government collapsed because its leaders were unworthy of the
name,'' a former student told me. ''But now many people who were glad to see it
go feel that the new Government isn't so gay, either. They've lost their
illusions. They don't like having to apply to the ward committee and pay a bribe
even to get permission to go visit their relatives in the Mekong Delta for a
week. But they still delude themselves. A lot of them talk about how the
Americans are going to land with helicopters and sweep the Communists away. The
Americans - imagine!''

I asked if people blamed the United States for the defeat - as some Americans
blame themselves for not providing Thieu with enough military aid to fight off
the Communist advances. ''I don't blame the Americans at all,'' he said. ''They
gave plenty of money and help, and it wasn't their fault that our generals and
leaders couldn't put it to proper use. It is our country. It was ours to defend
- we should have defended it ourselves.''

That is precisely why the Communists won, I said - they really believed it. He
shrugged. ''It's true,'' he said.


Ho Chi Minh's saying, ''There is nothing more precious than independence and
freedom,'' now stands above nearly every door in Vietnam. Many people in the
South put it there in the last days of April 1975, hoping to show the Communists
their hearts were in the right place. Even with all the help they have from the
Russians, I concluded, the Vietnamese have independence, but freedom, no, not
now.

Many of the Communist war veterans I had met in my two-week trip had emotionally
expressed their wishes for peace, for their children, my children, all our
children together. We were veterans of the same war, and we felt, strange as it
may seem, a sense of shared responsibility for what we had done to each other.
Perhaps, eventually, passions will cool and we will, like the French before us,
extend the hand of aid and conciliation to this fiercely independent, xenophobic
people.


The only flight out of Saigon to the West is an Air France jumbo jet that
arrives practically empty from Paris via Bangkok every Thursday and goes back
full of refugees. For the first time in my experience in Communist countries, my
Vietnamese hosts let me take pictures in the airport as I interviewed those who
were leaving. Finally, when the shuttle bus pulled out, their relatives shrieked
their names desperately from the observation platform.

There was nervous tension among these people as we went through yet another
ticket check on the gangway; they would not believe they were really leaving
until the plane started rolling down the runway. But as the doors were sealed
and the engines began turning, I looked back into the cabin and saw that it
would be impossible to continue interviewing them. Their native land was rushing
past the windows, and tears were streaming down their faces, and so there was no
need to ask any more questions.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of North Vietnamese border town of Lang Son; photo of Hanoi;
photo of American bombs on display in war museum; photo of former South
Vietnamese soldier and his family

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 30, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CRIME

BYLINE: By Newgate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7; Page 31, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 815 words


When Aaron J. Elkins's ''Fellowship of Fear'' came out earlier this year, it was
happily greeted in this corner. There was something infectious about the
character of Gideon Oliver, the young anthropologist who could look at an old
bone fragment and give the owner's age, sex and just about everything else
except name, rank and serial number. Now there arrives Mr. Elkins's

 THE DARK PLACE (Walker, $12.95) and, alas, it is not as good as its
predecessor.

''Fellowship of Fear'' was set in Europe. ''The Dark Place'' has as its locale a
rain forest in Washington State. People have been killed in it over a long
period of time, and when a cache of bones is discovered, Oliver is called in. He
examines a skull and finds some peculiar things about it. ''A narrow fracture
begins to show healing within a few days, but a larger perforation, like this
hole, takes longer. In fact, it never actually heals in the sense of closing up;
it just rounds the edges.'' After a good deal of talk like this, Oliver deduces
that death occurred from a skull operation.

As a matter of fact, there are some intriguing aspects to the mystery of the
dead campers.  ''The Dark Place'' has its spooky moments, including the looming
presence of - maybe - Bigfoot or a similar horrible monster, never before seen
by human eye. And there is a pleasant romance between Oliver and a woman forest
ranger.

But the writing! Perhaps ''Fellowship of Fear'' was also like this and we were
so bedazzled by Oliver's anthropological expertise that it went unnoticed. Here
the gaucheries of style stand out in great detail. Oliver is the kind of fellow
who says, ''You jest.'' The sequences between him and his lady are so arch you
wouldn't believe it. The hero's romantic technique went out with Booth
Tarkington. There is also Oliver's former teacher, a famous anthropologist who
talks like a caricatured stage Jew. In general, the writing throughout the book
suggests a bad sitcom.

For some really amusing, sophisticated and literate dialogue, there is

METZGER'S DOG by Thomas Perry (Scribners, $14.95). The hero is an attractive,
debonair rascal named Chinese Gordon, who heads a gang that breaks into a
university laboratory and walks away with cocaine worth about million. Chinese
Gordon also lifts some sensitive information from the desk of a professor with a
C.I.A. connection, and the C.I.A. goes crazy. The perpetrator must be caught,
and the entire resources of the Government are called into action.

Mr. Perry has some fun at the expense of the C.I.A., treating the agency as
amoral and basically stupid, given to using absolutely wonderful logic to arrive
at the wrong conclusions. This approach seems fairly standard these days. As for
the title of the book, well, it seems that Chinese Gordon has a cat named
Metzger, and Metzger adopts a giant hound, and. . . . But there's no point
trying to explain it. ''Metzger's Dog'' is a very funny, sharply written book
that should not be missed.

Anthony Oliver's

THE PROPERTY OF A LADY (Doubleday, $11.95) is a British small-town mystery with
the usual ingredients: nosy villagers, a smart cop (John Webber, retired from
the force), people with problems and tensions that culminate in murder. The
writing is skillful enough, but there is a very slow buildup and the feeling
that one has been through this many, many times before.

It might be stretching a point to call Mallory, the protagonist of

NO CURE FOR DEATH by Max Allan Collins (Walker, $12.95), a private eye. He is an
ex-soldier (Vietnam) and ex- cop, now a college student in Iowa. But he acts and
works like a private eye. All he lacks is the license. He first appeared earlier
this year in ''The Baby Blue Rip-off,'' and his creator is the man who writes
the Dick Tracy comic strip. Fortunately, there is no comic-strip dialogue in
this book. But neither is there anything particularly bracing or original.

The element of modern knighthood is an all-important part of the job
requirements for being a private eye. And, sure enough, Mallory goes galloping
off to save his damsel. There are faked auto accidents, and Mallory has to work
hard to get to the bottom of the case. The trouble with this book is its
inability to get away from the conventions of the genre. Mr. Collins, though
competent, lacks flair. And his ending is labored.

In

FINDERS WEEPERS by Max Byrd (Bantam, $2.50) we have a private eye from
California named Mike Haller, not to be confused with Mike Hammer. Is Mr. Byrd
trying to capitalize on the reputation of Mickey Spillane's old roughneck?
Anyway, Haller has been set up, has lost his license and teams up with a
prostitute who stands in line to inherit a large sum of money. There is lots of
calculated action and a whole slew of sleazy types, but everything is
predictable from the very first page to the last.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 30, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 36, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1387 words


FICTION 119

POLAND, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) Seven centuries of history
in fictional form.  2219

THE NAME OF THE ROSE, by Umberto Eco. (Helen & Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $15.95.) Unraveling the mystery of a murder in a 14th-century
Italian monastery.  338

CHANGES, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) The crises that arise when a
television anchorwoman and a glamorous physician fall in love.  4413

HOLLYWOOD WIVES, by Jackie Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The struggle for
money and power in Tinsel Town.  5512

AUGUST, by Judith Rossner. (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95.) The five-year
relationship of two women, a teen-age patient and her analyst.  689

WHO KILLED THE ROBINS FAMILY?, created by Bill Adler and written by Thomas
Chastain. (Morrow, $9.95.) The publisher offers a $10,000 prize to the reader
who submits the best answer.  766

WINTER'S TALE, by Mark Helprin. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $14.95.) Heroic
lives in Manhattan between the late 19th century and the year 2000.  876

THE AUERBACH WILL, by Stephen Birmingham. (Little, Brown, $16.95.) Three
generations of a German-Jewish family in New York.  9126

EVERYTHING AND MORE, by Jacqueline Briskin. (Putnam, $15.95.) Life after Beverly
Hills High School: the careers of four women.  101121

RETURN OF THE JEDI, adapted by Joan D. Vinge. (Random House, $6.95.) Illustrated
storybook based on the latest ''Star Wars'' film.  11107

MONIMBO, by Robert Moss and Arnaud de Borchgrave. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.)
What happens after Castro unveils a plan to stir racial tension in the United
States.  121330

CHRISTINE, by Stephen King. (Viking, $16.95.) A car that kills is at large among
a Pennsylvania town's high school set.  131433

THE LITTLE DRUMMER GIRL, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $15.95.) A British actress
caught between agents of Israeli intelligence and of the Palestine Liberation
Organization.  141527

HEARTBURN, by Nora Ephron. (Knopf, $11.95.) A roman a clef about a marriage
breaking up.  15 14

THE SEDUCTION OF PETER S., by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $15.95.) The sudden
danger-filled success of a long out-of-work actor.





 NONFICTION 116

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck.  (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  2242

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J. Peters and Robert H.  Waterman Jr. (Harper
& Row, $19.95.) Lessons to be learned from well-run American corporations.  344

THE BODY PRINCIPAL, by Victoria Principal. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Exercises
for women by a television personality.  4651

MEGATRENDS, by John Naisbitt. (Warner, $17.50.) Predictions about America in the
next decade based on an analysis of conditions today.  559

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $17.95.) The rescue of two
Americans from an Iranian prison.  633

THE MARY KAY GUIDE TO BEAUTY.  (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) An illustrated guide
for women prepared by the staff of a cosmetic firm.  775

FATAL VISION, by Joe McGinniss. (Putnam, $17.95.) The case of Jeffrey MacDonald,
Ivy League graduate, respected physician and convicted killer of his wife and
daughters.  887

THE BEST OF JAMES HERRIOT.  (St. Martin's Press, $19.95.) Selections from the
writings of the Yorkshire veterinarian.  995

THE PETER PAN SYNDROME, by Dan Kiley. (Dodd, Mead, $14.95.) A psychologist's
analysis of the plight of men who have never grown up.  10135

OUTRAGEOUS ACTS AND EVERYDAY REBELLIONS, by Gloria Steinem. (Holt, Rinehart &
Winston, $14.95.) Essays by a leading feminist writer.  111057

THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson. (Morrow, $15.)
How to increase the productivity of those with whom you work, as well as your
own.  121123

CREATING WEALTH, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) Making money in
real estate.  13122

VIETNAM: A History, by Stanley Karnow. (Viking, $19.95.) Profusely illustrated
history of the war: tie-in with the current PBS television series.  14 92

JANE FONDA'S WORKOUT BOOK, by Jane Fonda. (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) Exercises
for women by the film actress.  15 56

NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to buy real
estate with little or no money: a 1980 book.  The listings above are based on
computer-processed sales figures from about 2,000 bookstores in every region of
the United States. And Bear in Mind Other recent books that in the opinion of
the Book Review staff are of particular literary, topical or scholarly interest:


DASHIELL HAMMETT, by Diane Johnson. (Random House, $17.95.) A cool, steady-eyed
and engrossing biography of a writer who is perhaps as much fun to read about as
his most notable creation, the private eye Sam Spade.

A FEELING FOR THE ORGANISM: The Life and Work of Barbara McClintock, by Evelyn
Fox Keller. (W. H. Freeman & Co., $14.95.) An excellent biography of the
81-year-old ''loner'' from Cold Spring Harbor, L. I., who won the 1983 Nobel
Prize for Medicine for work in genetics that scientists once regarded as
heretical.

LIGHT, by Eva Figes. (Pantheon, $10.95.) Technique is all or nearly all in this
slender, fastidious novel of a day in the life of Claude Monet - a kind of
Impressionism in words.

LOCAL KNOWLEDGE: Futher Essays in Interpretive Anthropology, by Clifford Geertz.
(Basic Books, $18.50.) Eight essays, comparing different cultures, written over
the past decade by an anthropologist who has attracted attention well outside
his discipline.

MARBOT: A Biography, by Wolfgang Hildesheimer. (George Braziller, $16.50.)
Introducing a new genre - fictional biography. The author has made up Sir Andrew
Marbot (1801-1830), an English art connoisseur, critic and minor man of letters,
out of whole cloth. But it is quality cloth, through which we can see the spirit
of the age and some of its prime movers.

REVOLUTION IN TIME: Clocks and the Making of the Modern World, by David S.
Landes. (Harvard University Press, $20.) The story of the evolution of the
mechanical timekeeper from the crude tower clocks of 13th-century Europe to the
modern wristwatch. A feat of scholarship, and also fun to read.

THE STORIES OF BERNARD MALAMUD.  (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $17.95.) Twenty-five
stories from 1950 to the present, chosen by the author, whose special province
has been the everyday, unspectacular anguish of ordinary people.

THE STORIES OF WILLIAM TREVOR.  (Penguin Books, $8.95.) All the stories from
five previous collections of the last 20 years by an Anglo-Irish master of short
fiction.

TURTLE BEACH, by Blanche d'Alpuget. (Simon & Schuster, $14.95.) The first novel
by an Australian journalist to appear in America is set in a troubled and
changing Malaysia, and its author clearly knows how it smells and feels and how
its people, both Western and Eastern, think. An auspicious American debut.

UNION STREET, by Pat Barker. (G. P. Putnam's Sons, $13.95.) Divided into seven
sections, each named for a particular female, this first novel explores every
nuance of working-class life in a grimy industrial town in England.

VANESSA BELL, by Frances Spalding. (Ticknor & Fields, $22.95.) This biography
takes Virginia Woolf's elder sister from the shadow of Woolf's greater fame to
establish her identity as a remarkable and appealing woman and a gifted painter.


VITA: The Life of Vita Sackville-West, by Victoria Glendinning.  (Alfred A.
Knopf, $17.95.) A biography of the writer to whom Virginia Woolf dedicated
''Orlando.'' If the author cannot make this arrogant, selfish woman attractive,
she can - and does - make her vivid and memorable.

WATCH TIME FLY, by Laura Furman. (The Viking Press, $14.95.) Short stories about
the Vietnam-influenced generation of passively waiting lost souls by a writer
who combines apparent artlessness with a moving and very sophisticated esthetic
sensibility.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 30, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 40, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 756 words

DATELINE: MASS MARKET Mass market paperbacks are soft


-cover books sold at newsstands, variety stores and supermarkets, as well as in
bookstores. This listing is based on computer-processed reports from bookstores
and representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 outlets across the United
States.

1

SPACE, by James A. Michener. (Fawcett/Crest, $4.95.) The space program: fiction.

2

THE VALLEY OF HORSES, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $3.95.) A fictional saga of
human survival at the dawn of civilization.

3

MISTRAL'S DAUGHTER, by Judith Krantz. (Bantam, $4.50.) The art world of the 20's
and the fashion business of the 80's: fiction.

4

A CRY IN THE NIGHT, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Dell, $3.95.) A newly rewed woman is
haunted by her past: fiction.

5

MASTER OF THE GAME, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $3.95.) The secret behind a
woman business tycoon's rise to power: fiction.  6

SECOND HEAVEN, by Judith Guest. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Love in various forms heals
three battered people: fiction.

7

LIFE, THE UNIVERSE AND EVERYTHING, by Douglas Adams. (Pocket, $3.50.) Concluding
volume in a trek through the galaxies: fiction.

8

THE CLAN OF THE CAVE BEAR, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $3.95.) The beginning of
the saga continued in ''The Valley of Horses.''

9

THE 13TH VALLEY, by John M. Del Vecchio. (Bantam, $3.95.) The war in Vietnam:
fiction.

10

DIFFERENT SEASONS, by Stephen King. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Four novellas with
mainly nonhorror themes by a modern master of horror.

11

THE RIGHT STUFF, by Tom Wolfe. (Bantam, $3.95.) America's first manned space
program, recalled in high style: movie tie-in.

12

GOODBYE, MICKEY MOUSE, by Len Deighton. (Ballantine, $3.95.) Two World War II
fighter pilots in love and combat: fiction.

13

DRAGON ON A PEDESTAL , by Piers Anthony. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $2.95.) Seventh
volume of a saga about the fabulous land of Xanth: fiction.

14

ACCEPTABLE LOSSES, by Irwin Shaw. (Avon, $3.95.) A New York literary agent's
life is threatened by a mysterious stranger: fiction.

15

THE SKULL BENEATH THE SKIN, by P. D. James. (Warner, $3.95.) The mysterious
death of an actress in a castle off the Dorset coast: fiction.

 TRADE Trade paperbacks are soft-cover books usually sold in bookstores and at
an average price higher than mass market paperbacks. This listing is based on
computer-processed reports from about 2,000 bookstores in every region of the
United States .

1

GARFIELD SITS AROUND THE HOUSE, by Jim Davis. (Ballantine, $4.95.) Cartoon
humor.

2

THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson. (Berkley,
$6.95.) How to increase your productivity.

3

THE COLOR PURPLE, by Alice Walker. (Pocket/Washington Square Press, $5.95.)
Black men and women in the South: fiction.

4

CALDER BORN, CALDER BRED, by Janet Dailey. (Pocket, $6.95.) Conclusion of a
romantic saga of the American West.

5

GROWING UP, by Russell Baker. (NAL/Plume, $5.95.) The New York Times columnist
recalls his boyhood and youth.

6

COLOR ME BEAUTIFUL, by Carole Jackson. (Ballantine, $8.95.) Beauty tips for
women.

7

LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo F. Buscaglia. (Fawcett, $5.95.) Inspirational
talks by a California professor.

8

THURSTON HOUSE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $7.95.) Three generations of a wealthy
San Francisco family: fiction.

9GARFIELD ON THE TOWN, by Jim Davis and Lorenzo Music. (Ballantine, $4.95.)
Cartoon humor.

10

BLOOM COUNTY, by Berke Breathed. (Little, Brown, $6.95.) Cartoon humor.

11

MORE ITEMS FROM OUR CATALOG, by Alfred Gingold. (Avon, 4.95.)

 A second spoof of the L. L. Bean catalogue.

12

LIFE EXTENSION, by Durk Pearson and Sandy Shaw. (Warner, $10.95.) How to add
years to your life and life to your years.

13

THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (S&S/Touchstone, $7.95.) Psychological
and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.

14

BEYOND THE FAR SIDE, by Gary Larson. (Andrews and McMeel, $3.95.) Cartoon humor.

15

WHAT COLOR IS YOUR PARACHUTE?  by Richard Nelson Bolles. (Ten Speed Press,
$7.95.) Guide for job hunters and career changers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 30, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MUSIC;
TALENTS TRIED AND NEW ARE FOCUS OF THE FORENIGHT

BYLINE: By ROBERT SHERMAN

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 20, Column 2; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 950 words


ARE you a musical gambler, or do you go for the sure thing? Do you enjoy taking
a chance on new but basically unproved talent, or would you rather stick with
artists of major reputation? Piano recitals and ensemble concerts over the next
fortnight will provide the opportunity to indulge either preference.

The Emerson String Quartet will play Haydn and Beethoven at 3 P.M. today at the
Hudson River Museum in Yonkers; an hour later, the Grace Avenue Brass Ensemble
tackles everything from Bach to Scott Joplin at St. Barnabas Episcopal Church in
Ardsley. The decision of which to attend is a choice between one of the most
famous string quartets in the country today and a group made up of five young
New York City-area freelancers. Will the Grace Avenue group be giving Canadian
Brass a run for its money in a few years? Only time can tell.

Another place to meet fresh talent is the New Rochelle Public Library, where a
music review committee invites young performers to participate in ''music, wine
and cheese'' concerts held at 8 P.M. on alternate Tuesdays. This week, James
Kass and Peter Press offer duos for the classical guitar, while the
Transatlantic Winds dip into the often charming repertoire of music for woodwind
quintet. For more information, call the library at 632-7878.

Returning to the big names, the Tokyo Quartet has scheduled two more county
visits. On Friday at 8 P.M., at the State University of New York's Purchase
campus, it plays Schubert, Wolf, Ravel and, with the Metropolitan Opera soprano
Renata Scotto as guest soloist, Respighi's lovely portrait of an Italian sunset,
''Il Tramonto.'' Call 253-5900 for details. Then on Nov. 12 at 8:30 P.M., the
quartet plans a program of favorites - Haydn's ''Lark,'' a repeat of the Ravel
and the third Razoumovsky Quartet of Beethoven - for Friends of Music at the
Osinning High School (271-4657).

Next Sunday at 8 P.M., the Cantilena Chamber Players, formed to concentrate on
the great music for piano quartet, indulges in its favorite occupation:
juxtaposing a classic work for piano and strings with two scores that will be
refreshingly new to most listeners. The program at congregation Emanu-El in Rye
lists the almost unknown Mahler piano quartet, the scarcely more frequently
encountered quartet for piano, violin, viola and cello by Vincent d'Indy, and
everybody's favorite piano quartet, the G minor Brahms (723-0222 or 948- 6533).

Turning to solo piano recitals, there is also a choice today at 3 P.M. At Sarah
Lawrence College in Yonkers, one can meet Chan Le, who began his musical studies
amid the trauma of war in his native Vietnam, then came to the United States in
1980 to attend the Indiana University School of Music. Mr. Le's program includes
music of Mozart, Beethoven, Chopin and Ravel. There is no admission charge. But
if the call of the changing leaves makes a short car ride more enticing, a jaunt
to Riverdale's beautiful Wave Hill offers a stroll through the sculpture gardens
and a performance at Armor Hall by Sylvia Marx and Marcia Flaks. The pianists
will speak about and play four-hand pieces by Mozart, Brahms and Vincent
Persichetti.

Most Westchesterites know Mary van Nes as the program director of the Hudson
River Museum concerts. ''But I still enjoy playing in public, and my ambition is
to be the oldest performing pianist in Westchester,'' she says. ''Both of my
classmates (Class of '27) look upon me as a kind of freak, but I have no desire
to travel; I just want to stay home and practice and learn new things. When I
was a student of Schnabel in Berlin, I memorized all but five of the Beethoven
sonatas, and I intend to play them before I leave this earth.'' It is, however,
Chopin, not Beethoven, that she has chosen for her recital Tuesday at 2 P.M. at
the Yonkers Public Library: three waltzes, four etudes, eight preludes and the
scherzo in C sharp minor (337-1500).

A very different sort of piano virtuosity is the hallmark of the jazz great
Billy Taylor, yet many of his improvisations have the same carefully wrought
structure of great classical compositions. Mr. Taylor and his trio will play at
8:30 P.M. Saturday at the Emelin Theater (698-0098) and on Nov. 19 at 8 P.M. at
the Peekskill Paramount Center (739-2333). Ticket prices are $15 at the Emelin;
$20 and $25 at the Paramount, where the concert is a benefit for the Freedom
Fund of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.

Another major keyboard event at the Emelin is a series of three Thursday-evening
recitals by Gregory Haimovsky, encompassing all the preludes and etudes, the
Images and most of the other important piano suites of Claude Debussy. Mr.
Haimovsky, who emigrated from the Soviet Union in 1973 and now lives in Yorktown
Heights, starts the cycle on Nov. 10 at 8 P.M. (698-0098).

Returning to the Center for the Arts at the Purchase campus of the State
University, there is a recital by the young but already world-renowned Emmanuel
Ax a week from Saturday at 8 P.M. For my taste, Mr. Ax offers the ideal
combination of warm sensitivity and virtuoso flair; his program will include
Beethoven's ''Andante Favori'' and the ''Waldstein'' sonata, plus shorter works
of Schoenberg and Brahms (253-5900).

Finally, there is the re-creation of a Jewish service of the Italian Renaissance
scheduled at the Scarsdale Synagogue for 8:30 P.M. Friday. Nico Castel, the
Metropolitan Opera tenor who has long specialized in Sephardic and other Jewish
music, will be the soloist in a complete performance of Salamone Rossi's
''Sacred Service,'' accompanied by the Ensemble for Early Jewish Music, a
consort of musicians playing antique instruments of the period (725-5620).


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 30, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Statute of Limitations

BYLINE: By DIANE COLE

SECTION: Section 7; Page 35, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 452 words


To the Editor:

To bill Paul Johnson as ''the former editor of The New Statesman'' in connection
with his fulsome review of the latest collection of Irving Kristol nuggets,
''Reflections of a Neo-Conservative'' (Oct. 2), is like describing Ronald Reagan
as ''the former union leader.'' Mr. Johnson has changed his views entirely and
is now a fervent Thatcherite; his latest book, called ''Modern Times'' in the
United States, was, in fact, clobbered in The Statesman of July 15, 1983 - and
very properly too. In employment and opinions, there should be a statute of
limitations.  JOHN E. ULLMANN Hempstead, N.Y.  SYSTEM 3 PRINTER 2 TAKE 243831
TIME 13:15 DATE 10-30-83 [ 243831]BKR/ficbrf/10-30-83/7/33/3/jp [SY6 247216
10-18 Q033.1


FICTION IN BRIEF


EL VAGO

By Laurence Gonzales.  309 pp. New York: Atheneum. $16.95.



Pancho Villa and Emiliano Zapata remain the two most celebrated heroes of the
Mexican Revolution, and to dramatize their feats, Laurence Gonzales has invented
a third hero, El Vago: bandit, cattle rustler, revolutionary and foster brother
to Doroteo Arango, later known as Pancho Villa.

The story begins in 1894, when Doroteo shoots a corrupt

hacendado

 and the brothers are forced to flee to the mountains. They become adept at
rustling cattle, commandeering supplies and murdering would-be captors.

In El Vago's war, there are few heroes, only fighters. ''There was no noble
cause, no politics, no revolution of the people, and no goal or promise,'' he
says. Instead, he begins to see the revolution as a circus, with each atrocity a
sideshow and Pancho Villa himself as the chief exhibit. As he reflects on the
war, El Vago strains to see more than carnage and brutality, but he cannot;
ultimately he must leave Mexico and the ghosts of the dead who haunt him.

It is not until 1944 that the 63- year-old former revolutionary tells his tale,
in part to pass the time as he trails a runaway horse with his nephew Paco on an
eerily deserted nuclear testing ground in New Mexico.

In fact, in ''El Vago,'' Mr. Gonzales has given us the Mexican Revolution from a
particular kind of post-Vietnam, antinuclear perspective - a perspective that
assumes that all wars, whatever their stated purpose, are meaningless and that a
hero's medals are worth less than his victims' remains. Few would argue that war
is not horrid, but the book's implicit antinuclear statement seems misplaced in
a novel of the Mexican Revolution. Still, Mr. Gonzales excels in his vigorous
characterizations of a nation's heroes, and his command of Mexico's folklore and
legends is both entertaining and impressive.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letterreview

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 30, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REVELING IN MILITARY POWER

BYLINE: By Ronald Steel ;
Ronald Steel is author, most recently, of ''Walter Lippmann and the American
Century.''

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 978 words


Bot h the tragedy at Beirut airport and the American invasion of Grenada offer
dramatic insight into the Reagan Administration's foreign policy, one whose true
objectives are often obscured by its rhetorical bows to public opinion. These
events reveal a militarized Administration, obsessed with force and more than a
little trigger-happy, an Administration that has never learned that being strong
is not the same as looking tough.

The Marines were attacked because they were viewed as partisan and were being
used to support one faction in Lebanon's civil war. They became victims, not as
''peace- makers,'' as the Administration insists, but because they were
instruments of its efforts to assure the survival of the Gemayel Government.

Such a Government would not be undesirable: It would be pro-American, no trouble
to Israel, anti-Syrian and anti-Soviet. The trouble is that it is unrealistic to
imagine its survival - unless we send an American army to protect it, as we
tried under not totally dissimilar circumstances years ago in Vietnam. In
Lebanon, a center-right Christian-dominated Government is violently opposed by
powerful factions that, with Syrian support, are capable of thwarting it.  This
is why the other nations of the multinational peacekeeping force - France,
Italy, Britain - have kept out of the infighting among Lebanese factions.

The problem in Lebanon is not that of protecting a beleaguered democratic
government from foreign enemies. The Government itself is a faction; it exists
in its present form only because of American support. Unless it is expanded to
include all factions of the population - and to take account of the fact that
Syria, far more than the United States, has a ''vital interest'' in the area -
there is no possibility of a peaceful settlement.

After the disaster at the Marine barracks - a disaster that, it must be said,
resulted in part from lax security arrangements for which the highest officials
must be held fully responsible - Congress is beginning to regret the 18-month
grace period it so casually gave the Administration only a few weeks ago. Even
many Congressmen who supported the extension of the War Powers Act did so not
because they believed it desirable but because they feared that the
Administration would hold them responsible when things got worse. Like the
Tonkin Gulf Resolution nearly 20 years ago, the extension gave the President a
free hand to engage in a war as he saw fit.

Although it was a mistake to send the Marines in the first place, it would be a
mistake now to withdraw the entire contingent precipitously. The Lebanese
negotiators in Geneva

should be given one more chance to arrive at a compromise settlement. They are
likely to do so only if they know that this is their last chance and that the
Marines will be withdrawn within three months at the most.  Would the Reagan
Administration agree to this? Not unless forced to do so by public opinion and
by Congress. This is an Administration that not only believes in the assertion
of military power but revels in it. Its involvement in Lebanon, its
determination to install the Pershing 2 missiles in Western Europe, its actions
in Central America, and now the invasion of Grenada offer dramatic proof.
Grenada was an irresistible temptation. A coup d'etat, in which militant
Marxists overthrew somewhat more lackadaisical ones, presented the opportunity.
The presence of American medical students offered the pretext. Nonetheless, the
Administration had trouble keeping its stories straight. First it said it had to
evacuate the students, although the Grenadian Government had offered to do so
itself. Then it was to restore democracy. Now, we are told, it was to prevent
the island from becoming a Soviet-Cuban base to export ''terrorism'' - as if
there were any shortage of such bases already. The public is gullible, but not
stupid. Ronald Reagan invaded because he did not like the Government and had the
power to get rid of it.

Undoubtedly, as Mr. Reagan has said, the Grenadian regime was composed of
''leftist thugs,'' and it is hard to mourn their demise. One might take the
President's justifications more seriously, however, were they not so selective.
The area is full of ''thugs,'' including some particularly nasty ones who rule
nearby Haiti, not to mention El Salvador, where the thugs we support were
involved over the past four years in the murder of some 37,000 civilians - about
one- third the total population of Grenada.  We will wait, I think, in vain for
a liberation of these and other friendly thug-ruled countries. That being the
case, Mr. Reagan was hypocritical. He also insulted the intelligence of the
American people. He ordered the invasion of Grenada because he wanted to show
that the United States will use force to get rid of Marxist governments -
thereby hoping to intimidate radicals in other Caribbean countries. The invasion
was also a useful distraction from the disaster in Lebanon, whether or not the
Administration so intended. It might further have been devised as a way of
testing the waters of public opinion for future United States military moves
against Nicaragua and the Salvadoran guerrillas.  Left to its own instincts, the
Reagan Administration is drawn to gunboat diplomacy against opponents like
Grenada that cannot fight back and to seek quick military fixes for intractable
political dilemmas, as in Lebanon and Central America. In his obsession with
military force, Ronald Reagan has never understood that being a great power is a
responsibility. It is not merely an opportunity to twist arms. It means
understanding that force has its limits, that national prestige can be
dissipated on unworthy causes, that not every interest is a ''vital'' one. This
Administration still has not grown up, and at this point probably never will.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: cartoon

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 31, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. REDUCES FORCES IN GRENADA BY 700

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1369 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 30


The American force on Grenada has been reduced from 6,000 to about 5,300, a
Defense Department spokesman said today.

The spokesman said 700 Army Rangers had been withdrawn from the Caribbean island
and were returning to bases in the United States.

In another development, a senior State Department official said the United
States did not dispute Cuba's statement that there were only 784 Cubans on
Grenada when American forces invaded the island on Tuesday. The Reagan
Administration said Friday that it believed 1,100 Cubans were there.



Report of Attack on Hospital

A Pentagon spokesman, meanwhile, said he had no information on a report by
Michael Posner, a correspondent for the Canadian news magazine Maclean's, that
aerial bombing by the United States had killed 47 inmates in a mental hospital
at Richmond Hill, the site of a prison near the Grenadian capital. Mr. Posner
said a nurse had taken him through the rubble of the hospital, where Cuban
soldiers had taken refuge before the bombing. He said the nurse had told him
that there was no way that any attacker could have identified the institution as
a hospital.  The Defense Department spokesman said that most of the 1,200
marines who were in the original invasion force that landed on Grenada last
Tuesday were standing by to leave the island for duty in Lebanon, but that the
move had not begun. The Defense Department said Saturday that the marines would
begin to move ''within a few days.''

It thus appeared that paratroopers of the 82d Airborne Division had taken over
final mopping-up operations on the island from the marines.

A total of 1,800 marines, members of the 22d Marine Amphibious Unit, arrived off
Grenada last week in a fleet of five support ships. Six hundred of them remained
on the ships while the others went ashore.

Regarding the total number of Cuban nationals in Grenada, the senior State
Department official said ''no one is quarreling with'' the Cuban figure. He
spoke after a representative of the Cuban Government reiterated a statement that
there were 784 Cubans on the Caribbean island at the time of the invasion.

At the Pentagon, a Defense Department spokesman said that the official United
States count of Cubans on Grenada had been revised to less than the earlier
estimate of 1,100, but said he could not give a new number.

The Administration's Friday estimate of 1,100 Cubans was 10 percent higher than
the estimate offered the day before and almost twice as large as the estimate
made before the invasion began Tuesday. The Friday announcement came amid a
growing debate about why intelligence agencies had failed to measure Cuban
strength on the Caribbean island more accurately.

Military officials have said the United States has captured 638 Cubans. Other
officers have said privately that between 150 and 200 Cubans are still believed
to be at large on Grenada, some of them continuing sniper fire at American
troops.

Another State Department official, Deputy Secretary of State Kenneth Dam, said
the earlier judgment that placed 1,100 armed Cubans on Grenada ''was based upon
some documents but now that we've gotten better information, we've gotten a new
estimate.''

Agreement With Cuban Figure

He did not say what the new estimate was, but the other senior official
indicated the department agreed with the Cuban figure.

Mr. Dam, who spoke on the CBS News program ''Face the Nation,'' also said the
United States had captured Soviet, Cuban, and North Korean documents on Grenada
that he said were agreements to supply Grenada with military goods.

He said American forces in Grenada had found ''a treasure trove of documents,''
including three supply agreements with the Soviet Union and one each with Cuba
and North Korea.

The Defense Department reported tonight that the latest casualty figures from
United States forces in Grenada showed 16 killed in action, 77 wounded and three
missing. Four of those listed as killed on today's casualty list had previously
been listed as missing.

The department spokesman added that the department had no official figure on the
number of civilian casualties that might have resulted from the fighting in
Grenada, but that reports showed there were ''almost none.''

Military officers said that United States aircraft were flying reconnaissance
missions over small islands belonging to Grenada just north of the main island
to see whether armed Cubans were there. The largest of these is Carriacou, about
20 miles north of the main island.  The officers said United States forces could
not be completely withdrawn from Grenada as long as there was a threat of
continued Cuban fighting.

Cubans 'Not Soldiers'

On the matter of the Cubans in Grenada, Ramon Sanchez-Parodi, an official in the
Cuban Interests Section that acts here in the interests of Cuban citizens, said
on the CBS News program that the 784 Cubans ''were not soldiers.'' He added,
''They were people who were construction workers.''

On Friday, the Cuban Government issued a detailed list of its nationals on
Grenada, saying that of the 784, 636 were construction workers, with others
working in public health, education, fishing, transport, trade, culture and
communications. It said 43 were members of the armed forces, of whom 22 were
army officers and the rest translators and other support personnel.

Inadequate intelligence reporting, according to military officers, has hindered
the United States operation in Grenada from the beginning. They said the
intelligence services had good photographs of airfield construction and Cuban
camps but lacked agents on the ground who could provide eyewitness reports on
the numbers and armament of the Cubans there.

The initial United States Government estimate, made before the invasion, held
that 600 Cubans were on the island. A Defense Department official said captured
documents were the source of the estimate of 1,100 Cubans, many of them armed.

Supply Agreements

Referring to the ''trove of documents'' found on Grenada, Mr. Dam said ''the
Soviet agreement provided for transshipment of goods through Cuba'' but gave no
further details. He said the Government was analyzing the documents ''because we
don't want to misrepresent what they show,'' and he hoped they would be
available to the public later.

Other senior Administration officials said the documents would show that the
Soviet Union and Cuba intended to turn Grenada into a supply depot for leftist
insurgencies throughout Latin America. They said most of the weapons alfound in
Grenada were light arms, including the Soviet-made AK-47 automatic rifle, that
would have been intended for guerrilla warfare. The AK- 47, it was noted, was
extensively used by the Vietcong guerrillas in the Vietnam War.

Journalists who toured six warehouses on Grenada reported Friday that among the
weapons they were shown were one box containing two Korean War-vintage British
Bren guns and another containing Marlin 30-30 rifles made in 1870.

In addition to Mr. Dam, Lawrence S. Eagleburger, Under Secretary of State, and
Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the chief United States representative at the United
Nations, appeared on television programs today to explain President Reagan's
decision to land United States troops to the Caribbean island Tuesday morning.

Mrs. Kirkpatrick, who appeared on the NBC News program ''Meet the Press,'' said
in response to a question that the United States had suffered no moral loss with
the invasion of Grenada.

''I'm telling you,'' she said, ''that I don't think there's any moral cost to
that action.''

She added: ''I don't think it was an invasion; I think it was a rescue. And I
think we ought to stop calling it an invasion.'' She was referring to the
Administration's explanation that a primary reason for the mission was to rescue
some 1,000 United States citizens on the island.

Mrs. Kirkpatrick said that ''those nations who may seriously feel that it was an
immoral act already thought we were an immoral power.'' She also said: ''I think
The New York Times is simply wrong'' for saying in a editorial this morning that
''the cost is loss of the moral high ground.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Kenneth Dam and Daniel Patrick Moynihan (page A10)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 31, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Gulf of Tonkin Searched For Signs of Ship

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 119 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Oct. 30


Rescue operations continued today as ships and planes from China, the United
States and Vietnam searched the Gulf of Tonkin for an American drilling ship
that was reported sunk with 79 American and Chinese oil workers on board.

The New China News Agency said this morning that four Chinese ships were rushing
to where an American reconnaissance plane spotted a lifeboat with flashing
lights.

The official press agency also said rescuers were being hampered by continuing
rough seas. No rescues have been reported so far.

The 5,930-ton Glomar Java Sea deepwater drilling vessel was reported missing
last Wednesday after a severe tropical storm hit the area just south of Hainan
Island where it was operating.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 31, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FIRST OF THE CUBAN CASUALTIES DUE TO LEAVE GRENADA BY AIR

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 481 words

DATELINE: HAVANA, Oct. 30


The first group of Cubans killed or wounded in the United States-led invasion of
Grenada may return home Monday on a flight arranged with the help of Spain,
Colombia and the International Committee of the Red Cross, authorities here said
today.

''We've heard the aircraft will stop at Barbados, possibly tonight,'' a Cuban
official who asked not to be named said this afternoon. ''It may arrive here
possibly late Monday.''

Cuban authorities said an estimated 600 healthy Cuban prisoners would be brought
home on a British ship, but no details were issued on when the ship would leave
Grenada. The Government said it was told Cubans still on Grenada would be
returned when hostilities ended.

30 Cubans Reported Killed

In a related development, the Cuban Government said it had been told through
John A. Ferch, chief of the United States Interests Section in Havana, that 59
wounded Cubans were receiving medical treatment from American armed forces
personnel. It was not disclosed where they were receiving the care.

The United States has said about 30 Cubans died in the fighting that began a
week ago when American forces joined with six eastern Caribbean countries and
invaded Grenada.

The Cuban Government said there were 35 women in the area of hostilities near
the Point Salines airport, where Cuba says 636 Cubans were working when the
island was invaded. A Havana radio broadcast, monitored in Miami today,
questioned whether some of the women had been killed.

The broadcast accused the United States of manipulating the Cuban casualty
figures, and said one of the reasons might be to hide the deaths of women and
minimize the overall death toll. The Government source said Cuba had asked for a
complete list of the casualties, including the causes of death.

Plans for the repatriation were outlined late Saturday in a communique quoting
President Belisario Betancur of Colombia and President Felipe Gonzalez of Spain.

Despite Government statements here about the repatriation, there was no word on
whether Fidel Castro had approved the plan.

Mr. Castro had indicated he wanted to use a Cuban ship, the Vietnam Heroico, to
return the prisoners. The vessel was anchored off Grenada when the fighting
began and was ordered outside the 12-mile limit by United States military
commanders. It later went to Port of Spain, Trinidad, for supplies.

The Havana radio quoted Mr. Castro as telling Mr. Betancur and Mr. Gonzalez that
the United States did not want the ship used ''because of its name: Vietnam.''



Red Cross Confirms Plane

GENEVA, Oct. 30 (AP) - The International Committee of the Red Cross announced
from its headquarters here that a plane would be sent tonight to pick up the
Cubans, but it was not clear when it would reach Grenada. The announcement said
the plane would stop in Barbados on its way to Grenada.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Cubans captured in Grenada

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 31, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

25 Wounded on Island Awarded Decorations

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 150 words

DATELINE: FORT BRAGG, N.C., Oct. 30


Twenty-five American servicemen wounded in Grenada received Purple Hearts and
four others received the first Combat Infantry Badges given since the Vietnam
War.

The men were decorated in their beds and wheelchairs and while standing with
crutches Saturday at Womack Army Hospital by Army Chief of Staff Gen. John
Wickham Jr.

''What these soldiers and airmen have done in Grenada has been very important in
terms of American lives,'' General Wickham said. ''Our citizens there, we have
indications, were in jeopardy.''

He added, ''They've also performed an important service in terms of giving the
citizens of Grenada an opportunity to choose their own government, their own
way.''

The Combat Infantry Badges, awarded only to infantrymen who come under fire
during combat, were given to Staff Sgt. Sean Powers; Spec. 5 Steven Kurlowicz;
Sgt. Gerald R. Bannon and Pfc. Timothy G. Romick.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 1, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Editors Protest to Pentagon Over Press Curbs in Grenada

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 125 words

DATELINE: LEXINGTON, Ky., Oct. 31


The American Society of Newspaper Editors protested to the Defense Department
today over its refusal to permit reporters to cover the first stages of the
invasion of Grenada.

A telegram to Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger read in part:

''We object to the Defense Department's failure to honor the long tradition of
on-the-scene coverage of American military operations.

''The press landed with United States troops in Normandy on D-Day in 1944. Time
and again in both Korea and Vietnam reporters were able to give the American
public firsthand accounts from the front. In this case, however, it was more
than 48 hours before pool reporters were allowed in.

''We believe that the Defense Department has let down the American public.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 1, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

JERSEY VOTING TO DECIDE WHO RUNS LEGISLATURE

BYLINE: By JOSEPH F. SULLIVAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 917 words

DATELINE: TRENTON Oct. 31


Like a runner trying to defeat a stronger opponent, the New Jersey Democratic
Party has been pacing itself and counting on a strong finish in a campaign that
will determine whether it maintains control of the State Legislature.

The Democrats are being outspent 4 to 1 by the New Jersey Republican Party and
have no television budget. But party strategists are counting on concentrated
campaigning during the final weeks of the race and a targeted effort to get out
likely supporters - something they usually do better than the Republicans - to
maintain their slim majorities of 21 to 19 in the State Senate and 43 to 37 in
the Assembly.

Both parties' campaign staffs agree there is no major statewide issue in this
off-year election. In addition the recent events in the Mideast and the
Caribbean have diverted public attention even further from the state races.

Increased Turnout Foreseen

However, Frank Robinson, the executive director of the Democratic Legislative
Campaign Committee, sees another election dynamic at work as a result of the
events overseas.

''New Jersey is one of the few states having important elections this year, and
this is the only opportunity people will have to express their feelings at the
polls,'' he said. ''Whether the sentiment is 'rally 'round the flag' or 'bring
the boys home,' we believe it will increase turnout, and since all of the hotly
contested contests are in suburban districts, we think the added turnout will
favor our candidates.''

There are two Senate seats held by Republicans that the Democrats believe they
can capture on Nov. 8: the 13th District in northern Monmouth and southern
Middlesex Counties and the 24th District in Passaic and Essex Counties.

Senator John P. Gallagher, Republican of Middletown, is a freshman legislator
who is being challenged in the 13th District by a Democratic Assemblyman from
the same town, Richard Van Wagner, a 10-year veteran of the Legislature.

National Figures on Scene

Governor Kean, who is hoping to have a Republican-controlled Legislature next
year, has campaigned in Senator Gallagher's district. The Democrats have
countered with United States Senators Bill Bradley and Frank R. Lautenberg, as
well as Walter F. Mondale, the Presidential candidate, and Senator Edward M.
Kennedy of Massachusetts.

Senator Kennedy, who flew to a fund- raising event for Mr. Van Wagner last week
after attending a briefing on the Grenada invasion, praised the State Senate
candidate for his sponsorship of legislation that created the first state Agent
Orange commission in the nation. The panel was set up to study the effects on
American servicemen of defoliants used during the Vietnam fighting, and Mr.
Robinson said this had brought Mr. Van Wagner strong support from veterans'
groups.

Mr. Van Wagner has been campaigning door to door in the district for several
weeks. He talks about his sponsorship of education programs for handicapped
youngsters, the Agent Orange bill and his 10 years in the State Assembly, much
of it in leadership positions. He is presently an assistant majority leader.

Candidates Cite Accomplishments

''I tell people I have a record of accomplishment and my opponent has been
claiming credit for things initiated by the administration,'' Mr. Van Wagner
said.

Mr. Gallagher served for six years on the New Jersey Highway Authority, which
operates the Garden State Parkway. Part of that time he was chairman and the
remainder executive director. He has been stressing his work for residents of
the district.

''I got the state to locate a motor vehicle station in Matawan,'' he said. ''Up
until now, people from this part of the state have had to drive miles and wait
on line for hours to get their cars inspected.''

Mr. Gallagher's campaign, as well as that of Senator S. Thomas Gagliano,
Republican of West Long Branch, in the neighboring 12th District, received a
lift a few days ago from Governor Kean. The Governor went to Holmdel, which
borders the 13th District, to announce a $200,000 state contract with Com-Data
Systems Inc. to provide on- the-job training for 236 unemployed people.

The other Senate race at the top of the Democratic target list has a Passaic
County Freeholder, James W. Roe, Democrat of Wayne, trying to unseat a one-term
Republican, Joseph L. Bubba, also of Wayne. Mr. Bubba survived a primary
challenge in June and has been receiving campaign help from the state G.O.P.

Bubba and Roe Trade Charges The Democrats are counting heavily on Mr. Roe's
identification as a Freeholder, a seat he has won six times, and on the
prominence of his brother, Representative Robert A. Roe, who has won election to
Congress every two years for 14 years.

To make sure everyone knows he is not attacking the Congressman, Mr. Bubba's
campaign mailings italicize and underline the Freeholder's first name. Mr. Bubba
charges that Mr. Roe has missed a fifth of all Freeholder board meetings and has
failed to vote on many important issues.

Mr. Bubba also mentions his opposition to new taxes and says he scuttled the
drive for a 5-cent-a-gallon gasoline tax last year. He doesn't highlight the
fact that it was Mr. Kean's tax he helped kill when it needed only one more
Senate vote to pass.

Mr. Roe charges the district lacks effective representation in the State Senate
and says the Legislature took too long enacting bills aimed at giving motorists
some relief from high auto insurance premiums.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 2, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

A COMMUNIST INSISTENCE ON SPREADING VIOLENCE

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 285 words


To the Editor:


In his Oct. 21 column, ''A Policy of Hypocrisy,'' Tom Wicker asserts that U.S.
support of the guerrillas in Nicaragua is not morally superior to the
Communists' support of guerrillas in El Salvador. This argument ignores an
important moral distinction, which is closely analogous to the difference
between a benign tumor and cancer.

If the rightist forces which the U.S. is supporting should win their wars, they
have no ideological commitment toward further wars. However, if the leftist
forces win, their wars, as has been shown many times, will be exported to other
countries.

Extreme leftists claim they have a sacred duty to carry the ''benefits'' of
their system elsewhere. This missionary role takes precedence over raising
productivity and feeding the people at home. For example, Cuba, which depends
heavily on $6 million per day in Soviet aid, found it proper to export war to
Angola in the form of 36,000 troops. Similarly, a grindingly poor Vietnam brings
war to its neighbors.  It is this insistence on exporting violence that
distinguishes Communists from other socialists and also from various other
authoritarian systems.  All this might not be so dangerous if it weren't for the
concomitant proliferation of modern weapons. And it might not even seem bad if
it weren't for the utter failure of countries ruled by extreme leftists to
achieve prosperity, the utter irrevocability in going Communist and the utter
despair of the people under Communist rule (even the working classes), a despair
demonstrated by the efforts of many to flee their countries.  Ignoring these
facts is like ignoring cancer.

DANIEL SHANEFIELD Princeton, N.J., Oct. 21, 1983

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER TO THE EDITOR

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 2, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BOMB CARRIER IN U.S. HOME PROMPTS TIGHTENED SECURITY

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 478 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 1


The Capitol police re-adjusted metal detectors and installed sensitive
bomb-detecting equipment last month after a tourist entered the House gallery
with a homemade bomb under his shirt.

Jack Russ, the sergeant-at-arms of the House, said today that the urgent steps
following the Oct. 18 scare were the beginning of a tighter security system.

In an interview, Mr. Russ said the bomb taken into the building ''was not a
dud.'' It failed to explode because the man ''had not placed his wiring
properly,'' he said.

Aiming at Tighter Security

If the new detection devices and metal detector settings had been in place Oct.
18, he added, the man ''would not have been able to get in the front doors,''
adding that ''I think we'll have the state of the art'' in security measures
when the changes were made.

The Capitol Police said the man arrested in the gallery was Israel Rubinowits, a
22-year-old Israeli who threatened to blow up the Capitol when approached by the
police. His court-appointed lawyer, Carl Angelis, told a hearing in the District
of Columbia Superior Court that Mr. Rubinowits wanted to address Congress about
world hunger.

Mr. Rabinowits was charged with making threats of bodily harm, a charge that
carries a maximum 20-year prison term and a $5,000 fine. He was held when he
failed to make bond of $25,000.

Mr. Russ said Mr. Rubinowits had under his clothes two plastic one-liter bottles
wrapped in cardboard, strapped to his body with a rope and wrapped in a white
cloth bag. The thin copper wire attached to the bottles did not set off a metal
detector outside the gallery entrance.

Directions for Making a Bomb

The bottles contained black powder, a flammable liquid of unknown composition,
glass, stones, ceramic tile and metal fragments, Mr. Russ said. The man carried
several typed pages with diagrams entitled, ''How I Made the Bomb,''
instructions that were ''technically correct,'' Mr. Russ added.

The device was taken to the Fort Belvoir in suburban Virginia and was exploded.

Mr. Russ said preliminary estimates indicated that the blast could have had the
force of two to five sticks of dynamite, enough to injure ''quite a few
people.''

As the House was voting on establishing a medal to commemorate Vietnam veterans,
the man got up, walked to the front rail of gallery and pulled out the device.

Mr. Russ said that Mr. Rubinowits was flicking a switch on a battery when four
plainclothes officers closed in. ''Stop or I will blow it up,'' Mr. Rubinowits
yelled before he could be subdued.

Congress has metal detectors outside each gallery entrance, but on Oct. 18, Mr.
Russ said, the machines were calibrated to pick up such items as guns, knives
and large belt buckles.

''We have made them more sensitive,'' he said. ''We have made significant
changes and we intend to make more.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 3, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


;
A QUESTION NOT OF U.S. RESOLVE BUT OF JUDGEMENT

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 613 words


T o the Editor:

The tragic, needless events of recent days in Beirut will be probed for many
lessons, and so they should be. Yet in that agonizing search for responsibility
we ought not lose sight of the larger historical implications of this episode, a
lesson that seems inexcusably lost on the present national leadership.

Simply put, American foreign policy since World War II has repeatedly failed to
fit means to ends. We are not only humiliated by the anguish inflicted on those
who lost sons, husbands, brothers and fathers in Beirut but condemned by our
inability to explain what they were doing there.

No event in history is preordained, but surely the policy pursued by the Reagan
Administration in Lebanon should now raise doubts about its eventual success. A
similar string of events in 1964 and 1965 plunged the Johnson Administration
into a deeper commitment in Vietnam.

Although most Americans have pushed from their memories the massive destruction
and loss of military personnel resulting from the attack on the Bien Hoa air
base, the bombing of the Brink's Hotel in Saigon (then a billet and headquarters
for American officers) and the nighttime attack on the Pleiku airfield, the
historical message of these events is altogether relevant and troubling.

As in Vietnam, so in Lebanon we are dealing with a revolutionary movement whose
dimensions we do not understand. National administrations since World War II
have repeatedly made commitments for broad, vaguely articulated ends - the
destruction of Communism most frequently - but have persistently failed to
understand that others in the world may be more ruthless, more clever, more
intrepid and more committed to their beliefs than we are.  Lyndon Johnson, it
should be recalled, ultimately used the events of 1964 and 1965 to justify a
broader conflict in Southeast Asia, and he did so with arguments chillingly
similar to those advanced by the present Administration. We must show our
resolve to the rest of the world, they insist. Fundamentally, however, the issue
of resolve is not in question - the issue of judgment is.

Surely, we demonstrate through our actions that we do not understand the
relationship between the sinews of military power and foreign policy. The
incongruity of the world's most powerful warship, the New Jersey, standing
silently offshore while a truck driven by a fanatic and loaded with high
explosives metes out the greatest single day of punishment to American military
forces since the Tet offensive ought to compel us to reassess our position and
to question our judgment.

We ought not to disgrace those who died by claiming that those who survived
should remain in Lebanon in order to teach international terrorists a lesson. To
insist that we should shows merely how badly we confuse terrorism with modern
warfare, how we refuse to understand the power of the religious revolution that
is sweeping the Middle East and how thoughtlessly we employ our military power.
Our post-World War II history teaches an even more important lesson. We do not
have the capacity - in terms of military might or national will - to convert the
quarrels of others to our own and to pay the price for such intervention. We
cannot make the world over by force of arms, and we only make more problematic
our survival by attempting to do so.  A sane American foreign policy would seek
to measure our needs against our expectations, our military prowess against our
will and our success against how well we meet both of these.

KERMIT L. HALL Associate Professor of History and Law University of Florida
Gainesville, Fla, Oct. 25, 1983

*

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 3, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MARINE COLONEL TELLS OF NEW BEIRUT SECURITY

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 646 words

DATELINE: BEIRUT, Lebanon, Nov. 2


The commander of the United States Marine contingent here said today that he was
doing everything conceivable to protect his men but that ''there's no way'' to
prepare a sure defense against another terrorist bomb attack.

''You just don't have that kind of control here,'' the commander, Col. Timothy
J. Geraghty, said in an interview.

He said that before a truck bomb killed at least 230 marines, soldiers and
sailors on Oct. 23 he had felt that the marines, as part of the multinational
force that includes French, Italian and British troops, could not barricade
themselves as they ''would do in a combat offensive role.''

But, he added, ''I'm doing it now.  I mean I've absolutely no choice now.''

'A Security Nightmare'

Colonel Geraghty, who led a reconnaissance unit as a captain in Vietnam,
described the problems of trying to defend the main American encampment at the
Beirut International Airport as ''a security nightmare.''

''All you have to do,'' he said, ''is just look around our position here and you
don't have to be much of a tactician to know that it's terrible, simply because
of the large numbers of people and equipment, vehicles, etc. You have thousands
of cars a day just moving by here. Just any vehicle that's going by right out
there could be loaded.''

A four-lane divided highway leading to the passenger terminal of the airport
skirts one side of the Marine camp, and another road leading to cargo areas and
the flight line parallels the camp for several hundred yards.

Several hundred yards to the east and south, facing the longest of the camp's
barbed wire fences there are rows of unpainted slum houses. Behind them, the
thickly wooded Shuf Mountains rise sharply to a height of 3,500 feet or so
providing a commanding position for an attack on the airport.

The Marines were ordered to set up their main camp at the airport when they
arrived in Lebanon 13 months ago.

Would Prefer High Ground

''If we had our choice,'' Colonel Geraghty said, ''it would be to be tactically
deployed on the high ground. But that isn't our mission.''

The Marines' mission, the colonel said, is to serve as a ''presence'' in Lebanon
in hopes of creating an environment in which the Lebanese, who have been locked
in a civil war for eight years, might ''settle their differences over a
negotiating table rather than in the hills with howitzers.''

An aide said that before a terrorist driving a truck filled with explosives
smashed into the headquarters of the Battalion Landing Team on Oct. 23 the
Marines had received scores of car- bomb threats. He said also that a car bomb
had exploded beside a United States convoy a week earlier, wounding four
marines.

But Colonel Geraghty said there had been no indication that the Marines were to
be the target of so huge a bomb - 2,000 to 2,500 pounds of TNT - as the one
carried in the truck Oct. 23.

Colonel Geraghty said he was dispersing his forces over a wider area of the
compound so that the Marines could no longer be attacked in such large numbers
as was the case at the Battalion Landing Team headquarters.

He said he had also begun transferring more of the Marines' administrative and
support functions to the ships of the United States Sixth Fleet.

By late Tuesday, the Marines had blocked one of the two entrances to the camp
with 6-foot-high mounds of dirt, rows of tar-filled 55-gallon steel drums, wire.
Now the entrance to the camp from outside the airport is through a gate in a
steel picket fence off the road to the cargo area. That is the same route chosen
by the suicide terrorist on Oct. 23.

But a row of tar-filled steel drums now forces vehicles to turn right sharply as
they enter the compound, making it impossible for them to pick up speed before
encountering a .50-caliber machine gun mounted on a supply truck with a marine
hunched over it.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 3, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

PULLOUT IN BEIRUT REJECTED IN HOUSE

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 788 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 2


The House of Representatives today decisively rejected an attempt to force the
withdrawal of the Marines from Lebanon before next March.

An amendment offered to the Defense Department appropriations bill would have
cut off all funds for the Beirut operation by March 1. The leadership of both
parties opposed the measure, and it was defeated by a vote of 274 to 153.

The House then went on to pass the Pentagon bill, the largest appropriation
measure in Congressional history, by a vote of 328 to 97. The legislation
allocates $247 billion for military uses in the current fiscal year, which began
Oct. 1, and contains funds for such controversial weapon systems as the MX
missile, the B-1 bomber and the Pershing 2 missile.

Money for 2 Programs Omitted

All attempts by critics of the military to trim money for these systems were
defeated on the House floor. But the bill omits funds for two programs requested
by the Administration: a Jordanian strike force to help protect Middle East
oilfields in emergencies and new production of chemical weapons. A slightly
larger version of the legislation is due for Senate consideration later this
week.  Last month Congress adopted legislation that authorized deployment of the
Marines in Lebanon for 18 months under the War Powers Resolution. The move to
slash that time limit was initiated after the truck-bombing in Beirut 10 days
ago killed more than 230 marines.

Representative Clarence D. Long, Democrat of Maryland, who sponsored the rider,
told the House today, ''Keeping the Marines there any longer will have only one
result - to kill more marines.''

The decisive vote against the fund cutoff indicates that Congress is prepared to
run that risk, and keep the marines in position, as long as the Lebanese peace
talks in Geneva show any signs of progress. As Representative Lee H. Hamilton,
Democrat of Indiana, argued, ''We must give the political process, the
diplomatic process, a chance to succeed.''

Still 'a Lot of Doubts'

But many of those who opposed the rapid troop withdrawal warned the Reagan
Administration that Congressional patience was not unlimited and that the
authorization for the marines was not open-ended.

''There are a lot of doubts up here,'' said Representative Jack Edwards of
Alabama, ranking Republican on the Armed Services Committee. ''This was not a
referendum on the President's policies. There's a gut feeling among many people
that this is not the time to change signals in Lebanon, but there is a lingering
concern that this is another Vietnam. We'll always have to live with Vietnam
every time we do something outside our borders.''

Today's debate refocused the attention of Congress on Lebanon, which has been
eclipsed by the news from the American invasion of Grenada during the last week.
To many lawmakers, the Middle East situation is considerably more important to
American interests than the Caribbean island, and dozens of Congressmen jumped
to their feet today to join the debate.

Supporters of the fund cutoff maintained that this potential superpower
confrontation in Lebanon made it essential to replace the Marines with a
broader-based, multinational force, perhaps under United Nations auspices.
Representative Long argued that having armed representatives of the superpowers
in the region amounted to ''playing chicken'' with world peace.

Reagan Asked to Define Goals

To many lawmakers, the strongest argument in favor of removing the marines is
that the Administration has failed to advance a coherent and realistic set of
goals in Lebanon. Representative David R. Obey, Democrat of Wisconsin, said:
''We're trying to say to the Admninistration, Mr. President, you've got to
define a clear and reasonable mission for the marines, or your support in this
body will run out.''

Congressmen who argued for keeping the marines in Beirut retorted that America's
image in the world was at stake. ''We in this country,'' said Representative
Stewart B. McKinney, Republican of Connecticut, ''have to decide if we are, in
fact, a leader, or if we disappear into the world of Peter Pan, pull ourselves
back and forget about it.''

Perhaps the key to the outcome today, however, was the perception around Capitol
Hill that President Reagan's popularity has risen since the invasion of Grenada
and his televised speech to the nation.

''The fact is that this country likes victory, and they view Grenada as a
victory,'' said Representative William R. Ratchford, Democrat of Connecticut.
''The wave of patriotism that followed Grenada is what members sensed back home.
For the first time in a long time, I heard people saying, you've got to support
the President.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 3, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

House Authorizes Programs For Veteran Health Studies

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 98 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 2


The House approved a bill today authorizing health studies of Vietnam veterans
and veterans of atomic tests and programs for women and aging veterans. The
Senate was expected to follow suit Thursday.

The $30 million measure, approved by voice vote, calls for a study of stress
disorders in Vietnam veterans and preparation for a study of the impact of
radiation testing on the health of veterans.

It also extends a Vietnam veterans storefront counseling center program for four
years until 1988 and establishes a women's advisory committee within the
Veterans Administration.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 4, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK: DARKNESS AND LIGHT ON THE ISLE OF SP

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1258 words


ICE

 BY BERNARD WEINRAUB

ST. GEORGE'S, Grenada, Nov. 3 - Darkness comes early to Grenada. By 3:30 P.M.
the narrow streets of St. George's, the capital, are quiet and a soft breeze
carries the scent of nutmeg and saffron.

On the porch of a white stucco house on the fringe of the city, Alimenta Bishop,
the mother of Maurice Bishop, the Prime Minister who was slain in a coup,
pressed the fingertips of her left hand to her forehead.

''I bought him pistachio nuts and a bottle of whisky when he was put under house
arrest,'' she said, staring into the darkness. ''He had a bad mark on his face,
like a cigarette burn. He didn't want me to see it. He said, 'Mom you better
leave now.' We kissed each other.''

Seated beside Mrs. Bishop, her brother, Alan LaGrenade, a retired civil servant,
said: ''Maurice wanted a better understanding with the United States. He was
anticolonialist, that's what he was. He never admitted to being a Communist. His
whole philosophy was Socialist.''

The details of the downfall and murder of 39-year-old Maurice Bishop remain a
mystery that carries a special poignance here. It is widely believed in St.
George's that shortly before his execution by leftist extremists on Oct. 19, Mr.
Bishop pleaded in vain with his killers not to shoot the Education Minister,
Jacqueline Creft, because she was pregnant with his child. Miss Creft and Mr.
Bishop had a 5-year-old son, Vladimir, who now lives with Miss Creft's parents
in St. George's.

As she spoke the other evening, Mrs. Bishop's voice cracked. ''We don't even
know if Maurice was buried,'' she said. ''We had tried to get his body.''

Tears laced her cheeks. ''He was a lovely child,'' she said. ''He always thought
of the poor. He was a Socialist, not a Communist. We were well off, and one day
I complained about something and he said, 'Mommy you are lucky. Think of the
poor people.' ''

The next afternoon at the Point Salines airstrip, an American diplomat who flew
in from Washington remarked bitterly to a reporter that Mr. Bishop had created a
repressive state that stifled free speech and crushed liberal opposition.
Although Mr. Bishop had been arrested and slain by extremists in an apparent
grab for power, the diplomat said the Grenadian leader was a protege of Fidel
Castro's and hardly a moderating force.

''People here were highly political,'' the diplomat said. ''They love to gossip
and talk and under Bishop they were scared, just plain scared.''

Yards away, Alimenta Bishop, a stately woman, stood in the scorching dust to
board a United States Air Force C-130 cargo plane with several Grenadians and
Americans for the 45- minute flight to Barbados and a brief rest.


St. George's is an exquisite 18th- century capital, faintly reminiscent of C,ote
d'Azur. Driving along the crumbling mountain roads, one sees a lush vista of
homes with red tile roofs fringing the sunlit harbor. The sky is streaked pink.

Yet the signs of the brief war are everywhere. Not just overturned Cuban armored
personnel carriers and trucks along the roads. Or the charred United States
helicopters on the beach and splattered along a leafy playing field. Or the
wrecked Prime Minister's residence where propaganda manuals from Libya, Cuba and
North Korea lay flat and charred on the earth.

Near busy Lucas Street, traffic suddenly halted the other morning as soldiers of
the 82d Airborne Division crouched low at a frame house and ordered the
occupants to come out. A perspiring Army captain hawked orders to his troops and
cursed the traffic jam nearby. For a moment tension seemed to crackle in the
air.

One by one, several teen-agers emerged, the boys shirtless, holding their hands
aloft. The captain frantically waved the traffic by.

The paratroopers searched the house and found a Cuban uniform.


At the Cuban Embassy, atop a ridge about five miles from downtown, Ambassador
Julian Torres Rizo remained secluded beyond a locked gate. The Cubans refused to
leave despite orders to do so from Grenada's Governor General, Sir Paul Scoon.

''We're still in radio communication with Havana,'' Gail Reed, the Chicago-born
wife of the Ambassador, said through the embassy fence today. She was asked
about the killing of Maurice Bishop. It has been rumored here that Mr. Bishop's
murder stunned Mr. Castro to the point that the Cuban military effort against
the Americans was half-hearted.

Her eyes flashed. ''The killing of Bishop is not authorized,'' she said angrily.
''Not authorized.''


Of the 300 journalists here, only the Swedish and the Dutch have, perhaps not
surprisingly, been able to find Grenadians voicing anti-American comments. What
startles Americans here is that Grenadians seem to adore the American invaders.

''They are so darling, they are nice with us,'' said 61-year-old Albertina
Brathwaite, standing beside her small cottage as a goat grazed nearby.
''Darling, if it wasn't for the Almighty and Mr. Reagan we would not be here.''

At the St. Joseph's Convent School, one of the nuns, Sister Gabrielle, remarked
quietly, ''My hope for this country is that we be free - free to make our own
mistakes.''

On Young Street, some freshly painted words, ''God Bless America,'' are scrawled
above another slogan that has obviously been there for years. The slogan:
''Build the revolution.''


If journalists love nothing more than covering a war, Grenada was, for a brief
moment, the ideal story. One cameraman strutted around for days wearing the same
T-shirt with the inscription ''CBS News. Siege of Beirut, summer 1982.'' Through
days and nights there was gossip about Vietnam, El Salvador, Beirut.

If Grenada was far less dangerous than those wars, and far shorter, it was also
probably the most difficult conflict to cover.

On a typical day, a journalist awoke at 4 A.M. in Barbados, 150 miles away, then
drove to the airport and waited in line to board an 8:30 military shuttle flight
for Grenada. By late afternoon the journalist rushed to Grenada's still
incomplete Point Salines airport to wait several hours in the sun for military
flights returning to Barbados.

Long delays, canceled flights and frayed tempers were common.

Today, for example, the scheduled 1:30 flight from Grenada to Barbados was
abruptly called off, apparently to allow expelled Libyan diplomats to leave the
country.

A television correspondent shrieked and cursed at an Army captain that his film
would not make the evening news. The correspondent demanded to see a colonel, a
general, any general. The captain smiled. The journalists were finally placed on
a cargo plane 90 minutes later.


Perhaps the bleakest moment for the American forces during the invasion was the
accidental bombing of the Richmond Hill Mental Hospital that left at least 17
people dead.

The site was virtually wrecked but more than 60 patients remained in the dank
hospital, some behind bars. ''I'm hungry, starved to death, all the bad people
are here,'' a man shrieked as several reporters walked in the courtyard. Some
patients, presumably nonviolent, walked freely in and out of the hospital. There
was a powerful stench of ether.

''Such a sweet little country, this isle of spice,'' a nurse said quietly. ''But
we feel the hatred of politics.''

On the shattered wall of the pharmacy, one sheet of paper remained, slightly
torn and burned. It read:

''Lord, it is wonderful to receive this new year. Thanks for all the happy
memories of the past year.  Teach me self-righteousness. Put some laughter in my
heart and on my lips.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 4, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

BEHIND U.N. VOTE: HOW MUCH ANTI-AMERICANISM?
News Analysis

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 918 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Nov. 3


Early this week, when the United States failed in its challenge to the
credentials of a delegate from Grenada, the General Assembly burst into what
seemed a kind of gleeful, derisive, anti-American applause.  The incident
reminded some delegates of other such outbursts - including dancing in the
aisles - that apparently showed general pleasure at American embarrassments,
such as the time in 1974 when Yasir Arafat, the Palestine Liberation
Organization leader, was allowed to address the Assembly and the vote in 1980
electing Nicaragua to the Security Council.

Similar anti-American sentiment seemed to be operating here Wednesday when the
158-member Assembly, after agreeing to skip a debate, voted overwhelmingly to
deplore the United States invasion of Grenada. Not only the Soviet bloc and the
developing countries, which are often known as the ''automatic majority,'' voted
in favor of the resolution; not a single member of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, nor such other friendly countries as Pakistan, Thailand and Egypt,
voted with the United States.

Quarrels Fill the Debate

Is the United States virtually without open, powerful support in the court of
official international opinion? Despite the voting Wednesday, in which only
Israel, El Salvador and the Caribbean countries that joined in the Grenada
invasion voted with the United States, diplomats here today were cautioning
against such a view. In particular, they said, the events of Wednesday were
mixed enough to show a good deal of sympathy for the American invasion and a
failure of the pro-Soviet countries, which led the attack on the United States,
to succeed in all their objectives.

The Assembly session was filled with often-bitter procedural quarrels. At the
outset, the Assembly approved, by 60 votes to 54, a motion by Southern Yemen to
cut off debate before it had even started. The resolution deploring the invasion
that was then approved contained virtually all of the language of the resolution
vetoed by the United States in the Security Council last week.

''The U.N. showed itself to be the irresponsible, rush-to-judgment body that
votes at the behest of certain countries,'' a senior American official here
said. By ''certain countries'' he meant the Soviet Union and the other Communist
nations.

Close Vote Is Noted

The official added, however, that ''it wasn't an unmitigated disaster.'' He
pointed out that the vote to curtail debate was close. ''If you exclude the
knee-jerk votes of the Soviet bloc,'' he said, ''and consider the votes of the
countries that actually give the question some consideration, the results
weren't so bad.''

Other diplomats, including some who voted for all parts of the resolution
Wednesday, attached considerable importance to the passage of an amendment,
proposed by Belgium and backed by other European countries, calling for ''free
elections as rapidly as possible'' in Grenada.

A motion by Southern Yemen to take no action on the amendment was defeated by 63
votes to 43 and the amendment itself was approved by a wide margin, 71 to 23.
The countries that voted against the amendment were those most closely allied to
the Soviet Union, including most of the members of the Warsaw Pact as well as
Afghanistan, Angola, Cuba, Mozambique, Syria and Vietnam.

''The amendment,'' a Western diplomat said, ''was something that would be taken,
and legitimately so, as a token of understanding of the aims of the United
States invasion.'' The countries pushing for a quick anti-American vote, he
added, ''were outmaneuvered by this question of free elections.''

Legal Considerations Noted

But the fact remains that the vast majority of countries voted for the
resolution deploring the invasion, with its assertion that the American action
was a ''flagrant violation of international law.'' Some countries that did so,
such as the Philippines, Thailand, Italy and Uruguay, explained that their vote
was directed by purely legal considerations. In one way or another each
acknowledged that the situation in Grenada was rapidly deteriorating in the days
leading up to the invasion and they implied that, politically, an intervention
was understandable, if not exactly legal.

Why did they not simply abstain in the voting? Some delegates, noting that they
had voted earlier to deplore the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan, said they
felt that consistency and credibility required that they formally vote against
the invasion of Grenada.

Others said that to get to the root of the matter, it was necessary to delve
into what might be called the political culture of the United Nations. Some
delegates, particularly from Western countries, contend that the organization
can be moved by the manipulation of certain symbols; and, they add, the
Communist countries, equipped with the vocabulary of ''liberation'' are more
adept at using those symbols than the Western democracies.

''There is often a quick, automatic reaction at the U.N. and the Eastern
countries are good at capitalizing on it,'' a European delegate said. ''The
other countries are pulled into the maelstrom and they have to act very
quickly.'' Some American officials contended, in addition, that the voting
revealed dramatically that the United States does not have client states. It
would be rare indeed for an ally of the Soviet Union to defy its wishes in the
United Nations. By contrast, countries friendly to the United States and often
vote against the wishes of Washington.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 10, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
An article last Friday on the General Assembly's approval of a resolution
deploring the invasion of Grenada incorrectly described the vote by the
Philippines. It abstained.

GRAPHIC: photo of Jeanne Kirkpatrick

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 4, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE VIEW FROM A CAPITAL COLORED BY GRENADA...

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1073 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 3


Some say the war ended for all intents and purposes the night the American
medical students were shown on television, stepping off the plane from Grenada
and stooping to kiss United States soil.

In the world of images where this city's politicians so often seek confirmation,
that was the equivalent of the flag raising on Iwo Jima. ''That was a climactic
moment of the week,'' said David R. Gergen, the President's director of
communications. ''We didn't know how those kids would react.'' Reaganites feel
that the earth-bussing picture has reduced all debates about the wisdom of the
invasion to long gray footnotes.

As far as the withered mood of the capital city can be fathomed, the war may
have just as easily ended when Monday night football came on television with
another Redskin victory for enthusiastic hordes to again discuss on the bus and
subway to work the next morning. It was a victory bannered discreetly in one
newspaper above the news of the American bombardment of the Grenadian mental
hospital.


''Most people, once they saw the polls come out, went underground,'' said
Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, describing the relative dearth of
strong negative reaction in the capital once it was clear the President was not
to be roundly condemned in opinion polls for the invasion.

''Free microphone, Senator!'' one reporter hawked from amid the welter of
cameras and notepads that waited outside the White House all week. Senator
Charles H. Percy, normally receptive to such an invitation upon emerging from
the White House, hurried off in the opposite direction grinning and waving.

House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., was one of the few Democrats to strongly
criticize the President this week, although not for the 20 patients left dead in
the mistaken assault on the mental hospital. ''That's the heartbreak of war,''
he said. ''Those things happen.''


A measure of how successful President Reagan felt about his venture was provided
this morning at the White House when he objected entirely to the use of the word
''invasion'' to describe what the United States did on Grenada. ''It was a
rescue mission,'' he said, although he had used the word himself the day the
action began.

''In my view, Castro invaded Grenada,'' said the Senate majority leader Howard
H. Baker Jr., leaving a meeting with the President and vociferously endorsing
his view. He contended that ''American troops there relieved that invasion,''
and he predicted great things for the President ''in the history books'' because
of Grenada.


The White House press office, while vague for much of the war on its details,
was quick to present the voice of the people. This was carefully culled for a
press release based on what Reagan aides said was a spontaneous, historic flood
of thousands of messages of approval.

An excerpt from Vacaville, Calif.: ''You have put the eagle back on the mountain
top. God bless you.''

From a mother in Sagamore Hills, Ohio, quoting her son, a marine: ''If I should
die for my country, it is not because of stupidity, it is for a cause.''

White House officials denied the excerpts were chosen for propaganda purposes,
but they contained enough of a careful thread of quoted support from ''blue
collar'' workers and ''Democrats'' to make the reader think beyond war and
death, Lebanon and Grenada, to next year's election. ''As a Vietnam vet, I
support you 100 percent - please run again,'' said the excerpt offered from
Philadelphia.

Left unnoted by the White House was a plea by former President James Manchem of
the Seychelles to Mr. Reagan to consider ''ways and means'' of restoring
democracy to his Indian Ocean domain. North Koreans backed by the Soviet Union
prop up the Seychelles Government, contended Mr. Machem with great empathy for
the Caribbean invasion.


''People ask me about these new wars,'' said Jan Skruggs, the combat veteran who
pioneered the capital's Vietnam Memorial, ''and I usually say, 'Look, I'm just
cleaning up after the last one. No more memorials,' I say. Yeah - no more
memorials.''

Actually, Mr. Skruggs was more approving of the President's actions than
critical. ''At first,'' he said, ''I almost laughed and cried simultaneously
because I recalled the head of the island claiming we were going to invade, and
I thought he was paranoid, that it was like 'The Mouse That Roared.' Then, oddly
enough, we invaded Grenada.''

Some of the Vietnam trappings heard here in the days of Grenadian combat -
''friendly fire'' to describe the wounds mistakenly inflicted on American
invaders by their comrades - struck Mr. Skruggs as little more than small
emotional postscripts to Vietnam. ''My hunch is, I wish the whole thing hadn't
happened, but we probably did the right thing. People haven't said, 'Well,
another Vietnam in Grenada.' This is good because it's not another Vietnam. It's
a relatively small island under control in 48 hours.''


The war was clearly over when the White House began leaking chunks of stern
desk-thumping quotations from the President directing his Cabinet to take up
their budget tools and once again cut spending. This served to depict a
President working on more than one burner, hardly frozen by conflict as he
pointed toward the re-election campaign.

''What about your information policy on the war?'' one White House official was
asked in an interruption of all the noncombat news the Administration was
mustering.

''What policy?'' the official responded. Then, after a pause for irony: ''What
information?''


Joan Baez was tuning her guitar in the spotlight of a concert hall a few blocks
from the White House on the second night of the invasion, saying that nothing
had changed. ''Here we are back at Square One,'' she told the audience. ''The
world's blowing up and I'm singing a concert.''

Actually things had changed. Her audience, stilled at first, seemed brought to
life not by current events but by the past as memorialized in her songs of the
60's. Their gray hair showed as she sang, ''We are the warriors of the sun.
We're fighting postwar battles that never got won.''

She seemed more willing to kid herself, singing, ''It's getting harder to
deceive us. Bobby Dylan's gone to Jesus.'' Then, smiling at the shifts of time
and circumstance, she interrupted her own song to explain for any newcomers,
''Bob Dylan was a songwriter in the 60's.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of President Reagan

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 4, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

...AND ONE MAN'S NEW BEIRUT VIEW

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 983 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 3


A little more than a month ago, Representative Samuel S. Stratton, looking as
spry in green Army fatigues and combat boots as the military commanders he
admires, strode into the Marine base in Beirut for an inspection.

Under ordinary circumstances, Mr. Stratton, a hawkish Democrat from upstate New
York who is an enthusiastic supporter of the Reagan Administration's military
buildup, would be expected to rally behind the Marine presence. That would have
been consistent with the stance he has taken on military issues in his 25 years
in the House, where he is now dean of the New York State delegation.

But, after his visit to Beirut, Mr. Stratton's initial rumbling of misgivings
about the deployment of Marines and warships to Lebanon mounted. In the
aftermath of the terrorist attack on the encampment, his doubts have increased
to the point of outright opposition.

To the surprise of many, Mr. Stratton, a member of the House Armed Services
Committee who has been the bane of antiwar activists from Vietnam to the nuclear
freeze, was one of the prime movers behind the effort in the House of
Representatives this week to force the withdrawal of the Marines. The measure to
cut off all funds for the Beirut operation by March was defeated on Wednesday.

Ideally, Mr. Stratton would like the Marines out now. But in an effort to
attract more support, he agreed with the cosponsors of the amendment to the
March deadline.

'Like a Bouncer in a Nightclub'

''We ought to pull them out and I said so before we went,'' Mr. Stratton said
before the vote, as he picked through a pile of color photographs of his
activities in Lebanon. ''We shouldn't have the prime crack offensive forces of
the United States military sitting there and not able to do anything but shoot
back at people who shoot at them.''

''It's like a bouncer in a nightclub,'' continued Mr. Stratton, who visited
Lebanon with a bipartisan group from the Armed Services Committee. ''If you
stand in the corner and he looks strong, you don't do any monkey business. If
you try some monkey business, the bouncer will throw you out. There's all kind
of monkey business in Lebanon but the Marines are not throwing anyone out.''

The 67-year-old Mr. Stratton represents the New York State capital of Albany and
its environs.

Often his position on military issues places him in the minority of the state
delegation, as most of its members vociferously disagree with Mr. Stratton's
support of the MX missile, the B-1 bomber and his tough stance on arms control.

''Sam and I are light years apart on military matters,'' said Representative
Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of Brooklyn. ''But I respect the sincerity of his
views.''

No More Food Throwing

The monthly meetings of the delegation, once raucous scenes where the throwing
of bread rolls was not uncommon, have become comparatively subdued under Mr.
Stratton. This is in part, he said, because when his colleagues compete for
attention he doesn't call on them as ''one fool at a time'' in the fashion of
one of his predecessors.

''In the years I've been dean, we haven't had any food thrown,'' said Mr.
Stratton, who has had the job since 1978. ''Everyone gets a chance to speak, no
one is shut up. We try to organize the meeting to provide a place for those who
want to sound off.''

He said that the delegation, reduced from 39 members to 34 in last year's
reapportionment process, is making up for its losses in the ranks with an
increase in seniority among its members. Mr. Stratton, for example, ranks third
on the Armed Services Committee.

The Congressman can be abrasive and blunt when he wants something, particularly
in the Armed Services Committee where he is seen by his more liberal colleagues
as favoring expensive weapons systems over the needs of military personnel.

He sometimes runs into trouble forming coalitions and has an on-and- off
relationship with the Speaker, Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., who spoke out vigorously
in the Democratic Caucus against Mr. Stratton's effort to pull out the Marines.

Confrontation Over Lake Placid

Some time ago, Mr. O'Neill, furious that Mr. Stratton was holding up a major
spending bill because he wanted money for the winter Olympics in Lake Placid,
N.Y., had to persuade Mr. Stratton to back down. Mr. O'Neill remarked afterward:
''Humility is something you should learn at the outset in politics. It took Sam
22 years to learn it.''

''I didn't think I was ever nonhumble,'' said Mr. Stratton of the incident.
''That money was very important for New York.''

As he sallied forth in his first major opposition to Mr. Reagan's foreign
policy, Mr. Stratton got a taste of what it was like to antagonize the White
House. Edwin Meese 3d, counselor to the President, was in Mr. Stratton's
district recently and lost no time in calling Mr. Stratton's position
''irresponsible.''

Mr. Stratton is no newcomer to political challenges, however. Former
Representative John G. Dow campaigned on a nuclear freeze platform against Mr.
Stratton in the Democratic primary last year and forced Mr. Stratton to run his
most active race to date.

And earlier this year, Representative Charles E. Bennett, the Florida Democrat
who is one notch higher in seniority on the Armed Services Committee than Mr.
Stratton, challenged him for the chairmanship of the Subcommittee on Procurement
and Military Nuclear Systems. Mr. Stratton put up a spirited battle and edged
out Mr. Bennett in a secret ballot.

Mr. Stratton would like to be chairman of the full committee and he wryly
assessed the possibilities. ''Price faces some opposition at home from what I
understand,'' he said in reference to the chairman, Melvin Price, Democrat of
Illinois. ''Bennett is very hail and hearty. As they say in Washington, 'A few
die and none resign.' Maybe in another 20 years I'll be chairman.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Sam S. Stratton

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 5, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

COVERING GRENADA: HOST OF PROBLEMS

BYLINE: By JAMES FERON

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1419 words

DATELINE: BRIDGETOWN, Barbados, Nov. 4


The bombing of Fort Frederick in St. George's, Grenada, on the first day of the
invasion and the occupation of Pearls Airport, the only functioning airfield on
the island before the invasion, has created a host of problems for the 200 to
400 reporters trying to cover the action.

The bombing damaged a transmission center, severing telephone and cable links
with the world, while closing the airport meant that nonmilitary access to the
island has been possible only by boat. Thus, every day, hundreds of reporters
depend on military C-130 cargo planes to reach the island and return to Barbados
to send their stories.

This cumbersome procedure has been further complicated by what experienced
reporters here say is one of the least adequately informed military offices they
have ever encountered. Information is often released in Washington many hours
before shorter versions are offered here.

Restoring Communications

The transmission situation may change soon, according to Ronald McKenzie of the
Cable & Wireless Company in Bridgetown, who has been seeking to restore outside
communications with Grenada. ''We've shipped over the last bits of equipment we
had to order from abroad, and maybe service will be restored tonight or
tomorrow,'' he said today.

Communications experts have had to rebuild the transmitter atop Fort Frederick,
and that should restore voice and cable links. But television news teams will
still have to beam their ''feeds'' through an earth station here in Barbados,
meaning continued dependence on the military shuttle, for which the rules change
every day.

And until all the wires on Grenada are put back up, reporters there will
continue to function as they did before telephones, visiting each source of news
personally or depending somewhat on others' accounts of events.

News coverage of the Grenada invasion has, so far, meant spending half a day
visiting a few places and another half a day trying to get the story out of
Grenada. Some newspapers, magazines and television teams have organized a relay
system, taking turns carrying material to Bridgetown, where it could be
transmitted.

Nervous Tension in Newsrooms

This has elevated the ''pigeon'' system - finding someone to carry a news story
out to a colleague or depending on someone to actually send it - to new heights,
while creating nervous tension in newsrooms around the world.

One reporter was cut from the list of those on the last plane to Bridgetown a
few days ago, when seats were commandeered by the State Department for diplomats
and others. He stood on the tarmac writing his story by hand so that another
reporter could read it and send it to New York.

The magazine reporter who had volunteered to help was himself cut from the same
flight. Both newsmen were placed aboard another cargo plane a half-hour later
and made it back just in time to file their stories.

The reporters' day begins typically at 5:30 or 6 A.M. in the former air terminal
departure building here in Bridgetown, which now serves as the Joint Information
Bureau operated by the United States military. Processing begins only at 6:30 or
7 A.M., but the tendency is to get in early because the flights are limited to
about 90 reporters. Most flights are full, and some reporters are usually left
behind.

Concentrated Press Corps

The press corps is more concentrated here than it was in Vietnam, according to
those who covered both wars, in part because of the limited access to the island
and to the news. The corps is also somewhat larger than it might be, because
Grenada is near to the United States.

On the first flights to the island, only one dozen or two dozen reporters went,
and news organizations were designated by name. Wire services were always on the
list, although that included Reuters but not Agence France- Presse, and later
only a half-dozen major newspapers and magazines were allowed to go before the
list was opened to everyone. Among the early choices was The Washington Times,
which is owned by the Unification Church. The choice of that newspaper's
correspondent infuriated representatives of major daily newspapers that were not
on the list.

The foreign press was not represented on the flights for three or four days.
When a Canadian television team was again rejected, the correspondent followed
the military press officer around the room, shouting, ''We got your hostages out
of Iran; why can't you get us onto Grenada?''

Press credentials are checked and correspondents are moved into another waiting
area. All luggage, including cameras, sound equipment and sometime television
editing gear, go with the passengers into the plane's belly.

An Envelope of Earplugs

Passengers sit facing each other in double rows on woven plastic seats. Flying
in a C-130 is like riding under the hood of a car, with each operation, the
lowering of wheels or moving of flaps, easily heard. An envelope of earplugs is
passed down the aisle.

The first flight gets to the Point Salines airport, which the Cubans were
building but did not finish, at about 9:30 or 10 A.M. It is always noisy and
dusty. The airport is still designated a war zone, so the planes do combat
turns, which means keeping the engines going. Most of the time small Army buses
arrive for the half-hour trip into St. George's, but sometimes they do not
appear.

There have been military briefings, but they are dwindling because newsmen who
had been in touch with their offices overnight or who receive telex summaries of
morning newspaper stories found the briefings offered very little. The sessions
have become more administrative, offering news of press conferences in town, for
example, or the details of a visiting congressional group.

The airport itself can produce news. One morning press flight arrived just
before the repatriation of wounded Cubans. The reporters who stayed to cover it
got on the 1:30 flight back to Bridgetown, certain they had seen something of
news value and uncertain about the availability of the late afternoon flight.

Accommodation of TV Teams

The midday flight was added, according to military personnel, to accommodate
television teams seeking to edit their film in time to beam it to the United
States in the afternoon, when the $1,000-a-minute satellite is more available
for transmissions - and in time for the evening news.

But Thursday, the midday press plane was requisitioned for the repatriation of
Libyan diplomats. Frustrated television teams watched, a major news story in
their cameras. Space was found for them on another plane that left at 3 P.M.

There are no telephones linking the airport and the town. Taxis are available
but since Thursday they have been forced to wait at some distance because the
United States military is trying to clear the airport of the chaotic bargaining
for rides.

In St. George's, reporters have been sleeping on mattresses in the lobbies of
hotels packed with reporters. An estimated 100 reporters have taken up residence
on the island.

New Precautions

Returning to Bridgetown means showing up an hour and a half before the 1:30 and
5:30 P.M. flights, a change demanded by Barbadian authorities since one
passenger, described by a military spokesman as a ''soldier-of-fortune type,''
tried to bring back a gun belt with live ammunition.

Reporters now wait in a roped enclosure on the field, once they've been checked
in, making the ''pigeon'' work that much more difficult as guards discourage the
passing of notes, television tape or other paraphernalia. The return flight
arrives at Bridgetown at about 7 P.M. On Thursday night 10 reporters were unable
to get on.

Barbadian customs is now checking shoulder bags, television equipment and other
luggage, adding a half-hour to the six or seven hours of transportation daily.
And, as the news crews file through the terminal they are handed two- or
three-paragraph news releases.

The releases might disclose that United States forces swept the island of
Carriacou looking for Cubans, an announcement that had been made in detail in
Washington eight hours earlier. At their hotels, another half-hour away, the
reporters talk to their editors, who are asking questions about events that
officials in Washington say are happening in Grenada. Sometimes the reporter
knows about it, sometimes not. Because there are no phone links with the island,
there is no way to check it out, until tomorrow.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of a Grenadian passing a disabled van

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Linda L. Cornelius and E. H. Vick Jr., Advertising Executives, Are Married

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 89, Column 2; Society Desk

LENGTH: 256 words


Linda Louise Cornelius, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Adam E. Cornelius Jr. of
Buffalo and Jupiter, Fla., was married yesterday to Edward Hoge Vick Jr., son of
Dr. and Mrs. Vick of Haverford, Pa. The Rev. Thomas P. Stewart performed the
ceremony at the Westminster Presbyterian Church in Buffalo.

Devon Marlette and John J. Graves attended the couple as matron of honor and
best man.

The bride is a vice president of and account supervisor for Ogilvy & Mather in
New York. She graduated summa cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania,
where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's in business
administration from the university's Wharton School. Her father, now retired,
was a partner in Boland & Cornelius, ship brokers, and president and chairman of
the American Steamship Company.  Her grandfather, the late Adam E. Cornelius,
was cofounder of both concerns.

Mr. Vick is an executive vice president and director of account management at
Ammirati & Puris, a New York advertising agency. He graduated from the Episcopal
Academy in Merion, Pa., and the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
served as a lieutenant with the Navy in Vietnam and received a master's degree
from the Medill School of Journalism at Northwestern University. His previous
marriage ended in divorce. His father, now retired, was chief of pediatrics at
the Lankenau Hospital in Philadelphia.

The bridegroom is a great-grandson of Dr. Joshua Vick, who developed a number of
medical products now marketed by Richardson-Vicks.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Linda Vick

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET'S PRESS LOOSES SATIRE OVER GRENADA

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 17, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 767 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Nov. 5


In the criticism directed by the Soviet press at President Reagan over the
Grenada invasion, Tass has introduced a new weapon - bitterly personal satire.

For the second time in a week, a Tass writer, Konstantin Yuryev, on Friday,
ridiculed the President in what was titled a ''topical satire.''

It had Mr. Reagan receiving reports of the Grenada invasion from Secretary of
Defense Caspar W. Weinberger, and featured the President lauding ''Caspar,
dear'' for his feats while planning how to glorify the operation for the press.

The vignette concluded with the President dreaming of himself aboard Air Force
One on the day after a nuclear holocaust, eating his breakfast ''with gusto''
and receiving reports on the destruction of the earth from Mr. Weinberger.

Intense Propaganda Campaign

It concludes with the President saying: ''Serves them right! Next time they will
think twice before interfering with my attempts to restructure the world the way
I like.''

While the Soviet propaganda campaign over Grenada has been generally rated as
one of the most intense in recent years, what has struck many readers are the
increasingly personal attacks on Mr. Reagan.  Though Mr. Reagan is not the first
United States leader to take a drubbing at the hands of Soviet propagandists -
President Carter was roundly assailed for his human rights campaign and the
boycott of the Moscow Olympics - the attacks on Mr. Reagan have taken a personal
note not common in the past.

Most analysts here regard the trend as a reaction to the language Mr. Reagan has
used in assailing the Soviet Union, most notably in his ''evil empire'' speech.

Reagan Assailed

He has also been a product of the general deterioration of Soviet-American
relations in recent years, and in particular of the intensification of the
propaganda war in recent months over the shooting down of the Korean jetliner,
the impending deployments of new United States missiles in Europe, the Lebanese
struggle and Grenada, events which have led Soviet publicists to use ever more
strident rhetoric in assailing the President and his Administration.

The campaign over Grenada has filled newspapers, television and the Tass press
wire daily with countless expressions of indignation, ridicule, sarcasm and
anger.

Virtually every condemnation of the Grenada invasion by foreign governments and
organizations and by domestic groups have been reported in detail, and Soviet
commentators have depicted the operation as proof of Washington's militaristic
designs.

A sampling of dispatches on Friday included one comparing the ''harsh atrocities
and repressions'' in Grenada to ''Operation Phoenix'' in Vietnam.

Imaginary Dialogue

Tass dispatches have ridiculed Mr.  Reagan's stated reasons for the
intervention, including one that began bluntly with the charge that
justification for the action were a ''pyramid of lies.'' Mr. Yuryev's ''topical
satires,'' however, appeared to take the criticism to a new level.

In his first sally on Oct. 28, Mr. Yuryev took aim at Mr. Reagan's televized
account of how countries of the east Caribbean had asked him to help restore
order on Grenada.

''With the simple-mindedness that is typical of him, he told the Americans all
he knew about the intrusion of American troops on the island of Grenada,'' Tass
wrote. ''Eveything turned out to be much simpler than it had seemed to the
world.''

The article went on in this vein to ridicule the contention that american
students in St. George's were in danger and that Cubans were building an airport
''suspiciously suitable for the landing of Soviet military planes.''

Mr. Yuryev's second article on Friday was more harsh in its imaginary dialogue
between Mr. Reagan and Mr. Weinberger:

'' 'Caspar, dear, you are a hero! And I will accept no objections from you on
that score! You have razed to the ground the island's university and thus
liberated a thousand of our guys studying there. Glory to you!' ''

As the conversation develops, the defense secretary advises the President that
there were casualties in the operation. ''Let this not trouble you,'' the
President was depicted as saying. ''I'll just say that it was the Americans who
were dying and getting wounded while defending the lives of others and upholding
freedom and peace.''

''You are a giant, Mr. President!'' Tass had Mr. Weinberger saying in the
imaginary diaglogue.

''Thank you, my loyal minister, for this accurate comparison,'' Tass ridiculed
the President as saying. ''And be sure you repeat it to Nancy. She will be very
pleased.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN WAKE OF INVASION, MUCH OFFICIAL MISINFORMATION BY U.S. COMES TO LIGHT

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 20, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 3520 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 5


In the aftermath of last week's invasion of Grenada, it has become clear that
Reagan Administration officials and military authorities disseminated much
inaccurate information and many unproven assertions. They did so while
withholding significant facts and impeding efforts by the journalists to verify
official statements.

This picture has emerged from a review of initial statements made by
Administration officials about the invasion in light of evidence that emerged
later, including subsequent official statements that contradicted earlier ones.

Some misleading official statements apparently grew out of inadvertent errors in
the confusion of a combat situation. Others appear to have involved selective
and incomplete reporting of events and assertions designed to put Administration
actions in a favorable light. But some apparently involved deliberate
distortions and knowingly false statements of fact.

Criticism of the Administration's deception of reporters who asked beforehand
whether an invasion was planned has been muted by a broad consensus that
secrecy, if not lying, was necessary. But inaccurate official assertions of fact
continued long after the invasion had been launched and publicly announced.

Cuban Strength Inflated

In general, Administration statements in the days after the Oct. 25 start of the
invasion inflated the number of Cuban military personnel in Grenada, made other
misleading factual allegations to bolster President Reagan's unproven assertion
that the invasion was necessary to prevent a Cuban military takeover, and
exaggerated the evidence that Americans in Grenada had been in danger.

The Administration also failed initially to disclose several mishaps that cost
the lives of Grenadian civilians and American servicemen, while praising what
Mr. Reagan called the brilliant performance of the invading forces. For six
days, for example, the Administration did not report (and, it says, did not
discover) the inadvertent Oct. 25 bombing by a Navy plane of a civilian mental
hospital, which killed at least 17 people.

Official statements also understated the amount of planning for an invasion that
the Administration had done before a formal request from a group of Caribbean
island-states provided one of the main stated legal justifications for it.

At the same time, tight restrictions on press coverage prevented timely
independent checking of the accuracy of official statements. The Administration
barred reporters from Grenada until two days after the invasion began, strictly
limited access to the island over the next few days, provided only sketchy
information to official spokesmen about casualties and other key facts, and
sought to curtail amateur radio communications regarding Grenada.

News From Official Handouts

The result was that the public received most of its information in the crucial
early days from official news handouts. They portrayed the invasion in a more
favorable light than the fuller, but less prominently publicized, picture that
has emerged as officials have backed away from some of their assertions in the
face of evidence to the contrary.

Administration officials publicly assert that the errors were inadvertent. They
say the restrictions on press coverage were needed to preserve secrecy before
the invasion, to prevent interference with military operations, and to avoid
putting reporters in danger.

But many members of Congress, journalists and other critics have suggested that
a politically motivated design to influence public opinion pervaded the
Administration's handling of information about the invasion.

Senator Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, the Democratic minority leader,
complained of ''censored news reports'' giving only ''little morsels of
information.'' Senator Paul S. Sarbanes, Democrat of Maryland, said the most
disturbing thing about the invasion was ''the unprecedented treatment of a free
press,'' which, together with other Administration efforts to control Government
information, could lead to a situation in which ''the only sources of
information are official sources.'' Edward M. Joyce, the president of CBS News,
testified in Congress that in Grenada ''some threshold got crossed very early
on, from military censorship to political censorship.''

Inaccurate Statements Some of the inaccurate official statements that have come
to light, and unproven assertions that have been made, are summarized below,
starting with official denials up to the eve of the Oct. 25 invasion that any
such thing was planned.

White House spokesmen Larry Speakes and aides were asked by reporters on Oct. 24
whether United States troops had landed on Grenada. They checked with Rear Adm.
John Poindexter, the deputy national security adviser, who said this was
''preposterous,'' while keeping the press aides in the dark about the fact that
troops would be landing the next day. Mr. Speakes and aides repeated this denial
to reporters. They went on to deny that an invasion was planned.

That same evening, a reporter asked a Pentagon spokesman the whereabouts of the
Marine task force ultimately destined for Lebanon that had been diverted towards
Grenada. ''They are afloat in the Atlantic and headed for the Mediterranean,''
the spokesman replied. Hours later the same Marines landed in Grenada.

Les Janka, a Speakes aide, resigned this week, saying his personal credibility
had been damaged. But the White House has defended the pre-invasion deception of
its own official spokesmen as well as the press as necessary to safeguard the
secrecy of the operation. Most critics have agreed that secrecy was necessary,
but have accused the White House of deliberately making false statements when
some kind of ''no comment'' would have served as well.

Reports in Caribbean Press

In any event, the secrecy had already been compromised by reports in the
Caribbean press and on Grenadian radio more than two days before the invasion
that such an operation was being planned by Caribbean leaders. Adm. Wesley L.
McDonald, commander of all United States forces in the Atlantic region, said
Oct. 28 that the Cubans had known that ''U.S. intervention was likely'' and had
prepared for it.

Many of the inaccurate official statements about Grenada have involved vastly
inflated estimates of the number of Cuban military men on the island and other
assertions offered in support of President Reagan's statement, in a nationally
televised speech, that ''a Cuban occupation of the island had been planned.''

That Oct. 27 speech was the centerpiece of the Administration's largely
successful effort to win support for the invasion from a public that, because of
restrictions on the press, had not yet seen the kinds of bloody television
footage that turned many against the Vietnam War.

Mr. Reagan said the number of Cubans on Grenada was ''much larger'' than the
initial intelligence estimates of 400 to 600. He said ''they were a military
force'' rather than the construction workers they were believed to have been.

Count Rises to 1,100

The next day, Admiral McDonald said at a news conference that captured documents
showed there were at least 1,100 Cubans on Grenada, all ''well-trained
professional soldiers'' who had been ''impersonating construction workers.'' He
said 638 Cubans had been captured and 300 to 350 apparently remained at large.
Other military sources said as many as 1,000 Cubans might have taken to the
hills to fight a guerrilla war.

Then, last Sunday, the State Department acknowledged that the estimate of 784
Cubans on the island that the Cuban Government had given earlier was about
right. And on Wednesday, United States military authorities in Grenada said most
of the Cuban prisoners had been classified after interrogation as workers, with
only about 100 ''combatants.''

Thus, over three days the Pentagon estimate of the number of Cuban fighters who
had met the invading forces seems to have plunged from more than 1,000 to fewer
than 200, including the estimated 30 to 70 Cubans who were killed. The
up-and-down fluctuations in the estimates have not been fully explained. Cuban
officials say only 43 Cuban military personnel were on the island.

Mr. Reagan also said in his Oct. 27 speech that Grenada ''was a Soviet- Cuban
colony being readied as a major military bastion to export terror and undermine
democracy,'' and that ''we got there just in time'' to prevent Cuban occupation
of Grenada.

'A Terrorist Training Base'

The next day Admiral McDonald added that ''there was a terrorist training base
taking place at Calvigny barracks,'' and that ''the Cubans were planning to put
their Government into Grenada.'' He said captured documents showed that ''341
more officers and 4,000 more reservists'' were to arrive as part of a plan for
''the Cubans to come in and take over the island, which they had already started
to do at that time.''

A senior Pentagon official later said privately that the Admiral had been
confused about the 4,341 additional troops, and that they were to have been
Grenadians, not Cubans as the Admiral had suggested.

Captured documents released Friday by the State Department indicate that Cuba
had an agreement with Grenada's Marxist regime to base 27 military advisers
there to train Grenadian troops, and the Soviet Union and North Korea had agreed
to deliver $37 million in military equipment to the Grenadians.

The Administration has repeatedly said that its assertions were supported by
what Deputy Secretary of State Kenneth Dam called ''a treasure trove of
documents'' captured by the invaders. But there is no evidence that a terrorist
training base existed or that Cubans had planned to take over Grenada either in
the documents released Friday or in any other materials made public by the
Administration.

Closed-Door Briefings

Democratic and Republican Senators who received closed-door intelligence
briefings agreed that the evidence presented did not support the
Administration's sweeping pronouncements.

In his Oct. 27 speech, Mr. Reagan cited the discovery of three warehouses of
military equipment, including one with ''weapons and ammunition stacked almost
to the ceiling, enough to supply thousands of terrorists.''

Reporters who inspected the warehouses the next day said that this seemed an
exaggeration, and that the equipment might have been as appropriate for defense
against an invasion as for export of terrorism. There were many Soviet-made
weapons and ammunition, but the warehouses were no more than half-full, and many
weapons were antiquated.

Mr. Reagan also asserted that the Soviet Union ''has assisted and encouraged the
violence'' in Grenada and that ''it is no coincidence that when the thugs tried
to wrest control of Grenada, there were 30 Soviet advisers'' there, along with
the Cubans. This was a reference to the Oct. 19 killings of Maurice Bishop, the
Marxist prime minister of Grenada, and several aides following a coup by other
Marxists. One news report quoted a ''senior Administration official'' who said a
Soviet- backed assassination team had been responsible for the killings.

Killing Denounced by Castro

But the Administration has made public no evidence that supports its suggestions
of a Soviet or Cuban role in the killings, which were forcefully denounced by
the Cuban regime of Fidel Castro, often described as a close ally of the late
Mr. Bishop.

Whether the 1,000 or so American citizens on Grenada were in danger of being
harmed or taken hostage, a risk that Mr. Reagan cited as the primary reason for
the invasion, is in dispute. Several assertions offered by officials as evidence
that the danger justified the invasion have proven to be inaccurate.before the
invasion, Oct. 24, that there was no indication of danger to Americans. After
the invasion he said they had been in danger.

He stressed that the airport on Grenada had been closed Oct. 24, thwarting any
possibility that the Americans, mostly medical students, could be evacuated
peacefully. This proved to be false, Mr. Speakes acknowledged Monday, after
witnesses had said the airport opened Oct. 24 and that at least four charter
planes had left that day.

Air Links Cut

Canadian and British planes scheduled to pick up citizens of those countries
from Grenada that day were prevented from doing so because Barbados and other
neighboring Caribbean states cut off air links to Grenada. Prime Minister Tom
Adams of Barbados was already planning for the invasion with United States
representatives.

In addition, Administration officials initially did not disclose that during the
days before the invasion both Grenadian military officials and the Cuban
Government repeatedly provided assurances that Americans on the island would not
be harmed and could leave if they wanted. After this had come to light Mr.
Speakes said the Administration did not trust the pledges.

Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger said last Friday that there were
''indications'' from ''intelligence reports'' of plans to take American
hostages. But intelligence sources later said there was no clear evidence of
such a threat.

Students at the medical school have been divided on whether they were in danger
before the invasion, although most agreed they were terrified during the
fighting and many praised the invasion. Some school administrators, including
one who said he approved of the invasion, have said they had also received
assurances from Grenadian authorities and did not think there had been any
danger to the students before the invasion.

Accounts of Invasion Planning

Questions have also been raised about whether Mr. Reagan and Secretary of State
George P. Shultz gave a full account last week when they suggested that serious
planning for the invasion had begun only after they received a request for help
by the seven- member Organization of Eastern Caribbean States, under a
collective defense treaty, on Oct. 22.

American officials later said that Mr. Reagan had ordered urgent contingency
planning for an invasion on Oct. 20. This was the day after the killing of Mr.
Bishop had prompted a request for intervention by Prime Minister Adams of
Barbados, which, like the United States, is not a party to the treaty. Mr.
Reagan also ordered Oct. 20 that a naval task force carrying Marines to Lebanon
be diverted towards Grenada.

The officials said Mr. Reagan ordered that the plans proceed on Oct. 22, after
an informal request from the Caribbean group had been received, but before the
formal, written request that the State Department later made public had been
obtained.

There have been news reports quoting private statements by unidentified
Caribbean leaders that unidentified United States officials had seemed to favor
military intervention in Grenada since well before the Oct. 19 killings.

Speech by Adams

In addition, Mr. Adams said in a public speech last week that an American
official had approached one of his aides on Oct. 15, and offered American help
in launching an operation to rescue Mr. Bishop, who had been put under house
arrest. White House officials did not deny this account, but said the Grenada
matter did not receive high-level attention before the Oct. 19 killings.

Evan Galbraith, the United States Ambassador to France, said in an Oct. 26
interview on French television that the invasion ''was an action which had begun
two weeks ago.'' This statement, offered to show that the invasion was not a
''riposte'' to the Oct. 23 bombing of a Marine barracks in Lebanon, placed the
beginning invasion planning before the Bishop overthrow and assassination. It
conflicted with the Reagan- Shultz account.

Mr. Galbraith later said he had ''misspoken,'' and that it would be ''ridiculous
to suggest'' that the planning had begun before the overthrow of Mr. Bishop. It
is not clear whether he had been privy to the invasion plans in advance, or
whether France had been asked to participate in it.

One apparently deliberate, although relatively minor, deception understating the
United States' dominant role in the invasion came in a news conference by Vice
Adm. Joseph Metcalf 3d, the commander of the United States task force that
landed on Grenada. When asked about the Oct. 29 capture of Bernard Coard, the
deputy prime minister of Grenada who helped lead the coup that deposed Mr.
Bishop, he first replied that Grenadians had detained Mr. Coard.

Confronted with a report that in fact United States Marines had captured Mr.
Coard by threatening to blow up the house in which he was hiding, Admiral
Metcalf said, ''Okay, let's be technical, okay.'' Pressed further, he conceded
that he had known all along that Mr. Coard had been captured by Marines.

Admiral Metcalf answered many press queries with the words, ''I haven't the
foggiest idea.'' He threatened at one point, perhaps in jest, to fire upon
unauthorized press boats that tried to reach the island. This contrasted with
Mr. Weinberger's statement Oct. 26 that reporters had been barred from Grenada
for their own protection.

Henry E. Catto, Jr., who was Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs
from March 1981 until September 1983, cited ''the buzzing, with open bomb-bay
doors, of small ships carrying reporters - and cameras,'' as shown in television
news, as an example of what he called the military's unduly hostile attitude
towards the press. Mr. Catto, who is now contributing editor of the Washington
Journalism Review, made the observation in an op-ed article in The Washington
Post Oct. 30.

There has also been misinformation, lack of information and confusion about
casualties in Grenada, including those of Grenadian civilians and soldiers,
American troops and Cubans.

Reports on Civilian Casualties

For example, a senior Administration official who briefed reporters just before
Mr. Reagan's Oct. 27 speech stressed that there had been no known civilian
casualties. The Pentagon held to this position through Sunday Oct. 30. Official
spokesmen pointed with pride to the surgical precision with which the invaders
had supposedly avoided inflicting civilian casualties.

Then a Canadian journalist who had visited the site of a civilian mental
hospital reported that it had been bombed on Oct. 25, the first day of the
invasion, with as many as 47 dead. The Pentagon finally confirmed on Monday that
a Navy plane had bombed the hospital without realizing what it was, killing 12
or more Grenadian civilians. The count later rose to at least 17. Officials said
they had not disclosed this sooner because they had not known of it.

Mr. Speakes suggested Monday that United States forces had not discovered the
bodies initially because ''I am told there is a religious custom that the
Grenadians bury their dead very soon after they die.'' He later said the
practice ''may not be religious.'' Bodies are usually buried quickly in tropical
climates.

On Oct. 27, after most of the fighting had been finished but before Mr. Reagan's
televised speech, officials reported 8 American servicemen dead, 39 wounded and
8 missing. The latest official figures are 18 dead, 89 wounded and none missing.
Most of the casualties apparently occurred on the first day, Oct. 25.

Details on American Casualties

The Pentagon provided little detail on how the American casualties had been
incurred until after news reports based on interviews with soldiers and
witnesses had described accidents in which some servicemen had been killed and
wounded. On Monday, six days after the invasion, the Pentagon issued a statement
that 12 soldiers had been wounded when a Navy jet inadvertently dropped a bomb
on their position, four Navy commandos had died when their landing craft tipped
over in rough seas early Oct. 25, and two men were injured when a helicopter
disabled by enemy fire collided with another helicopter.

The Pentagon stressed, however, that no Americans had been killed in Grenada
''as a result of friendly fire.'' It said the mishaps were typical of those that
occur in combat.

There has been persistent confusion about the number of Cuban casualties. On
Thursday, nine days after the invasion started, an Administration official in
Washington said at least 60 Cubans had been killed, while an Administration
official in Grenada placed the number at 38.

The Pentagon's early statements also understated the number of American troops
that would be used in the invasion. On Oct. 26, Mr. Weinberger said he thought
that the 3,000 troops then reported to be on Grenada would probably be
''sufficient'' to secure the island.

Two days later, Admiral McDonald disclosed that the number of United States
troops on the island had jumped to 6,000. It was also learned that the invading
forces had used heavier firepower, including bombing and naval bombardment, than
the Pentagon had originally implied. On Thursday it was announced that the
United States force on Grenada had been cut back to about 3,000.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Cuban prisoners; phot of Marine wounded in Grenada returning
to U.S.; photo of ruins of Grenadian mental hospital; photo of American medical
students being rescued

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET'S GRIP ON AFGHANS CALLED TIGHT

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 889 words


MilitaryAnalysis

Western intelligence evaluations suggest that the Soviet intervention in
Afghanistan has provided Moscow with solid strategic gains and valuable lessons
in training and tactics. However, this impression, from intelligence reports and
analyses, must be set against reports from Pakistan and India depicting an
effective resistance by Afghan guerrillas to Soviet rule exercised through the
client Government in Kabul.

The Russians have given no indication that they intend to withdraw their forces.

''This is not an in-and-out operation like America's in Grenada,'' a senior
British officer said this week. ''The Russians are there and they mean to stay
there. Possibly they'll make Afghanistan a Soviet Socialist Republic and
incorporate it into the union. Whatever they do, the West has to face the
prospect of a Soviet military presence in the heart of Southwest Asia.''

Periodic Forays Against Rebels

The Russians are engaged, intelligence services say, in periodic operations
against centers of guerrilla resistance. Last month fighter-bombers and
helicopters carried out raids at a point 40 miles north of Kabul, and ground
forces carried out punitive operations in seven provinces.

The insurgent operations that prompted these actions have not shaken the Soviet
grip on cities and towns. Supply columns, while harassed, usually reach their
destinations, and the buildup of Soviet air power has reached the point where
bases in Afghanistan could provide Soviet naval forces in the Indian Ocean with
air cover where they already enable the Russians to monitor American activities
in the area.

Although some weapons have reached the insurgents through Pakistan, the number
and quality are below what the insurgents expect. A NATO military source who has
visited Afghanistan three times in the last six months saw only two SA-7's, a
Soviet- made surface-to-air missile, during his visits.

Pakistan Said to 'Skim Off'

These weapons, which are indispensable against Soviet helicopters, are reported
to come from Egypt via Pakistan. This source believes the Pakistanis are
''skimming the cream'' off the arms shipments either for their own use or for
sale elsewhere.

Yossef Bodansky, an Israeli expert on the Soviet military, believes that the
strategic gains that the Soviet Union has derived from its intervention in
Afghanistan, as seen in the context of the chaotic situation in Southwest Asia,
are significant.

He says Soviet planes are now 200 miles closer to the Persian Gulf and Soviet
forces are established in considerable strength on the eastern border of Iran.
The Russians have also established a firmer base for political manipulation in
the Middle East, particularly for efforts to undermine Pakistan and Iran
internally.

All this has been accomplished, Mr. Bodansky says, at a minimum cost.

Soviet troop strength in Afghanistan is estimated at 110,000 to 120,000 men
compared to the half a million or more Americans that were in Vietnam. Troops
are rotated on a six-month basis and, in periods of overlap, there may be an
additional 20,000 to 40,000 troops.

Few in Anti-Insurgency Raids

According to analysts, only a small proportion of these troops are engaged in
operations against the insurgents. Mr. Bodansky puts the figure at 12 000 to
15,000 men, all drawn from the 201st Motorized Rifle Division, which has its
headquarters at Bagram. Other sources put the figure at 20,000. Western analysts
believe that the other Soviet forces are free to train in a new environment.

The consensus of intelligence experts is that Soviet losses have been
comparatively light. Estimates vary from 1,000 to 1,500 dead a year. Some are
the results of insurgent action, but most are from disease, food poisoning and
training and traffic accidents.

In most operations the Russians employ troops of the Afghan Army. If an
operation goes wrong, Soviet helicopters and fighter-bombers are sent to restore
the situation.

The Soviet forces have built or improved seven air bases, at Herat, Shindand,
Farah, Kandahar, Kabul, Bagram and Jalalabad. These are believed to be
all-weather bases from which planes can operate throughout the year. The base at
Jalalabad is used for helicopter operations but would be open to jet planes in
an emergency.

Shindand Is Most Important

Shindand is the most important base. An Afghan insurgent leader said this year
that he and his band had approached it, but had been unable to penetrate its
defenses.

No friendly Afghans are allowed on the base, which is protected by minefields,
miles of barbed wire and dug-in tanks and field guns.

This is intended to protect the electronic warfare equipment, spare part stocks
and maintenance installations. According to Mr. Bodansky, Soviet reconnaissance
planes flying from Shindand routinely monitor the United States Navy squadron in
the Indian Ocean.

Helicopters have been the most effective Soviet weapon, largely because the
insurgents lack surface-to-air missiles. Attacks on insurgent strongholds in the
mountains and patrols over highways have been major roles for the helicopters.
They also land infantry on high ground to support forces advancing along the
roads and, when necessary, provide fire power to assist ground forces.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Soviet Said to Continue Aid To Hanoi for Oil Exploration

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 17, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 92 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 5


The Soviet Union will continue to help Vietnam with oil and gas exploration off
its southern continental shelf under a long-term cooperation agreement signed
Oct. 31, the Hanoi radio reported today.

Under the agreement, the two countries will expand their exchange of goods and
cooperation in joint enterprises, the official radio said in a broadcast
monitored here.

Soviet economic and technical aid to Vietnam has been substantial in recent
years. Major non-Communist nations have denied Hanoi aid because of its 1978
invasion of Cambodia.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PRIVATE BODY SEEKS $300,000 TO SAVE 3 FORT SUMTER FLAGS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 68, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 368 words

DATELINE: CHARLESTON, S.C., Nov. 5


A private group headed by Gen. William C. Westmoreland of the Army, retired, is
trying to raise $300,000 for the preservation of three flags that flew over Fort
Sumter at the beginning and at the end of the Civil War.

The first shot of the Civil War exploded over the Union installation at 4:30
A.M. April 12, 1861. The island fort at the mouth of Charleston harbor was
bombarded by Confederate troops for 48 hours, until its commanding officer, Maj.
Robert B. Anderson, surrendered.

One of the standards that flew over the fort during the bombardment was a
garrison flag 36 feet by 20 feet; the other was a storm flag measuring 20 feet
by 10 feet. The garrison flag was torn nearly in half the night before the
bombardment. The storm flag flew over the fort until the Union forces
surrendered.

After Confederate soldiers occupied the fort, they raised a flag bearing a black
South Carolina palmetto tree against a white field with a lone red star in the
upper left corner. It is the third flag in the group to be restored.

Flags Are Badly Deteriorated

At the end of the war, President Lincoln ordered General Anderson to return to
Fort Sumter and raise the same flag he had lowered in 1861.

All three flags are now the property of the National Park Service. But the flags
are badly deteriorated, and Park Service officials have said no Federal funds
are available for restoration, according to Arthur M. Wilcox, chairman of the
Association to Save the Fort Sumter Flags. The flags are in storage at the
National Park Service's curatorial facility in Harpers Ferry, W. Va.

General Westmoreland, who commanded United States forces in Vietnam, said the
three flags ''represent not only a conflict, but ultimately the reunification of
the nation.''

About $90,000 will be needed to halt the deterioration of the flags, and
$210,000 will be used to build a climate- controlled case for the flags at Fort
Sumter. The fort is maintained as a museum by the Nationl Park Service.

The Association to Save the Fort Sumter Flags is accepting tax deductible
donations, which can be mailed to the National Parks and Conservation
Association, 1701 18th Street, N. W., Washington, D. C., 20009.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV VIEW;
TV WILL RECALL THE KENNEDY YEARS

BYLINE: By John Corry

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 2; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1299 words


It is likely that John F. Kennedy was elected President because of television;
it is certain that once in office he used

the medium with instinctive understanding. Style and

substance were inextricable, mutually reinforcing and

often confused, and if Mr. Kennedy's television persona does not make up our
whole recollection about him, it certainly makes up a very large part. He was
our first television President, and it is altogether fitting that television is
marking his death, 20 years ago this month, with a number of programs about his
life.

Mr. Kennedy was elected President in 1960, his margin over Richard M. Nixon only
118,550 votes. At the start of the campaign, Mr. Nixon was far better known, the
beneficiary, hard as it may be to credit now, of eight years of favorable
coverage of his Vice Presidency. The press was predominantly print, not
electronic, and its criticisms were confined mostly to the editorial pages.
Television was young and altogether uncritical. Broadcasters read wire service
stories; small images danced on small screens. White House reports showed
President Eisenhower standing at a podium or greeting foreign visitors on the
porch. Campaign coverage, meanwhile, was virtually unknown.

The 1960 election, although it was scarcely realized at the time, changed all
this. At the 1964 Republican National Convention, delegates wore buttons that
read, ''Stamp Out Huntley-Brinkley,'' and shouted at anchor booths. Only two
years before, however, after losing the California gubernatorial election, Mr.
Nixon held the news conference in which he said, ''You won't have Nixon to kick
around anymore.'' It is forgotten now that he also said, with equal passion, ''I
can only thank God for television and radio for keeping the newspapers a little
more honest.'' Mr. Nixon was still thinking of the 1950's; he hadn't understood
the 1960 election, either.  What happened in 1960, of course, was John F.
Kennedy. Campaign coverage was still limited, but Mr. Kennedy lent himself so
easily to television that he almost demanded coverage. Mr. Nixon sawed the air
with stiff gestures; Mr. Kennedy was graceful. Mr. Nixon hunkered down before
the camera; Mr. Kennedy embraced it. Granted that when we look now at television
film from 1960, our sensibilities are tempered by history: the tragic ending of
Mr. Kennedy's life and the ignominious ending of Mr. Nixon's career. It is still
clear, however, that on television in 1960 Mr. Kennedy was a picture of grace.
Not until Ronald Reagan in 1980 did any President use television so well. Mr.
Nixon, for the most part, looked truculent.

Consider, too, that after the first Kennedy-Nixon debate in 1960, polls showed
that people who heard the debate on radio thought that Mr. Nixon had won. People
who saw the debate on television thought Mr. Kennedy was the victor. The debates
may not have provided Mr. Kennedy with his margin of votes, but certainly they
raised up his candidacy. They also showed for the first time television's
extraordinary ability to determine a national agenda, no matter how peripheral
it may be to real issues. Who remembers now, for example, the positions taken by
Mr. Kennedy and Mr. Nixon on the defense of Quemoy and Matsu? When it arose as a
question in one of the debates, it became of paramount concern in the campaign.

Meanwhile, television news coverage expanded during the Kennedy Administration,
and in large part Mr. Kennedy inspired the expansion. He was not only the
President of the United States; he was the extraordinarily attractive leader of
what was referred to as the ''free world,'' as well. On Sept. 2, 1963, CBS made
journalism history with network televi sion's first half-hour evening news
broadcast. The first story on the program showed Mr. Kennedy, sitting in a deck
chair on the lawn at Hyannisport, Mass., being interviewed about school
integration by a respectful Walter Cronkite.

Television will now commemorate Mr. Kennedy with a wide mixture of programming.
On Nov. 20, for example, NBC will begin ''Kennedy,'' a three-part, seven-hour
mini-series, with Martin Sheen as Mr. Kennedy and Blair Brown as his wife. The
producers say it will be seen in 40 countries. On Friday, ABC will present
''JFK,'' a two-hour documentary. Channel 13, WNET, will show ''Thank You, Mr.
President: The Press Conferences of J.F.K.'' on Nov. 22. On Nov. 23, it will
rebroadcast ''Years of Lightning/Day of Drums,'' the film the United States
Information Agency made about Mr. Kennedy. ABC-TV will show a syndicated
two-hour documentary, ''Being With John F. Kennedy,'' on Nov. 19 and again on
Nov. 27. WNBC-TV will present ''Moment of Crisis,'' an exploration of the events
immediately after Mr. Kennedy's death, on Nov. 19. Other programs are scheduled,
too.

Whatever else they do, it is likely that collectively the programs will
reinforce the Kennedy myth. Mrs. Kennedy told Theodore White that she wanted her
husband's Administration to be remembered as ''Camelot.'' The convention,
therefore, has been to interpret the myth in terms of a Broadway musical. It is
a mistake. The real myth, sprung from Celtic mythology, repeated in many
countries, is the legend of King Arthur. It is the myth of a noble king, slain
by a treacherous enemy, who promises to return to deliver his people.


However one interprets myths, it has been clear since the Greeks that they
reflect serious concerns. They function in many ways, usually as an expression
of wishful thinking, and often telling of birth, death and resurrection. The
heart of the Arthurian myth, the heart of the Kennedy myth, is that the spirit
of the one true king still wanders the land, and that succeeding kings are
interlopers and impostors. To deny the Kennedy myth is to say that all that
happened in this country since Nov. 22, 1963 - Vietnam, Watergate, racial
strife, the tarnishing of the national image - was our own fault. To accept the
myth is to believe that Vietnam, say, or Watergate were aberrations; they would
not have happened if Mr. Kennedy, or his true heirs, had been in office.

Until his death, Robert F. Kennedy was the inheritor of the myth, the repository
for the spirit of the king. Then it was Edward M. Kennedy's turn. With Robert
Kennedy gone, it was understood that he would run for the Presidency. It was
expected of him. The Kennedy myth had been perpetuated, even if unintentionally,
by television. There was a special irony, therefore, when television turned on
Ted Kennedy. It was the celebrated CBS interview with Roger Mudd on Nov. 4,
1979. ''Why do you want to be President?'' Mr. Mudd asked. ''Well, I'm - were I
to - to make the, the announcement and to run, the reasons I would run is that
because I have a great belief in this country,'' Mr. Kennedy began, and went on
to stumble through other questions, too. His campaign, which seemed to have
surmounted Chappaquiddick and other crises, never recovered.

On the other hand, even though images become tarnished, myths do not die. They
are part of our unconscious. ''JFK,'' the upcoming ABC documentary, is excellent
television journalism, as good a rendering of the Kennedy years as we are likely
to see. It shows both the failures and the successes. It recalls Mr. Kennedy
without tears. Inevitably, however, zhere are the funeral scenes - the riderless
horse, the pipers' dirges, the muffled sound of gunfire at the grave. It is the
funeral of a king. Someone says that Mr. Kennedy ''haunts us today.'' Someone
else says that ''he said we were going on to a better future.'' The last
television image we see is a buoy in the water off Hyannisport. At first the
buoy rings like church chimes; then it quiets to mournful single tollings.
Hyannisport is like Arthur's Avalon, the home of the missing king.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Martin Shen and Blair Brown in Kennedy ; photo of President
Kennedy during Cuban missile crisis; photo of President Kennedy with Richard
Nixon in 1960 debate

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEYOND THE LIMIT OF A PRESIDENT'S LEGAL POWER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 287 words


To the Editor:


The debate about the invasion of Grenada seems to have missed a key point. The
President's use of U.S. troops to occupy the island - an action unrelated to the
rescue of U.S. medical students - violates the Constitution's limits on
Presidential war-making powers. In the absence of Congressional authorization or
the need to protect the United States from imminent attack, the President has no
right to order troops to occupy a country or overthrow a government. And no
request from a foreign government can confer on the President powers denied him
by the Constitution.

Acquiescence by Congress and the public in the Grenadian occupation would set an
extremely troublesome precedent - there would be nothing to stop any President
from unilaterally and unconstitutionally invading and occupying other foreign
countries.  Under Mr. Reagan's justification for the Grenada incursion, ''to
restore democracy,'' dozens of nations would be eligible for U.S. military
takeover simply on the President's say-so. The Constitution never intended to
place such awesome powers in the hands of a President acting alone.  The 1973
War Powers Resolution requires the President to withdraw the troops in 60 days.
But the act also allows Congress to order their return before then. Congress
should do that.  We cannot let the need to counter tyranny abroad become an
excuse for constitutional usurpation. That was the bitter lesson of Presidential
war- making in Vietnam and the illegal bombing of Cambodia. It would be a pity
if that lesson were to be forgotten now.

ELIZABETH HOLTZMAN Brooklyn, Nov. 3, 1983

The writer, Brooklyn District Attorney, is a former U.S. Representative.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

URBAN ISSUES, ODD ALLIANCES IN THE NEW HAVEN ELECTION

BYLINE: By SUSAN CHIRA

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1005 words

DATELINE: NEW HAVEN


Biagio DiLieto was chief of the New Haven police in 1971 when thousands of
demonstrators assembled daily on the green across from the courthouse to protest
the murder trial of Bobby Seale, the leader of the Black Panthers. Told that his
detectives needed to keep a closer watch on potential troublemakers, Mr. DiLieto
authorized wiretaps until the end of the trial.

Last week, as Mr. DiLieto was campaigning for a third term as mayor, he counted
as supporters many people who considered him an enemy more than a decade ago. In
his race two years ago, he won a majority in every ward in the city. Although he
is being challenged in Tuesday's municipal election by Edward White Jr., the
first black Republican to run for mayor in Connecticut, Mr. DiLieto has the
endorsement of many black leaders, including State Treasurer Henry E. Parker,
his unsuccessful opponent in the 1979 Democratic primary.

Explanations for Mr. DiLieto's political journey from conservative police chief
to populist Mayor vary. Some cite his accessibility, which they say convinces
people that he cares about them and enables him to transcend political
philosophy or grudges. Others cite the power of the Democratic machine. To
supporters, Mr. DiLieto is politically flexible, responsive to the changing
demands of the time. But to some critics, the 60-year-old Mayor is a chameleon
who shifts with the political winds.

Mr. White, a 42-year-old Princeton graduate and a former city housing director,
has accused the Mayor of neglecting the schools and poor neighborhoods in favor
of ambitious downtown redevelopment plans. A Democrat until he switched his
party affiliation in July, Mr. White maintains that the Democrats have been
unresponsive to the poor and to minorities. Backed by some black Democratic
leaders who have defected to him, Mr. White has promised to end one-party rule
in New Haven, restore curtailed city services and improve schools. He faces an
uphill fight: Democrats outnumber Republicans in the city by 10 to 1. (Blacks
account for 31 percent of the city's 126,101 residents, according to the 1980
census.)

From 1950 to 1980, New Haven experienced a decline common to older cities. Major
retailers fled to the suburbs; the population declined; half the manufacturing
jobs were lost, and downtown property values plummeted. Mr. DiLieto takes credit
for helping brake the slide during his four years as Mayor, saying he attracted
$215 million in investments. He argues that downtown redevelopment will produce
jobs and, thus, will help residents in poor neighborhoods, too. He also insists
that conditions in the schools are improving.  The success of the downtown
revival will likely determine New Haven's future, along with Mr. DiLieto's. The
Rouse Company, developers of Manhattan's South Street Seaport and Boston's
Quincy Market, has agreed to renovate and manage New Haven's major downtown
shopping center, the Chapel Square Mall. The renovation of the railroad station
and the creation of an entertainment district centered on the revived Shubert
Theater are also integral parts of the Mayor's plans for downtown. The Science
Park, a projected high technology center, is under construction in the heart of
a predominately black neighborhood. Mr. DiLieto predicts that the projects will
spur additional private investment.  The mall renovation - the centerpiece that
city officials hope will restore downtown New Haven as the region's cultural and
retail hub - had been theatened by a similar mall proposed in suburban North
Haven.  City officials discovered, however, that North Haven had not applied for
certain required permits and the suburban mall now appears to be delayed for at
least two years. ''I finally have the feeling that this city is beginning to
blossom again,'' said Henry Chauncey Jr., the former Secretary of Yale and head
of the Science Park.  Mr. White and one of his supporters, Charles Allen 3d, a
Democratic alderman, disagreed. Mr. White called the Shubert Theater revival a
white elephant, saying that New Haven's existing theaters are already
struggling. Instead of trying to attract retailers, he and Mr. Allen said, New
Haven should try to lure corporations moving out of New York City and should aid
existing small and minority businesses. ''We've got to stop trying to make
retail trade the foundation upon which we build downtown,'' Mr. White said. ''We
cannot roll back the calendar and make New Haven the shopping mecca it was 30
years ago.''

Mr. DiLieto's most controversial act, however, may have occurred not during his
time as mayor, but back in 1971, in his first year as police chief. From 1964 to
1971, the Police Department illegally wiretapped hundreds of residents,
according to a 1977 investigation by the Board of Police Commissioners, a
civilian body that oversees the Police Department.

An Issue That Rankles

Most wiretaps took place before Mr. DiLieto took control of the department, but
he is a defendant in a lawsuit brought on behalf of 1,200 people who say their
phones were tapped illegally. The wiretaps were placed by subordinates, Mr.
DiLieto has said, and he was not aware that they failed to follow proper
procedures. The suit is in progress and, while the widespread wiretapping still
rankles many people, it has not been a major campaign issue.

The Rev. John Hay of the United Church on the Green is a DiLieto supporter, even
though his church was wiretapped and he believes the Mayor has not taken full
responsibility for his actions. ''I think he is basically a good and decent
person,'' Mr. Hay said, citing the Mayor's support for a church project to
shelter the homeless. ''He may be one of those people who profoundly responds to
the atmosphere of the time,'' he said. In 1971, there was great fear that
demonstrators would take out their anger about the Black Panther trial and the
Vietnam War on the city. There was ''a police barracks mentality,'' Mr. Hay
said, and Mr. DiLieto ''is not a man of large vision; he will respond to the
context.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of New Haven Mayor Biagio DiLieto; photo of challenger, Edward
White Jr.

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

OBJECTIONS TO AN UNWITNESSED WAR

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 269 words


Journalists and Congressional leaders, including many who approved of the
invasion, were outraged by what some saw as an assault on the public's right to
know. The Senate voted, 53 to 18, that the restrictions should ''cease.'' As
fighting on the island subsided last week, the House of Representatives
dispatched its own fact-finders. Press groups said the blackout on combat
coverage had no precedent in World War II, Korea or Vietnam. ''The Defense
Department has let down the American public,'' the American Society of Newspaper
Editors said.

Information was confined at first to Government handouts, Pentagon film and
amateur radio broadcasts. Later, reporters got brief escorted tours. As protests
swelled, news people were allowed to remain on their own

.

Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger said permitting direct coverage might
have jeopardized the operation and journalists' safety. A House judiciary
subcommittee looked for broader implications. Chairman Robert W. Kastenmeier, a
Wisconsin Democrat, saw the curbs as part of ''a swing back toward restrictions
on civil liberties'' that included President Reagan's executive orders. The
orders have expanded authority for political surveillance, the use of lie
detectors to discourage unauthorized disclosures, lifetime censorship of the
writings of high-level officials and tightened restrictions on scientific
communication. Senator John Tower, Texas Republican, told the admirals who took
responsibility for the Grenada restrictions, ''You have done the right thing.''
This view was shared in many letters published by the newspapers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BESTSELLERS MASS MARKET Mass market paperbacks are soft-cover books
sold at newsstands, variety stores and supermarkets, as well as in bookstores.
This listing is based on computer-processed reports from bookstores and
representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 outlets across the United
States.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 52, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 714 words


1

SPACE, by James A. Michener. (Fawcett/Crest, $4.95.) The space program: fiction.

2

MISTRAL'S DAUGHTER, by Judith Krantz. (Bantam, $4.50.) The art world of the 20's
and the fashion business of the 80's: fiction.

3

A CRY IN THE NIGHT, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Dell, $3.95.) A newly rewed woman is
haunted by her past: fiction.

4

THE VALLEY OF HORSES, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $3.95.) A fictional saga of
human survival at the dawn of civilization.

5

THE RIGHT STUFF, by Tom Wolfe. (Bantam, $3.95.) America's first manned space
program, recalled in high style: movie tie-in.

6

HEART OF THUNDER, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $3.95.) A headstrong beauty and an
arrogant outlaw in the Old West: fiction.

7

MASTER OF THE GAME, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $3.95.) The secret behind a
woman business tycoon's rise to power: fiction.  8

SECOND HEAVEN, by Judith Guest. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Love in various forms heals
three battered people: fiction.

9

FOUNDATION'S EDGE, by Isaac Asimov. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $3.95.) The struggle to
keep civilization alive in a crumbling empire: fiction.

10

THE 13TH VALLEY, by John M. Del Vecchio. (Bantam, $3.95.) The war in Vietnam:
fiction.

11

THE CLAN OF THE CAVE BEAR, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $3.95.) The beginning of
the saga continued in ''The Valley of Horses.''

12

LIFE, THE UNIVERSE AND EVERYTHING, by Douglas Adams. (Pocket, $3.50.) Concluding
volume in a trek through the galaxies: fiction.

13

ACCEPTABLE LOSSES, by Irwin Shaw. (Avon, $3.95.) A New York literary agent's
life is threatened by a mysterious stranger: fiction.

14

DRAGON ON A PEDESTAL , by Piers Anthony. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $2.95.) Seventh
volume of a saga about the fabulous land of Xanth: fiction.


15

GOODBYE, MICKEY MOUSE, by Len Deighton. (Ballantine, $3.95.) Two World War II
fighter pilots in love and combat: fiction.

 TRADE Trade paperbacks are soft-cover books usually sold in bookstores and at
an average price higher than mass market paperbacks. This listing is based on
computer-processed reports from about 2,000 bookstores in every region of the
United States .

1

THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson. (Berkley,
$6.95.) How to increase your productivity.

2

GARFIELD SITS AROUND THE HOUSE, by Jim Davis. (Ballantine, $4.95.) Cartoon
humor.

3

THE COLOR PURPLE, by Alice Walker. (Pocket/Washington Square Press, $5.95.)
Black men and women in the South: fiction.

4

GROWING UP, by Russell Baker. (NAL/Plume, $5.95.) The New York Times columnist
recalls his boyhood and youth.

5

CALDER BORN, CALDER BRED, by Janet Dailey. (Pocket, $6.95.) Conclusion of a
romantic saga of the American West.

6

COLOR ME BEAUTIFUL, by Carole Jackson. (Ballantine, $8.95.) Beauty tips for
women.

7

LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo F. Buscaglia. (Fawcett, $5.95.) Inspirational
talks by a California professor.

8

THURSTON HOUSE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $7.95.) Three generations of a wealthy
San Francisco family: fiction.

9

BLOOM COUNTY, by Berke Breathed. (Little, Brown, $6.95.) Cartoon humor.

10

THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (S&S/Touchstone, $7.95.) Psychological
and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.

11

LIFE EXTENSION, by Durk Pearson and Sandy Shaw. (Warner, $10.95.) How to add
years to your life and life to your years.

12

MORE ITEMS FROM OUR CATALOG, by Alfred Gingold. (Avon, 4.95.)

 A second spoof of the L. L. Bean catalogue.

13

WHAT COLOR IS YOUR PARACHUTE?  by Richard Nelson Bolles. (Ten Speed Press,
$7.95.) Guide for job hunters and career changers.

14

MISS MANNERS' GUIDE TO EXCRUCIATINGLY CORRECT BEHAVIOR, by Judith Martin.
(Warner, $10.95.) Etiquette prescribed by an amusingly bossy lady.

15

THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $4.95.) Philosophical humor.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BESTSELLERS;
FICTION

SECTION: Section 7; Page 48, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1350 words


1110

POLAND, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) Seven centuries of history
in fictional form.  239

CHANGES, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) The crises that arise when a
television anchorwoman and a glamorous physician fall in love.  3220

THE NAME OF THE ROSE, by Umberto Eco. (Helen & Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $15.95.) Unraveling the mystery of a murder in a 14th-century
Italian monastery.  4 1

PET SEMATARY, by Stephen King. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The new family in town
discovers the horrors that lie in a neighboring cemetery.  5414

HOLLYWOOD WIVES, by Jackie Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The struggle for
money and power in Tinsel Town.  6610

WHO KILLED THE ROBINS FAMILY?, created by Bill Adler and written by Thomas
Chastain. (Morrow, $9.95.) The publisher offers a $10,000 prize to the reader
who submits the best answer.  787

THE AUERBACH WILL, by Stephen Birmingham. (Little, Brown, $16.95.) Three
generations of a German-Jewish family in New York.  8 2

THE SAGA OF BABY DIVINE, by Bette Midler. (Crown, $11.95.) The entertainer
imagines what her infancy was like in a fable lushly illustrated by Todd Schorr.
9513

AUGUST, by Judith Rossner. (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95.) The five-year
relationship of two women, a teen-age patient and her analyst.  1097

EVERYTHING AND MORE, by Jacqueline Briskin. (Putnam, $15.95.) Life after Beverly
Hills High School: the careers of four women.  1177

WINTER'S TALE, by Mark Helprin. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $14.95.) Heroic
lives in Manhattan between the late 19th century and the year 2000.  121231

CHRISTINE, by Stephen King. (Viking, $16.95.) A car that kills is at large among
a Pennsylvania town's high school set.  13118

MONIMBO, by Robert Moss and Arnaud de Borchgrave. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.)
What happens after Castro unveils a plan to stir racial tension in the United
States.  141022

RETURN OF THE JEDI, adapted by Joan D. Vinge. (Random House, $6.95.) Illustrated
storybook based on the latest ''Star Wars'' film.  151428

HEARTBURN, by Nora Ephron. (Knopf, $11.95.) A roman a clef about a marriage
breaking up.


 NONFICTION 117

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck.  (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  2243

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J. Peters and Robert H.  Waterman Jr. (Harper
& Row, $19.95.) Lessons to be learned from well-run American corporations.  335

THE BODY PRINCIPAL, by Victoria Principal. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Exercises
for women by a television personality.  4452

MEGATRENDS, by John Naisbitt. (Warner, $17.50.) Predictions about America in the
next decade based on an analysis of conditions today.  564

THE MARY KAY GUIDE TO BEAUTY.  (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) An illustrated guide
for women prepared by the staff of a cosmetic firm.  6510

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $17.95.) The rescue of two
Americans from an Iranian prison.  788

THE BEST OF JAMES HERRIOT.  (St. Martin's Press, $19.95.) Selections from the
writings of the Yorkshire veterinarian.  876

FATAL VISION, by Joe McGinniss. (Putnam, $17.95.) The case of Jeffrey MacDonald,
Ivy League graduate, respected physician and convicted killer of his wife and
daughters.  996

THE PETER PAN SYNDROME, by Dan Kiley. (Dodd, Mead, $14.95.) A psychologist's
analysis of the plight of men who have never grown up.  10106

OUTRAGEOUS ACTS AND EVERYDAY REBELLIONS, by Gloria Steinem. (Holt, Rinehart &
Winston, $14.95.) Essays by a leading feminist writer.  111224

CREATING WEALTH, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) Making money in
real estate.  12133

VIETNAM: A History, by Stanley Karnow. (Viking, $19.95.) Profusely illustrated
history of the war: tie-in with the current PBS television series.  131158

THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson. (Morrow, $15.)
How to increase the productivity of those with whom you work, as well as your
own.  141557

NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to buy real
estate with little or no money: a 1980 book.  15 1

TOUGH TIMES NEVER LAST, BUT TOUGH PEOPLE DO!  by Robert H.  Schuller. (Thomas
Nelson, $12.95.) Inspiration from a Protestant preacher.  The listings above are
based on computer-processed sales figures from about 2,000 bookstores in every
region of the United States. And Bear in Mind Other recent books that in the
opinion of the Book Review staff are of particular literary, topical or
scholarly interest:

THE ANATOMY LESSON, by Philip Roth. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $14.95.) The
concluding novel of Roth's trilogy finds Nathan Zuckerman, the once-triumphant
novelist, middle-aged, out of ideas, emotionally exhausted and living in a state
of chronic pain.

DASHIELL HAMMETT, by Diane Johnson. (Random House, $17.95.) A cool, steady-eyed
and engrossing biography of a writer who is perhaps as much fun to read about as
his most notable creation, the private eye Sam Spade.

A FEELING FOR THE ORGANISM: The Life and Work of Barbara McClintock, by Evelyn
Fox Keller. (W. H. Freeman & Co., $14.95.) An excellent biography of the
81-year-old ''loner'' from Cold Spring Harbor, L. I., who won the 1983 Nobel
Prize for Medicine for work in genetics that scientists once regarded as
heretical.

LIGHT, by Eva Figes. (Pantheon, $10.95.) Technique is all or nearly all in this
slender, fastidious novel of a day in the life of Claude Monet - a kind of
Impressionism in words.

MARBOT: A Biography, by Wolfgang Hildesheimer. (George Braziller, $16.50.)
Introducing a new genre - fictional biography. The author has made up Sir Andrew
Marbot (1801-1830), an English art connoisseur, critic and minor man of letters,
out of whole cloth. But it is quality cloth, through which we can see the spirit
of the age and some of its prime movers.

REVOLUTION IN TIME: Clocks and the Making of the Modern World, by David S.
Landes. (Harvard University Press, $20.) The story of the evolution of the
mechanical timekeeper from the crude tower clocks of 13th-century Europe to the
modern wristwatch. A feat of scholarship, and also fun to read.

THE STORIES OF BERNARD MALAMUD.  (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $17.95.) Twenty-five
stories from 1950 to the present, chosen by the author, whose special province
has been the everyday, unspectacular anguish of ordinary people.

THE STORIES OF WILLIAM TREVOR.  (Penguin Books, $8.95.) All the stories from
five previous collections of the last 20 years by an Anglo-Irish master of short
fiction.

TURTLE BEACH, by Blanche d'Alpuget. (Simon & Schuster, $14.95.) The first novel
by an Australian journalist to appear in America is set in a troubled and
changing Malaysia, and its author clearly knows how it smells and feels and how
its people, both Western and Eastern, think. An auspicious American debut.

VANESSA BELL, by Frances Spalding. (Ticknor & Fields, $22.95.) This biography
takes Virginia Woolf's elder sister from the shadow of Woolf's greater fame to
establish her identity as a remarkable and appealing woman and a gifted painter.


VITA: The Life of Vita Sackville-West, by Victoria Glendinning.  (Alfred A.
Knopf, $17.95.) A biography of the writer to whom Virginia Woolf dedicated
''Orlando.'' If the author cannot make this arrogant, selfish woman attractive,
she can - and does - make her vivid and memorable.

WATCH TIME FLY, by Laura Furman. (The Viking Press, $14.95.) Short stories about
the Vietnam-influenced generation of passively waiting lost souls by a writer
who combines apparent artlessness with a moving and very sophisticated esthetic
sensibility.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW JERSEY JOURNAL

BYLINE: By Martin Gansberg

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 3, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1521 words


THE United States Census Bureau, in a survey of county and local governments
throughout the nation, reports that New Jersey has had the largest increase in
such governments since such records were begun four decades ago.

All told, the state has 1,592 units to regulate activities in its 21 counties
and more than 550 municipalities. The number, which includes special districts
such as those for beach erosion, schools, sewage and firefighting, has grown
steadily since 1942, when there were 1,143.

The growth of governments in the state has been particularly strong in recent
years, the bureau said, noting that the rapid rise began in 1972, when there
were 1,457. The increase in other states has been much slower.

Anthony Angelini , assistant director of the state's Division of Local
Government Services, said that one reason for the tremendous increase in local
units could have been the so-called cap law enacted in 1978. It limited to 5
percent the amount by which local governments could increase annual budgets.

''What could have occurred,'' Mr. Angelini said, ''was that, to sort of get
around the caps, special districts and authorities were created.'' He said this
loophole was closed two years ago, when the law was amended to forbid the
practice.

A study of the bureau's figures tends to support this view. Whereas the number
of county and local governments (589) has grown by only three since 1952, the
number of districts has risen enormously. There are now 548 separate school
districts in New Jersey, compared to 481 three decades ago. Special districts
now total 454; in 1952, there were 81.

The creation of these districts led to more supervisory jobs, additional
operational budgets and overlapping agencies, the bureau noted. The increase, by
the way, does not include school districts in large communities, since these
usually come under the management of municipal governments.


The New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority, which operates the Sports
Complex in the Hackensack Meadowlands, has budgeted $2.4 million to help improve
traffic flow into and out of the area. Four million cars were driven to
activities last year.

The complex has parking spaces for more than 24,000 cars on a daily basis, but
as many as 30,000 have jammed the area for special events, such as football
games at Giants Stadium. A network of service roads feeds traffic from nearby
highways and the New Jersey Turnpike directly into the parking lots.

Jon F. Hanson, chairman of the authority, said that roadways would be widened,
toll plazas rebuilt and new highway signs installed in an effort to ease access
for the 10 million fans who attend events at the race track, Brendan Byrne Arena
and football stadium every year.

''Traffic planners feel that these improvements will eliminate some of the
bottlenecks that have caused backups during certain events in the past,'' he
said.

William F. Taggart, vice chairman of the authority, said that the existing
internal-roadway sign system would be upgraded and remote-controlled Variable
Message Signs installed at critical points. He said that a new radio
communications system for traffic and parking control would help speed movement.

The authority, Mr. Taggart said, also is studying proposals that ''could include
the construction of additional roadways, parking areas and signs.'' These
proposals, he said, would cost as much as $39.6 million, so ''we are taking a
very deliberate and cautious approach.''


There are many towns named Salem in the United States, but the New Jersey
community on the Delaware River and one in New Hampshire have what appears to be
a justified complaint with the Postal Service and its zip codes. It seems that
this state's Salem's digits are 08079 and the New Hampshire number is 03079.
Result: confusion.

''We get a lot of mail that belongs in New Hampshire,'' said

Donald Urban , postmaster for the New Jersey town. ''Sometimes what causes us
trouble is the way a person makes a 3 - if they loop it too far.''

He pointed out that there were people who, when abbreviating states, wrote
unclearly. In addition, both Salems have a main street named Broadway, and that
does not help speed delivery, either. If the zip code is not on the address, Mr.
Urban said, more mail is misrouted.

''We handle about 40,000 pieces of mail a day,'' he said. ''A lot of it
sometimes does have Salem, N.H., without a zip code. That ends up here. It could
be six or seven in one day; it could come in spurts.''

Mr. Urban said that the difficulties started in post offices across the country
because workers sorted mail by using the first three numbers of the zip code
before sending it on to the general delivery area. They have to make quick
decisions on where to route the mail with the punch of a key.

Declaring that wedding invitations seem to cause the most trouble for the
sorters, Mr. Urban said that ''some people in New Hampshire may be as troubled
as the post office by the mistake.''

Why?

''There are probably a lot of people late for weddings up there,'' he observed.



James J. Barry Jr. , director of the state's Division of Consumer Affairs, has
started two publications to help consumers understand their rights and know
where to go for help. One, Consumer Update, will be issued quarterly ''to convey
timely topics of interest''; the other, Tel Consumer, lists all offices of the
division and the telephone number to call to hear tapes describing the
regulations. The number is 800-242-5846.

In the first issue of Update,

Irwin I. Kimmelman , the state's Attorney General, writes:

''Gone are the days of the small village shops where all necessary items were
produced and sold to the nearby consumer and where the manufacturer-seller was
known to the customer by name.

''Today, the consumer must deal with large corporations consisting of many
levels of personnel and many branch offices. A single consumer complaint may
travel from department to department before anything is done.''

Update describes problems with automobile advertising, contract language,
concert-ticket scams, deals with movers and the gimmickry of precious-metal
brokers. In addition, there is a summary of consumer-affairs bills in the
Legislature.

In Tel Consumer, Mr. Barry writes:

''There is no one in a better position to protect the consumer from fraud and
other abuses than the consumer himself, given the proper information . . . The
information on our tapes is short, simple and to the point. They tell you what
you need to know in from one to six minutes.''

Both publications are available from the Division of Consumer Affairs, 1100
Raymond Boulevard, Newark 07102.


The first state-owned veterans' cemetery will be built in North Hanover,
Burlington County, beginning early next year, according to

Warren Davis , director of the Division of Veterans Services.

The cemetery, to be on 184 acres in the Arnytown section of the township, will
have 110,000 plots and cost $1.2 million. The funds have been provided by the
state and Federal governments.

There will be a 1,300-square-foot administration building, a committal-service
shelter and chapel, restroom facilities, a maintenance building and a vehicle
storage area. A staff of 13 people will supervise and maintain the cemetery.

The Department of Corrections donated the land, which was appraised at $300,000,
to Veterans Services for $1. The Legislature has approved a $300,000
appropriation for the project.

Mr. Davis said that, in most cases, veterans on active duty in the two World
Wars and the Korean and Vietnam conflicts and their dependents would be eligible
for burial in the cemetery.


Almost 2,000 women turned out Oct. 21 and 22 for the first annual Business
Ownership Conference for Women sponsored by the Small Business Administration
and the Small Business Assistance Office of the state's Department of Commerce
and Industry.

The conference, in the Hilton Inn of Somerset and the Somerset Holiday Inn, was
the first of 25 to be held throughout the country as a result of an executive
order by

President Reagan . The order also established a President's Council on Women
Business Ownership.

Maureen Reagan , the President's daughter, and

Angela Buchanan , a former United States Treasurer, were the principal speakers.


In Passaic, a group of housewives, businessmen and a police lieutenant have
formed a Heart Foundation that is aimed not at cardiac assistance, but at
helping with funds where essential equipment is lacking. The first goal is to
buy an ambulance for the city.

One of the leaders of the group,

Dennis Gero , a jeweler, said that, because of declining income in the city,
''it is getting tough to raise money for the things that are needed.'' He said
that funds were being raised at luncheons and dinners and by the sale of raffle
tickets. In addition, there has been soliciting in churches, banks and
supermarkets.

''It's tough when you get promises rather than cash,'' Mr. Gero said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: aerial photo of the parking facilities at the Meadowlands

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WARS' FORGOTTEN EDDIES

BYLINE: By Eldon KEnworthy ;
Eldon Kenworthy is professor of political science at Cornell University.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 780 words

DATELINE: ITHACA, N.Y.


Countries have been wrong before without being dishonest. We are being dishonest
wanting to be both a democracy and an imperial center (nowadays called a world
power). Although seemingly the best of both worlds, the combination - democracy
and world power - is finally corrupting. Rome discovered as much, as more
recently did Britain. Democracy lives by negotiation, empire by imposition.
Combining them breeds hypocrisy.

How do I know? Look at the monuments in your town. World War I in marble or
bronze, World War II in granite or concrete, a plaque for Korea and maybe one
for Vietnam - though some euphemism must be found for Vietnam, the war that
officially wasn't. Is there a monument for our heroes killed in Nicaragua in the
late 1920's or in Santo Domingo in the 1960's? A monument for those fallen in
Mexico, Haiti, Panama or the Philippines?

President Reagan ended his recent speech about Grenada and Beirut saying that
prayers weren't needed for those lost in either place: They already are in the
arms of God, and only the wounded require our prayers. I pray for those who give
their lives in combats that Presidents hope will be forgotten before the

next election rolls around.  I remember stories told by old men in Nicaragua who
fought with Augusto Cesar Sandino 50 years ago - stories about young marines who
were cut down by peasants as they stumbled through unfamiliar terrain lugging
the wrong equipment. How many were they, those young gringos? How is it that I
don't know, don't even know where to find that statistic? That's when I remember
that in all the towns I've passed through, I've never seen a monument to heroes
fallen in Nicaragua.

In Washington, tourists silently scan the names of the Vietnam dead on the
memorial in the Mall, while relatives and buddies pass their fingers over the
letters chipped in marble. What do they say to themselves? Hero? Sucker? For
most, it is too hard to say: ''Brother or sister, nothing we needed then and
there required your life. You died in vain.'' It has happened all over again -
in Grenada now. In time, perhaps, it will happen in Nicaragua. Our leaders will
be ferried from the golf course to the microphones to tell us how
''credibility'' or the ''world Communist threat'' or some other abstraction
requires human sacrifice. Many ''natives'' will be sacrificed, of course, but
also a few of us, killed in countries whose names our leaders have just learned
to pronounce.

The high school dropout forced into the military by the recession may die
thinking he's done his duty. Will there be a monument to him? Only 16 United
States soldiers died in Grenada so far - a ''successful'' operation with
''light'' casualties. How many makes an operation heavy?

The host of one call-in radio show justified it this way: ''I don't really give
a damn what the rest of the world thinks. We're tired of getting kicked around
and pushed around by those little podunk countries down there.'' Who will write
a monument to a marine who died in Granada - let's call him Eddie Washington -
that says he died to provide a therapeutic moment for the American public?

What did Eddie die for? To get medical students out? But the Grenadan
authorities had reassured the Administration that there would be no obstacle to
foreigners leaving. And even if that was the reason, why have we stayed to root
out ''pockets of resistance'' all over the island?

Did our marines die to restore order to a country that had passed through a
coup? Is that a mission we've assumed around the world? Had Maurice Bishop been
assassinated by right-wing military officers, would we have intervened?

Did we invade to prevent Soviet or Cuban access to an airfield that is further
from Central America and the United States than comparable airfields on Cuba
itself, to which the Russians already have access? Did we hope to forestall some
threat to neighboring islands that so far has not materialized? Or did
Washington hope to re-establish its credibility in international capitals by
successfully subduing a country smaller - in population and area - than
Columbus, Ohio? Is that supposed to make us a world-class power? The world is
indeed full of potential threats. But does the world's strongest nation
sacrifice its youth to stave off distant but possible theats that it would have
ample means to handle if indeed they arose? Doesn't our security really depend
on keeping the respect of our allies and on strengthening the international
norms that outlaw one state's forced intervention in the affairs of another?

Who will make a monument to Eddie Washington and engrave in marble the reason
why he died in Grenada?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DRUGGED IN VIETNAM

BYLINE: By Walter Kendrick

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1083 words


MEDITATIONS IN GREEN

By Stephen Wright.  342 pp. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. $14.95.

LATE in ''Meditations in Green,'' lying on his bunk blowing smoke rings,
Specialist 4 James Griffin experiences transcendence. ''The war encapsuled him
in peace. Events arranged themelves into machines of quiet harmony. Objects
tended to rest in the serenity of an ancient comprehension. All things simply
slowed slowly slowing except the days, of course, and the days, they went zip.''
The lethal idiocy of the Vietnam War still rages around him, gathering momentum
for a final assault on his body, but Griffin's mind is free. He has found the
one escape from pain and horror, an escape that neither logic nor religion nor
even psychosis can promise, an escape waiting for him all along in the green,
growing things of nature. Specialist Griffin has discovered heroin.

He was slow coming to it, though in retrospect the arrival looks inevitable.
Marijuana, of course, was there from the start of his one-year tour of duty with
the 1069th Military Intelligence Group, which seen from the air makes a forlorn
geometrical scar on the formless Vietnamese jungle. Joints as thick and long as
your middle finger were rolled from the finest buds a tropical climate can
breed, so strong they make you throw up until you become inured to the rasp in
your throat and the swoon in your head. Then it's all right; pot sustains you
for a while; you never get addicted to pot. But horror intensifies, and pot can
do only so much; reality (if that's what it is) intrudes. You go looking for a
more potent antidote, and you find it.

Stephen Wright makes no attempt either to condemn or defend Griffin's heroin
addiction, even when,

Walter Kendrick is a professor of English at Fordham University.  after a
painful withdrawal and 10 years off the stuff, Griffin returns to it. Throughout
''Meditations in Green,'' chapters on Griffin's Vietnam experiences alternate
with accounts of his later life as a slightly disabled veteran in a large
unnamed American city too hectic and violent to be any but New York. Both plots
culminate in heroin. Though ignorance and panic might excuse the first
addiction, the second is entered on deliberately, with full knowledge of the
consequences. If judgment is to be passed on Griffin or the society that made
him what he is, the reader must do it unaided by Mr. Wright, who narrates the
lunacy of war and the euphoria of drugs evenhandedly.

This brilliant, scarifying first novel contains many materials familiar to
readers of Vietnam fiction. Drugs are omnipresent, in every form from plants to
powder. Torture, mutilation and murder are frequent, often so vividly described
that the reader has trouble keeping his eyes fixed on the page. And as in most
Vietnam novels, the influence of Joseph Heller's ''Catch-22'' is strong -
perhaps because Heller's technique of multiple, intertwined subplots, each
centered on a different type of war-induced insanity, is the only way that a
writer can give form to a subject so abysmal and mind-numbing. The 1069th is
full of solipsistic crazies: Wendell has decided that the war must be filmed,
and he goes on filming even when the base explodes about him as the enemy
finally attacks during a showing in the chapel of ''Night of the Living Dead'';
after a shattering excursion into the field, naive private Claypool gradually
gives up speaking, then retreats behind a wall locker, where he is found a week
later, crouched amid his own excrement; and Major Holly, on guard against death
threats from the men he is supposed to be commanding, builds a tunnel from his
hooch to the orderly room.

There are many others; the fragmented narrative shifts nervously among them,
adhering primarily to Griffin's point of view but sometimes leaving him to
follow someone else's story to its logically absurd conclusion. They all die
horribly, except for Griffin and his best friend, Everett (Trips) Triplett, who
survive into an utterly askew peacetime world.  The past will not fade; it
masters them still. Trips is on the trail of Sergeant Anstrim, who shot Trips's
dog, Thai, back at the 1069th. He pursues any number of imaginary Anstrims
through the city streets, plotting elaborate revenge, and Griffin goes along
with the mania up to a point. But when Trips pulls a gun on an innocent
pedestrian, Griffin tries to restrain him and gets stabbed by his only friend.
So Griffin retires to his shabby apartment, which he has transformed into a
greenhouse for the raising of opium poppies.


THE absurdity of other wars has provoked humor, but Vietnam was so extreme that
laughter immediately escalates into a shriek. The reality of the experience
could not be faced directly; it seemed that everyone it touched, from the policy
makers to the lowliest private in the field, fled into fantasy and stayed there.
To narrate events coolly, with humor and detachment now, would be the wildest
madness of all.

There is little humor in ''Meditations in Green,'' except for an occasional
death's-head grin, and no detachment whatever. The novel is lurid, extravagant,
rhapsodic and horrific by turns - sometimes all at once. Its structure is
needlessly complicated, and its superheated prose often gets wearisome. Yet for
all its self- conscious excesses, it has overwhelming impact - the impact of an
experience so devastating that words can hardly contain it.

Some of the excess of the book can be ascribed to its being a first novel,
mulled over for at least 10 years. It tries to do too much - to describe the
war, its aftereffects, the psychology of drug addiction and (most murkily) the
role that green plants play in all these matters. Mr. Wright strains after
poetry and scatters literary echoes like shrapnel. His talent is impressive,
though unruly. The publishers have thought highly enough of the book to award it
their Maxwell Perkins Prize for best first novel of the year. Certainly a novel
of the caliber of ''Meditations in Green'' is a promising start for a young
novelist. Yet even if Griffin's postwar story were not told in the first person,
the novel's brutal intensity would suggest that Mr. Wright - who, like his
protagonist, was an ''image interpreter'' in Vietnam - is Griffin. Vietnam is
the only story that Griffin has to tell; we can only hope that Mr. Wright
departs from Griffin here, that this first display of Mr. Wright's extraordinary
talent will not be his last.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IS HIGHER EDUCATION IN THE DARK AGES?

BYLINE: By Arnold Beichman

SECTION: Section 6; Page 48, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4733 words


Arnold Beichman has taught political science at several universities in the
United States and Canada and is now a Visiting Scholar at the Hoover Institution
on War, Revolution and Peace at Stanford University. By Arnold Beichman

 OMETHING BEAUTIFUL HAS disappeared from American academic life. With its
departure, the quality of teaching and the will to learn have diminished and the
sense of the university as an adventure in ideas has gone, perhaps forever.

To say this is not the futile expression of some Mr. Chips nostalgia, a yearning
for a genteel golden age that never was, nor is it the idealization of a
fleeting moment in the history of American higher education. Rather it is to
commemorate a grave loss and thereby to express the hope, once shared by many
academics, for a return from the present Dark Ages to that era when the
university, sanctified by the ''great chain of being'' tradition, was not only a
place where one could prepare for a learned profession but also a place where
one was expected to get a broad education, meaning a sense of what the world is
about; a place where a sense of values was imparted.

But that hope is intercepted by a memory of how the university helped compass
its own downfall in the 1960's, first under pressure by politicians ambitious to
win over the intellectual classes and later by academics who saw in the
university a vehicle for revolutionizing American politics and Government.

It had begun innocently enough, or so it seemed, in the early 1950's when
universities willingly undertook to train military personnel, welcomed deferment
policies for their students, sought and received Government contracts for
research and Federal support for veterans and foreign students and benefited
from a host of other Federal programs. But the university's tradition of
enlightenment remained unchallengeable.

In that post-World War II period, it was taken as a given that to reach elite
status was a good thing if it came about through one's own efforts, not through
ascriptive criteria like family, wealth, patronage. But today elitism is the
virtue that dares not speak its name.

Perhaps the climactic moment in those golden years came during the Kennedy
Administration with the flight of academic stars to Washington.  University Jump
Page 48, 78






 Splitting their weeks between campus and capital, they toured the great
Government departments, lances at the ready, to advise, consult, appease, plan,
prophesy and, at the very least, dine at the White House, the Lyceum of the
1960's.

It was a heady era but something was going on down below.


In an 18th-century study by Montesquieu into the reasons for the fall of the
Romans, the French political philosopher denied that it is ''fortune which rules
the world.'' He referred to ''general, intellectual as well as physical causes
active in every monarchy which bring about its rise, preservation or fall.'' He
said: ''All accidents are subject to these causes and whenever an accidental
battle, that is, a particular cause, has destroyed a state, a general cause also
existed which led to the fall of this state as a result of a single battle. In
short, it is the general pace of things which draws all particular events along
with it.''

The American university didn't enter the Dark Ages suddenly, like a New York
City blackout. The light had been dimming for some time, but nobody seemed to
notice. Yet why had it happened to a society that so easily would have satisfied
the pioneer sociologist Emile Durkheim's notion of solidarite: a society whose
institutions were, or so it seemed before Vietnam, blessed by stable, well-
grounded and widely accepted values?

What was ''the general pace of things'' that had overwhelmed higher learning in
America, that had found these valued institutions literally unable to cope,
institutions whose once proud and unquestioned authority collapsed, like ancient
walls, on a sunny afternoon in May 1968 at the first blast of student

Page 78





 rebel Mark Rudd's bullhorn in Columbia University's Hamilton Hall? From
Durkheim's solidarite to anomie, in one de-generation.

Perhaps more than ever in its recent history, the university of the 1960's
willingly abandoned the one doctrine indispensable to its moral integrity -
academic neutrality. Either it is a seeker after the elusive, indeterminate
truth through reason, rationality and, perhaps, transcendence, or it is nothing.
As Clark Kerr, president of the University of California at the time of the
student uprising, said recently, involving the university in political action
''changes the university for the worse more than it changes society for the
better.''

And when the university moved from revolution to postrevolution and all the
counterrevolutionary administrators had been fired or exiled and the remaining
antiquated academics had been properly cowed, what was there to show for it?
Quotas or affirmative action for students and for faculty? The power of
handfuls, but organized handfuls, of students and faculty to bar from the
university campus certain subjects and speakers, but virtually no objections to
Soviet spokesmen, at least until their jets shot down a Korean civilian
airliner, and no hard questions concerning by what participatory electoral
process the former head of the Soviet secret police had become ruler of all the
Russias.  What else was there to show for it? Unisex toilets and showers? Did
the American university emerge from the purges and terrorism all the better for
these phenomena?

Of course not. There was now a new reigning orthodoxy: It is the duty of the
university to alter society; to transform the inhuman economic system into
something more humanist to seek utopia scientifically. Curriculums must be
revised to further these large transformational ambitions. The bourgeois
establishment must be brought down. And since there is no revolutionary party in
America today worthy of the name, the job will have to be done through the
universities.

For many students in South and Central American institutions of higher learning,
and today to many American students, ''the university is primarily a fortress
from which to recruit troops to attack the larger society, or its surrogate, the
administration building,'' as Seymour Martin Lipset, a professor of political
science and sociology at Stanford University and senior fellow at the Hoover
Institution, has written.

In Latin America, the university has, often understandably so, long embodied a
counterculture spirit. In the United States, an open, pluralistic society, it is
a little more difficult to justify the claims of the counterculture that
flourished during the late 1960's and that is still an integral part of campus
life today.


In recent years, the arts have been inflamed by a new modernism, the cult of the
''anti'' - the antinovel, the antidrama and antitheater, the antihero, even
antipolitics, antimemoirs and antihistory. The common denominator has been the
irrational passion to destroy, or at least to fragment, democratic culture, to
disintegrate consensual values and traditions through a new conformity with the
cry that all doctrines, faiths and dogmas are created equal but some are more
equal and ''scientific'' than others. The ultimate aim of the antimovement is to
make the political democratic systems appear absurd and
''counterrevolutionary.''

A well-known Marxist professor, University Jump Pages 80,82, 84






 Bertell Ollman, in an essay ''On Teaching Marxism'' has stated that Marxism is
''the only adequate analysis of capitalism today'' and that it can be taught
successfully to college students. ''If non- Marxists see my concern with such
questions as an admission that the purpose of my course is to convert students
to socialism,'' he added, ''I can only answer that in my view - a view that
denies the fact-value distinction - a correct understanding of Marxism (or any
body of scientific truth) leads automatically to its acceptance.''

Such pedagogic determinism, of course, raises the inevitable question: What
happens to the benighted student who doesn't ''automatically'' accept these
Marxist truths? It is worth here recalling the words of Harvard President Derek
Bok: ''An instructor does not indoctrinate his students merely by disclosing his
own ethical values. The critical line is crossed only when a teacher attempts to
force his values on his students by refusing to entertain contrary arguments or
by using his power as grader and discussion leader to coerce students into
accepting his views.''

In line with the anti-ism trend we now have the antiuniversity within the
university and, even worse, an antibasics, antieducation system at the secondary
level, a system that has disowned excellence, as the National Commission on
Excellence in Education report last April demonstrated, a system that has raised
high the supposed psychological and social benefits of illiteracy, antielitism,
antitolerance, antimerit and, of course, antidemocracy. Burdens of moral
decision have been imposed upon the university as if it had the power of the
Supreme Court or the Congress to alter the course of events. These burdens have
so overloaded the university as to make the process of education a collateral,
if not subordinate, enterprise.

In part, the decline of the university in the last decade can be blamed on the
''second-rate intellects'' who flocked to the graduate schools in the 1970's and
''clung tightly to the revolutionary attitudes of their undergraduate days,''
according to Kenneth S. Lynn, a history professor at Johns Hopkins University.
These ''veterans'' of hundreds of campus confrontations have now entered
full-time teaching and, blessed with tenure or its imminent bestowal, ''have
begun to take over the colleges and universities of this country by more subtle
means than they formerly employed. In the field of history, for example, Marxism
is by all odds the most fashionable mode of analysis among teachers of European
history, while in American history, more and more of the current scholarship is
consecrated to the expression of contempt for the achievements of our
civilization.''


In the meantime, what of the role universities once played in helping to set a
society's moral tone? There was a time when the university, along with the
family, religious institutions and, to a lesser extent, Hollywood and the press,
had an enormous influence in the creation and stabilizing of values, society's
preferred and more-or- less morally sanctioned patterns of behavior. The
university, however, was not expected to peddle one particular set of values as
the prevailing orthodoxy. Rather, it was widely held that students should be
exposed to the many winds of doctrine: Plato and Marx, Nietzsche and Lenin,
Dewey and Trotsky, Niebuhr and Mao, Freud and Marcuse, Oakeshott and Stalin.
Such exposure of facts and ideas in a classroom atmosphere of intelligent
instruction would lead to intelligent debate about the values and standards by
which we live. And out of that debate there would emerge a true comprehension of
the desirable and the undesirable. In other words, out of the university's
pursuit of truth would emerge the will and the capacity of students to judge
social values for themselves.

But the student-faculty uprising against the university establishment more than
a decade and a half ago, engendered in part by the Vietnam War, enfeebled the
university and its historic engagement in the pursuit of truth. The university
had already lost its powers of resistance against those within the academy who
had undertaken to subvert academic freedom. The new force in America's value-
making system is, of course, television.

That it is difficult for the university, let alone church or family, to compete
with television's ''talking heads'' anchor-men in this mounting American crisis
of values is undebatable. But what is grievous is that the university, with few
exceptions, has quietly surrendered its raison d',etre, its once fearless
pursuit of truth. The loss of faith in its own legitimacy is the reason why the
university, in seeking a new relevance, is on the road to irrelevance. Not the
''end of ideology'' but the rebirth of ideology is the condition of the American
university today. Few university presidents, deans, trustees or faculties are
willing to speak out or challenge this new ''march through the institutions.''


Several years ago, Prof. Steven Marcus of Columbia University loosed an
explosive judgment about American education that should have been but wasn't
heard round the world: ''What we are confronted with in higher education in
America is a situation of mass functional illiteracy. The situation itself is
not entirely new, but the scale is unprecedented. . . . Hence one of the
historic functions of the first two years of higher education in America has
been, and remains, reparative.''

His words came in the course of his review of ''English in America,'' by Richard
Ohmann, a book about the teaching of English in American universities. Professor
Ohmann wrote: ''We should understand what we are up against: not tests that are
arbitrary, but a class society that requires such tests. No attack on these
rites of passage can be finally successful unless it overturns bourgeois
culture, itself, and the rule of our dominant classes.'' Instead of laughing
away educators like Professor Ohmann, whose words Professor Marcus quoted in the
foregoing paragraph, people took them seriously in the 1970's, and some still
do.

Marcus went on to describe the teaching profession in the University Jump Page
86





 field of literature as ''full of mediocrities, and its intellectual standards
are abysmal. Research and scholarship tend to be tightly compartmentalized,
excessively and esoterically specialized, and more often than not are devoted to
trivia.''

Is the reparative work function about which Professor Marcus talks being
accomplished in the colleges of today? Not according to Paul Gagnon, a historian
at the University of Massachusetts at Boston, who tells us that ''in the modern
American university, nobody takes responsibility for what is taught . . . The
participatory democracy of curriculum-making somewhow manages always to end at
the same point; anything must be declared to be as good as anything else, lest
the balance of departmental enrollments (and operating budgets) be disturbed. .
. . Letting students ignore the events and ideas that have shaped their world is
called freedom of choice, amnesia becomes liberation.''

There is much documentation for such statements by those whose underlying
consensus is that most students' problems are really faculty problems, ignored
by complaisant and timid administrations. Seeking to increase their popularity
and thereby gain large student enrollments, some professors water down
introductory course requirements, achieve reputations as easy markers and so
corrupt the education process.

Writing about what he called ''the debasement of the grading system,'' Paul
Seabury, professor of political science at the University of California at
Berkeley, recently said that ''it now takes an extraordinary concentration of
will on the part of the student to actually fail a course.''

I recall the sudden infiltration of my freshman course in American Government
one morning some years ago by six young men from a halfway house. Later that
day, when the reason for the infiltration was explained to me, I discovered that
the young men, parolees-to-be from a nearby prison, were public-school dropouts,
functional illiterates.

My orders, however, were to give them time and effort. My classroom was the
halfway-home away from halfway-home.

One night I got a telephone call from the faculty supervisor in charge of the
halfway housers.

''Alonzo hasn't been around lately, has he?'' Right, Alonzo hadn't been around
lately.

''Yes, but don't penalize him, please, for his absence.'' Of course, I wouldn't,
but what was the problem. The woman in charge sighed: ''He was arrested a couple
of weeks ago.'' Oh, what for? ''Well, if you must know, he tried to rob
someone.'' Oh, a holdup. ''Yes, a holdup.'' With a gun? ''Yes, with a gun. Say
what is all this?'' Nothing. Was anybody hurt? ''Uh-huh, but it's just a flesh
wound, so Alonzo won't be in class for a while. But he wants to take the final
exam.'' However, neither he nor any of the others ever completed the semester.

This was also a time when two University of California professors could preface
a reader for college students with the riveting statement:''We don't rule out
the possibility that Lenny Bruce may have more to teach us than Alfred North
Whitehead''

As for ''relevant'' courses, the president of a college of the New York State
University system was proud of a five-point course in ''creative candlemaking.''
Other institutions had courses like ''adjustment to the environment,'' or in
cosmetology, tap- dancing and how to be a clown. It was the era of junk-food
courses, which, according to the late Robert M. Hutchins, former president of
the University of Chicago, ''swell the catalogues of great American
universities.''

There isn't a faculty member or university executive who couldn't match or
exceed my catalogue of horror stories during this Grand Guignol era in American
higher education.


The American university has become so politicized - its function regarded by
many academicians and ad University Jump Pages 87,88,90






 ministrators as primarily remaking society and enlisting the university,
corporately, in ''causes'' - that its revival as an educational institution is
doubtful in this generation. It has become the easy target of a stratum of
politicized educators bent on preparing the way for significantly left-oriented
socioeconomic changes of the American polity. Support for this movement is to be
found in a number of social-sciences faculty associations that make no secret of
their view that pure Marxism, unencumbered by any need to explain the
dehumanizing forces within existing socialist societies, is the wave of the
future. In fact, at major American universities, Marxism, as an apodictic faith,
has become the modern academic equivalent of ''creationism'' at fundamentalist
institutions.

Professor Ollman recently wrote that ''a Marxist cultural revolution is taking
place today in American universities. More and more students and faculty are
being introduced to Marx's interpretation of how capitalism works. . . . It is a
peaceful and democratic revolution, fought chiefly with books and lectures.''

The view that American society and American education must be made over, whether
or not the American majority approves, is not confined to a few campus radicals
here and there. On the contrary, it is a view that has long been sold through
theoretical educational journals such as Perspectives in Education and the
Teachers College Record, both of which are publications of the highly
influential Columbia University Teachers College. The fall 1969 issue of
Perspectives, for example, said that ''it is the task of the teacher to educate
- to educate for change - to educate through change. To educate for orderly
planned revolution. If necessary, to educate through more disruptive
revolutionary action.''

Writing in ''Education and the Taming of Power,'' Sidney Hook, philosopher and
professor emeritus at New York University, countered with: ''The task of the
teacher is to educate students to their maximum growth as perceptive, informed
and reflective persons so that they can decide intelligently for themselves what
is to be changed, where and how. It is not the teacher's function to
indoctrinate his students in

Page 88





 behalf of any cause no matter how holy, to brainwash them into becoming
partisans of revolution or counterrevolution.''

Dean Herbert I. London of New York University recently recalled graffito he had
see on an N.Y.U. wall in 1969: ''Make them teach you only what you want to
learn.'' Two years later, an article in the Teachers Col lege Record described
required courses and area distribution studies as violating ''the student's
autonomy, his moral freedom and responsibility.'' Yesterday's graffito, today's
dogma.  And as if all this weren't bad enough, we have a Federal regulatory
agency called the Office of Civil Rights within the Department of Education, a
Cabinet department that candidate Reagan promised to abolish but which, no doubt
in a fit of absentmindedness, he has allowed a continued existence, a sort of
unannounced Presidential pardon. In the name of ending racial discrimination,
the Office of Civil Rights has so involved itself in university decision making
that one can truly say, as Clark Kerr did (quoted in a 1983 book by George
Keller, ''Academic Strategy,'' in a peripheral context): ''The greatest change
in governance now going on is not the rise of student power or faculty power but
the rise of public power. The governance of higher education is less and less by
higher education.''

In short, the American university has become an arm of government to enforce
governmental or judicial decrees; that is, when faculty-student cabals aren't
enforcing their own decrees by barring ''controversial'' speakers and subjects
from a once- free campus.

Senior faculties know perfectly well that they are witnessing the collapse of
academic standards, the disintegration of their disciplines in the name of
creating a better world. There is some consolation to be found, however, in the
fact that students who enter the professions and the sciences are not
radicalized but rather are career motivated. However, as Gertrude Himmelfarb,
professor of history at the graduate school of the City University of New York,
notes, ''the professions and scientists do not affect the culture the way the
humanities and social sciences do. They do not change people's ideas for good or
for bad. The culture is shaped by and large by humanists and social scientists,
not by engineers or physicists.''


There is little hope that in coming years the university, for financial as well
as sociopolitical reasons, will be able to surmount enormous pressures from
quasi-revolutionary faculties - in Irving Howe's telling phrase, ''guerrillas
with tenure''- who demand that leftist political activism must be the
university's ruling principle and that such a principle can only be demonstrated
by the university when it dedicates itself collectively to ''social service.''

More certain, we will see an increasing number of private scholars at private
foundations, which will come to resemble the once-great repositories of learning
during the Dark Ages, the monasteries and the royal court of the Franks, where
Charlemagne encouraged the recovery of learning through the services of Alcuin,
the scholar-ecclesiastic. In the eighth century, when Alcuin flourished and when
literacy was confined to so few, it was said that he knew personally everyone in
Europe who could read and write. Tnere is no need to press the moral of Alcuin's
life history.

In the name of instant improvement, the university has become just another
corporation to be taxed and regulated right down to gender composition of the
basketball team.

Government, cheered on by sections of the faculty and their extramural
paracletes, has prevented the university from returning to its true vocation.
Instead, the university has had conferred upon it a new ''vocation,'' that of
''an equal-opportunity employer.'' Because he can get his school into trouble,
the professor Page 90






 who supervises the equal-opportunity-employer doctrine has become as important
to the university administration as the dedicated scholar whose pursuits are
seen by the Government bureaus that now dominate American universities as
maquillage hiding reactionary racism, sexism and capitalism from public view.

The great and dangerous fallacy in this Government takeover of the university is
the assumption that the purposes of government and the aims of the university
are similar. Such an assumption could only be valid in Nazi Germany, the
People's Republic of China or the Soviet Union, where institutions of higher
learning are mere adjuncts of central committees or politburos.

The university has become a public convenience to be used by anyone who can wave
a contract for ''research'' or has the right ascriptive attributes. But what of
the real capital that makes a university great, the invisible endowment that
supports the idea of the university? In the words of T.S. Eliot: ''Someone said,
'The dead writers are remote from us because we know so much more than they
did.' Precisely, and they are that which we know.'' Who is going to supply and
teach that which we must know?


What distinguishes a democracy from a totalitarian dictatorship is that in a
democracy there is an agreed-upon separation of government from society, that
there is a realm of the private into which government may not intrude because
there are rules that forbid or limit such intrusion, a Bill of Rights or ancient
conventions and traditions that guard a society's autonomy. The same concept of
privacy should apply to the university.

The university is now a subagency in all but name of the Federal Government.
When a faculty department begins to think of faculty hiring or curriculum
revision or a university administration about admission standards, each must
give careful consideration to Government- agency rules and regulations, the
litigation that might ensue and the sanctions that might be imposed if
Washington decided that the wrong instructor had been appointed or that the
entrance examination or any examination is culturally biased, to use the cant
phrase. Perhaps the time has come to try a little deregulation of American
universities. What is fitting for the airlines might be eminently fitting for
institutions of higher learning.

Let me concede that this is an essay in crisis mongering, and there is no
greater victim of crisis mongering than the American university. Are all these
opinions and judgments I have culled over the years exaggerated, unjust, untrue?
Or has higher education in America sunk into a quagmire from which it will take
years of thrashing about to free itself?

We have grown accustomed to prescriptive studies by Government commissions and
private foundations, by professional educators and university administrators
about how to effect a turnaround for the better. Despite the ideas, many of them
of a superficial excellence, the hoped-for improvement in higher education for
the near term is an illusion. There will be little improvement for a generation,
at least. The rot is too deep.

An American philospher has said that ''there is an enormous vacuum where until a
few decades ago there was the substance of education. And with what is that
vacuum filled: It is filled with the elective, eclectic, the specialized, the
accidental and incidental improvisations and spontaneous curiosities of teachers
and students.  There is no common faith, no common body of principle, no common
body of knowledge, no common moral and intellectual discipline. Yet the
graduates of these modern schools are expected to form a civilized community. .
. . When one realizes that they have no common culture, is it astounding that
they have no common purpose? That they worship false gods? . . . That in the
fierce struggle for existence they are tearing Western society to pieces? . . .
We have established a system of education in which we insist that while everyone
must be educated, yet there is nothing in particular that an educated man must
know.''

Is the problem of higher education in America insoluble? Is the system of higher
education in America outmoded? Forty years on, the foregoing words of Walter
Lippmann, delivered before the American Association for the Advancement of
Science in 1940, have a sad, familiar ring.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of modern university ; photo of students in an American
university

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 7, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SHULTZ WITH TOUGH LINE, IS NOW KEY VOICE IN CRISIS

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2583 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 6


After more than two months of international crises, beginning with the Soviet
downing of a Korean airliner on Sept. 1 and extending to last month's bombing of
the Marine compound in Beirut and the invasion of Grenada, Secretary of State
George P. Shultz has emerged as the paramount voice in the Reagan
Administration's foreign policy.

According to a wide range of key officials, Mr. Shultz and his top aides have
become the strongest advocates in the Administration for using military force as
an instrument of diplomacy in the Middle East and the Central American and
Caribbean region, often in the face of what officials say have been Pentagon
doubts or opposition.

At the same time, officials said Mr. Shultz's ascendancy, along with the
departure of William P. Clark as national security adviser and White House
concern about President Reagan's vulnerabilities on foreign affairs in next
year's election, was producing a steadier and less ideological foreign policy.



'A Common Thread'

Underneath everything, most officials interviewed agreed, was the effect of the
crises on the President himself. A senior official said, ''Grenada, Beirut and
the K.A.L. airliner all served to confirm in the President's mind his own view
of the world, that there was a common thread to all these events and it all led
back to Moscow.''

As these officials see it, Mr. Reagan may be more reluctant than ever to make
deals with Communist leaders who he is convinced seek only world domination and
cannot be trusted.

These are the main conclusions from interviews with officials at every level in
the White House, the State Department and the Department of Defense. To many of
them, the Administration's mettle has been tested and a result is a new firm and
consistent policy. To other aides, mainly lower down in the hierarchy, senior
officials have been reeling from crisis to crisis without having thought through
goals and strategy.



Bureaucratic Battles

Throughout the last 10 weeks, personal and bureaucratic battles were also fought
over policy and over the appointment of Robert C. McFarlane as national security
adviser. Officials say they believe that these developments will lead either to
the lessening of the internal warfare that has troubled the Administration so
far or to new scores that will be settled later.

The common theme to the responses recommended by Mr. Shultz and approved by Mr.
Reagan, as put together from descriptions by officials, has been this: Be tough,
even to the point of using force, if necessary; keep negotiating lines open but
do not be optimistic about positive results, and meanwhile, solidify positions
of strength.

In Lebanon, this approach has resulted in some modest deeds and words to
frighten Syria, and private warnings to President Amin Gemayel to broaden his
Government and take Syrian interests into account or risk losing American
political support. It has also led to a major effort, now under way, to
strengthen ties with Israel and make Israel virtually the centerpiece of
American policy in the Middle East.

On Central America and the Caribbean, officials said the decisions were to
invade Grenada principally as a show of American resolve to the region and the
world - the Pentagon was opposed at first - and to step up covert operations
against the Nicaraguan Government as a way of trying to persuade Managua to
offer concessions in negotiations. The goal of building up El Salvador's
Government and army was also reaffirmed.

As for the Soviet Union, officials say, the response to the downing of the South
Korean airliner was intended to be tough in polemics while still holding the
door open to arms control talks. But since favorable Soviet responses were not
to be expected, they said it was decided that the main aim should be to insure
Western European support for the deployment of new medium-range missiles,
scheduled to begin next month.

The Decisions And the Infighting

Major decisions such as these were not hammered out without many personal and
bureaucratic bruises. In the State Department, there is much talk that Defense
Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger and the military are afflicted with ''the Vietnam
syndrome'': a reluctance to flex American military muscles without substantial,
advance political backing at home.

In many quarters of the Pentagon, the response is that the diplomats are
providing little policy guidance for the use of force and that vague goals like
''peace and stability'' in Lebanon are a recipe only for open-ended involvement.


New Authority for Shultz

The main result of the bureaucratic give-and-take in recent weeks has been new
authority for Mr. Shultz and the State Department as a whole, backed by Vice
President Bush and James A. Baker 3d, Mr. Reagan's chief of staff.

''George meets with the President alone, at least once a week, which he never
did before,'' a senior official said of Mr. Shultz. ''He is the one that the
President looks to, but he will never be as close to the President or as
powerful as Clark was.'' That seems to be the judgment of most of those
interviewed.

Mr. Shultz's emergence is due at least in part, according to a number of
officials, to Mr. Reagan's realization that his new chief diplomat was tough and
not unafraid to resort to force.

At a National Security Council meeting on Oct. 25, hours after the invasion of
Grenada began, Mr. Shultz told his colleagues that it was a ''turning point.''

'Thoroughly Planned Crisis'

''This was the most thoroughly planned crisis I've ever participated in,'' an
experienced American diplomat said of the American-led invasion of Grenada.
''Lebanon does not have an end game; Grenada does - in, out and over.''

The Inter-American Bureau of the State Department, backed by Lawrence S.
Eagleburger, the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, started
pressing for the operation on Oct. 17, according to the accounts.

At an interdepartmental meeting on that day, the State Department
representatives called for ''serious thought'' and military contingency planning
on an evacuation operation for the more than 500 Americans in Grenada. To those
at the meeting, the overthrow of Grenada's Prime Minister, Maurice Bishop, on
Oct. 12, by radicals whom even Cuba had apparently disavowed, spelled potential
trouble for American citizens. The representatives of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
at the meeting were described as resistant to even beginning contingency
planning.

The bureaucratic standoff eased somewhat on Oct. 19, the day Mr. Bishop was
killed, as the military representatives agreed to discuss a limited action to
evacuate Americans. The State Department officials argued that a limited
operation would not do, and that to save the Americans and to serve broader
goals the military action should be aimed at taking over the whole island.

Shultz 'Got to' Reagan

At some point on Oct. 19 or soon after that, it is said that Mr. Shultz ''got
to'' the President to head off continued qualms in the Pentagon. Then
contingency planning went into full swing for the first time. State Department
officials said they discovered to their dismay that the Pentagon had done no
prior contingency planning or intelligence gathering for a move against Grenada,
despite several years of difficult relations with the island country.

The President and Mr. Shultz hesitated until approached by the leaders of
several Caribbean countries who issued a strong call for American military
action.

On Oct. 23, after the truck-bomb attack on the marines in Beirut, Mr. Weinberger
and the Joint Chiefs of Staff were said to be cautious once again about action
in Grenada, but were now willing to go along.

''They were dismayed by what happened in Beirut that morning, and were not in
the mood to get into another situation where we would take additional
casualties,'' a senior official said. ''They were also concerned that an attack
would add credence to the charge that the Administration was 'out of control'
and too willing to use force.''

U.S. Sends a Signal To Friend and Foe

The invasion as carried out on Oct. 25 conformed to State Department desires not
just to evacuate the Americans but also to rid the island of its radical
leadership.

Officials acknowledged that there was a message intended in this for the
Nicaraguan leaders and especially for those in Costa Rica, Panama, Honduras and
El Salvador who were worried about Washington's reliability.  Second big subhed
in 1st take can be moved up if needed.

The officials believe that the Cubans and the Nicaraguan leaders are more
worried now about what Washington might do. ''Their fear can take them in one of
two directions,'' an American diplomat said, ''either digging in their heels or
being more willing to talk, if we can orchestrate various factors well.''

In El Salvador, the center of Administration concerns in Central America, it is
generally seen by officials here that events are not going well in that country,
after a few months of optimism.

'Force in Their Repertoire'

The effects of the decision to invade Grenada, to most officials, are likely to
be more internal than external. ''In the fight with the ideologues in this
Administration,'' a key official said, ''it shows that the pragmatists have the
use of military force in their repertoire.''

Many of the same officials who identify themselves as pragmatists had been
urging the use of greater force in Lebanon as well. For months, by all accounts,
Mr. Shultz and Mr. Eagleburger had been standing virtually alone in the
Administration in support of requests by Mr. McFarlane, who was in the Middle
East, for relaxing the restrictions on Marine operations in Beirut.

Officials said they had recognized for some time the anomalous nature of the
American role in Lebanon: American stakes, as they see them, are vital, but
Washington has little ultimate power to control events; the Marines are there on
a so-called peacekeeping mission where there is no peace, and the highly
vulnerable position of the marines at the Beirut airport is dictated more by
political concerns not to be seen as expanding American involvement than by
considerations for the safety of the men.

The Administration felt that it passed the first test in September when Congress
voted under the War Powers Act to approve the Marine deployment for 18 months.

Pressure on Gemayel

That the aim of the Marines is prop up the Gemayel Government and prevent Syrian
domination of Lebanon is clear now. But outside critics and some Administration
officials argue that a Marine force of 1,600 is inadequate for either task.

Officials said that in the summer, days before Israeli forces withdrew from the
Beirut area, allowing radical forces into the heights around the city, Mr.
McFarlane gained President Gemayel's agreement to a process of broadening his
Government. This diplomatic effort was backed up by a letter from Mr. Reagan to
Mr. Gemayel underlining his commitment to a unified Lebanon, but stressing that
American public support could crumble unless progress was made toward a
negotiated settlement.

But Administration officials said, as one put it, that every time Mr. McFarlane
and others walked through Mr. Gemayel's door, ''we were never sure which Gemayel
would be there, the son of his father and the leader of the Phalangist faction
or the President of Lebanon.''

In the negotiations on national reconciliation in Geneva, the Administration has
told Mr. Gemayel that it expects him to make concessions and to share more power
with the Shiite Moslems and the Druse.

This would go part way toward meeting Syrian interests, but not so far as to
include two other factions thought to be too close to Damascus: the Sunni
Moslems led by Rashid Karami and the Maronite Christians led by Suleiman
Franjieh. ''These others would be dealt with in a second phase,'' an official
said.

While this process was being set in motion, the Shiite, Druse and other forces
associated with the Syrians were bearing down on the strategic heights of Suk al
Gharb, outside Beirut, and this touched off another debate in the White House.

Mr. McFarlane, supported by Mr. Shultz and Mr. Eagleburger, recommended that for
the first time naval gunfire be used against the Druse and the Shiites, even
though this would not be in response to an attack on the Marines. The Pentagon
questioned this on the ground that it would lead only to further American
involvement.

''This was to make clear that we would not allow the high ground at Suk to come
under hostile control, and we also sent a private message to the Syrians saying
that they bore responsibility for those they were supplying with arms as well as
for their own actions,'' a high-ranking official said.

Shultz Changes Course On the Syrians

Asked what more lasting influence the Administration might have on Syria, the
answer was twofold. First, he said, Damascus needs to be seen dealing with
Washington as a way of maintaining independence from Moscow and financial
support from Saudi Arabia. Second, he said, Damascus has to be made aware again
of Israeli military power.

Mr. Shultz has only recently come to see Syria as the problem rather than as
part of the solution. For most of the year after the Israeli invasion of
Lebanon, Mr. Shultz was known to have argued that the United States could and
should try to establish good relations with Damascus. One Shultz aide said,
''He's been re-educated on Syria.''

For months Mr. Shultz has been trying to prompt Israel to reassert itself
militarily in Lebanon. According to officials, the message has been sent through
various channels that Israel runs the risk of being seen in Damascus as a
''paper tiger'' and that Syria might miscalculate and start a war. The feeling
in the Administration is that the truck-bomb attack on Israeli soldiers in Tyre,
Lebanon, on Friday confirms this concern.

Israel, in the throes of severe economic problems and changes in government and
after a year of hearing Washington call for its withdrawal from Lebanon, has
hunkered down in southern Lebanon near its own border and resisted the
promptings. Officials said Mr. Shultz then began to search for ways to interest
Israel again in the broader Lebanese situation, and perhaps to get the broader
Middle East peace process reinvigorated as well.

A New Approach: 'To Reinvolve Israel' A result was a policy paper delivered by
Mr. Shultz to a National Security Council meeting on Oct. 18, arguing in effect
to put Israel at the very center of American policy in the area. ''Our aim is to
reinvolve Israel across the board, not just militarily in Lebanon,'' a key
official said.

Over objections from the Pentagon that doing so would undercut Washington's
position with moderate Arabs, Mr. Reagan approved most of the Shultz
initiatives. These were said to include helping Israel's military research and
development programs; loosening restrictions on Israel's having to buy American
goods with American aid, and providing less aid but on better terms.

Administration officials say the attacks on Israeli and American forces in
Lebanon have formed a new ''blood bond,'' in the words of one State Department
official, making it more likely that the two countries will act together - even
with military force, if necessary - in the coming months.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of George Shultz (page A15)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 7, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN'S TRIP TO JAPAN: TIES REMAIN STRONG

BYLINE: By CLYDE HABERMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1131 words


News

 Analysis

TOKYO, Nov. 6 - President Reagan's scheduled arrival here Wednesday for a
three-day visit comes at a time when Japanese seem uncertain whether they are on
good or bad terms with the United States.  If they wished, Mr. Reagan and Prime
Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone could find plenty to talk about to make them mutually
unhappy. Japan still does not spend enough on defense to satisfy many Americans,
two-way trade is likely to produce a $23 billion deficit for the United States
this year and continued high unemployment has left some Americans with the
notion that the Japanese are responsible for many of their troubles.

There is grousing, too, on this side of the Pacific, mostly out of conviction
that every time something goes wrong in the United States, Japan is made a
scapegoat. The sense that this country tends to be picked on unfairly is
sufficiently engrained for a new word to have cropped up in some circles here:
''goatability.'' It is used only partly in jest.

Doubts about America's dependability, both as a military protector and economic
partner, appear to have set in long ago. ''Your country is still above the
standard, of course,'' an American was told the other day by a politician with
broad government experience. ''But you're not as far above the standard as you
used to be.''

For all the grumpiness, though, the relationship between the two countries not
only endures but also has not changed dramatically over the years on many
fundamental points.

Even before World War II, and certainly after, they were an odd couple -
suspicious of each other, neither fully comprehending what made the other tick.
Perhaps inevitably, as with business partners who need each other but who watch
closely to make sure that no profit-skimming is going on, relations sometimes
rise, sometimes fall. But they go on.

If anything, the Reagan Administration and the Nakasone Cabinet have been
uncommonly cordial. United States criticism of this country's trade and defense
policies has been muted, and Mr. Nakasone calls Japan a ''member of the West''
more insistently than his predecessors.

The deep anti-American sentiment heard readily in Europe has to be searched for
here. Antinuclear demonstrations recently drew only a few thousand people, with
little of the explicit denunciations of Washington that have become common among
antimissile protesters in such Western European nations as West Germany.  In
1968, at the height of the Vietnam war, large protest rallies greeted the
arrival of a nuclear-powered United States aircraft carrier. Twice this year,
nuclear-powered ships sailed into Japanese ports to what by comparison were
whispers of complaint.

Of all the major United States allies, Japan alone did not recoil immediately at
the invasion of Grenada. There were criticisms in newspaper editorials and in
street interviews, but the Government's attitude appeared to be that the
military action, while regrettable, was also understandable. Besides, within a
few days Grenada was not talked about much. It is too remote for most Japanese
to worry about.

In daily life, the United States influence is no less powerful than ever, from
the close attention paid to pronouncements by the American President to the lure
of American ''superstars'' in television commercials.

But one difficulty for many Americans is that they come to Tokyo, see a
McDonald's hamburger stand and conclude that the Japanese are just like them.
They are not. And the cultural differences may explain some of the persistent
frictions.

Double Standard Seen

In magazine articles and in conversations, many Japanese resent what they regard
as a United States double- standard.

Japan, for years, has gone along with, or at least acquiesced in, almost every
major American foreign policy initiative. Much of this country's defense and
foreign policy seems designed to do whatever is necessary - though not a
fraction more - to minimize Washington's displeasure. Yet the Japanese are
perplexed, knowing they are considered untrustworthy by many Americans.

The United States wanted Japan to restrict automobile exports, and last week
Japan agreed, albeit reluctantly, for a fourth straight year. Many Japanese
cannot figure out why their business practices are considered a barrier to free
trade but auto quotas insisted upon by the United States are not. The
frustration is over ''inequality,'' a word often used here to describe the
relationship.

For decades, dozens of scholars have cited Japanese insecurity - combined with a
certain self-centeredness and distrust of foreigners - as important
considerations. This can lead at times to exaggerated perceptions.

Poll of New Yorkers Cited

It was news here several weeks ago when a poll taken on New York City streets
showed that only 3 out of 100 people interviewed at random could name the
Japanese Prime Minister. Virtually anything perceived as a slight to Japanese
officials at the economic summit meeting last spring in Williamsburg, Va.,
received prominent coverage.

Judging from conversations, there is a widely held belief that Americans may
have become more than a bit lazy and now fault Japan for possessing qualities
supposedly held in high regard in the United States - willingness to work hard,
ingenuity, perseverance. Sometimes this bemoaning is wistful. ''Glorious
America, where are you?'' was the headline on one magazine article two years
ago.

At other times, the attitude is that perhaps the Americans should be more like,
well, Japanese. Prime Minister Nakasone expressed this opinion last January
while on a visit to Washington, in response to a question about trade frictions.


Trade Carefully Prepared

Japanese manufacturers, he observed, study the United States market in detail
before trying to enter. They make endless studies of what Americans like and do
not like, and are prepared to modify their products accordingly. American
businessmen do not do that when they come to Japan, Mr.  Nakasone said. Few
bother to learn even a word or two of Japanese.

There is also a sense that the United States may be unclear about what it really
wants from Japan. Defense spending is sometimes raised as an illustration. How
far, many people ask, is America willing to go in demanding a military buildup?

Masashi Ishibashi, chairman of the Socialist Party, the leading opposition
group, pointed out in an interview that if Japan had international power equal
to its economic strength it would have the world's third largest military force.

''Do the Americans really think that a Japanese defense force of that size could
still be obedient?'' Mr. Ishibashi asked. His bet was that not many Americans
would care to find out.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 7, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

PANEL TO REVIEW CURB ON THE PRESS

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 524 words


Gen. John W. Vessey Jr., Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said yesterday
that he would create a panel of officers and journalists to review the news
restrictions imposed in the initial days of the Grenada invasion and to suggest
rules for press coverage of military actions.

General Vessey approved the Grenada restrictions during planning sessions before
the invasion.

The panel is to be headed by Winant Sidle, the director of public relations for
the Martin Marietta Corporation and former Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense
for Public Affairs. Mr. Sidle said he hoped the panel could establish guidelines
agreeable both to the Government and the press ''that fulfill the requirements
of the First Amendment and of military security.''

Reporters and camera crews were prevented from covering the landing in Grenada
and the second day of fighting, and coverage during the next two days was
limited to restricted tours.

Instantaneous Communications

In an interview on the NBC News program ''Meet the Press'' yesterday, General
Vessey said the panel would ''help us decide how, in this modern age of the
television camera and instantaneous communications around the world, we can
conduct military operations and protect the operation and protect our own people
and still inform the American people.''

General Vessey said that reporters had to be barred from the invasion ''because
we needed surprise and secrecy to have any chance of having the operation be any
kind of a success.''

Representatives of the press have said that they would have honored a military
embargo, that the Cubans and Grenadians knew the invasion was imminent, and that
decisions about coverage should have been made by civilians, President Reagan or
Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger, rather than the military.

In a telephone interview from his home in Orlando, Fla., Mr. Sidle, who is 67
years old, said he hoped to meet with General Vessey soon to discuss the panel
and select other members.

Rules or Censorship

Mr. Sidle said that in Vietnam, where he was chief of information for the
Military Command, journalists adhered to a set of 15 rules that were intended to
prevent the enemy from learning about tactics, troop movement, casualties or
other useful information. Mr. Sidle said the alternative was military
censorship, a practice that ''has been thrown by the wayside in recent years.''

Reporters in Vietnam had mixed feelings about Mr. Sidle's performance there.
Many felt that the communiques issued by his office were inadequate or
misleading; others said he had done a good job within the confines of a
government policy that consistently portrayed the military situation as
favorably as possible.

In 1968, he suspended the accreditation of John Carroll, a reporter for The
Baltimore Sun, who had written that the United States was abandoning its
garrison at Khe Sanh. Mr. Carroll, who was barred from reporting from Vietnam
for 60 days, pointed out that the move was well known to the North Vietnamese
and the Vietcong long before his article made the information public in the
United States.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gen. John Vessey Jr.

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 7, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

The Calendar ;
 Monday

BYLINE: By Marjorie Hunter

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 509 words


President Reagan leaves Tuesday for a six-day trip to Japan and South Korea.
While in Japan, he is to meet with Emperor Hirohito and Prime Minister Yasuhiro
Nakasone. In Korea, he is to hold talks with President Chun Doo Hwan and visit
troops of the United States Second Infantry Division at Camp Liberty Bell.

Talk of the New Deal: Katie Louchheim, a former State Department official, is to
discuss her book, ''The Making of the New Deal, the Insiders Talk.'' 12:15 P.M.,
Woman's National Democratic Club.

Vietnam Veterans: Delegates to the first annual convention of the Vietnam
Veterans of America gather for a four-day session. 9 A.M., The Shoreham.

Once Again: A House Judiciary subcommittee is to work on a proposed equal rights
amendment to the Constitution. 2:30 P.M., Room 2237, Rayburn House Office
Building.

Tuesday

The President's Private Sector Survey on Cost Control is to release reports on
research and development, wage setting, financial management and anomalies in
the Federal Government. 10 A.M., Room 6802, Commerce Department.

Salute to Veterans: Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger and Secretary of
Labor Raymond J. Donovan are to address the Labor Department's annual Salute to
American Veterans. 11 A.M., Labor Department's Great Hall.

Presidential Aides: The National Academy of Public Administration releases
findings of a study of Presidential personnel recruitment and the appointment
process from Harry Truman to Ronald Reagan. 10 A.M., 11 Dupont Circle, N.W.

Wednesday

The American Radio Relay League announces a scholarship award in honor of a
noted ham radio operator, Senator Barry Goldwater, Republican of Arizona. 10
A.M. Room 353, Russell Senate Office Building.

Arms Control: The Brookings Institution sponsors a forum on ''The Arms Control
Debate.'' 9 A.M., 1775 Massachusetts Avenue N.W.

Women at Work: Linda Lavin, the star of television's ''Alice,'' is to present
the ''Women at Work'' broadcast awards, sponsored by the National Commission on
Working Women. 9 A.M., Madison Hotel.

Tangled Policies: William H. Luers, a former United States Ambassador to
Venezuela, is to speak on ''The Soviets and Latin America: Three Decades of
Tangled U.S. Policies.'' Noon, Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars,
the Smithsonian Institution.

Neighborhood Service: Awards for service to low-income communities are to be
presented at a two- day conference sponsored by the National Center for
Neighborhood Enterprise. 9 A.M., 15th and M Streets N.W.

Thursday

Maynard Jackson, former Mayor of Atlanta, is to receive the Booker T. Washington
Foundation's distinguished service award at a dinner honoring the nation's 244
black mayors. 6:30 P.M., Shoreham Hotel.

Roundtable: The Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies sponsors
a roundtable on ''Limits to American Interventionism.'' 4:45 P.M., 1740
Massachusetts Avenue N.W.

Retail Sales: The Commerce Department releases a report on October retail sales.

Friday

Federal offices are closed in observance of Veterans Day.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: Schedule

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EX-U.S. INTELLIGENCE AND MILITARY PERSONNEL SUPPLY ANTI-NICARAGUA REBELS

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1676 words


The following article is based on reporting by Jeff Gerth and Philip Taubman and
was written by Mr. Gerth.


WASHINGTON, Nov. 7 - A network of former United States intelligence and military
personnel is supplying increasingly advanced aircraft, weapons and paramilitary
support to American- sponsored rebels in Nicaragua, according to participants
and to Government documents.

The new aircraft and distribution system have made it more difficult for the
Reagan Administration to direct the rebels and raised new fears among
Congressional critics over the accountability of covert operations in Central
America, according to intelligence and Congressional sources.

The informal network, which according to Administration officials was created in
part with the help of the Central Intelligence Agency, has significantly
improved the offensive firepower of the insurgents and their ability to strike
at targets deep inside Nicaragua.

Other Sources Unclear

Although the C.I.A. is the main source of support to the groups fighting inside
Nicaragua, intelligence experts say guerrillas of one of the groups, the
Revolutionary Democratic Alliance, have been able to raise money and secure
equipment, including planes, from other, unidentified sources.

In recent months, rebel groups operating from bases in Honduras and Costa Rica
have launched a series of air and sea raids against industrial and
transportation targets inside Nicaragua, blowing up a large oil-storage area in
the Pacific port of Corinto, bombing the main airport in Managua and sabotaging
an oil pipeline along the Atlantic coast.

New Arms Aid in Recent Months

Rebel leaders, according to Americans familiar with their operations, have said
these raids could not have been carried out without the new weapons and aircraft
that they have received in recent months.

At the same time, the aircraft provided by the network have made it more
difficult for the Reagan Administration to limit the rebels' operations. For
American officials, the question of limiting the rebels has recently become more
difficult because their troop strength and the sophistication of their equipment
have increased, according to intelligence and Congressional sources.

The C.I.A., for example, has disavowed the attack on the Managua airport,
telling members of Congress that the agency did not approve the air raid. This
has generated concern in Congress that the rebels cannot be adequately
controlled.

Debate in Congress

The Congressional debate over the accountability and feasibility of covert
operations in Central America has reached a crucial stage. The House of
Representatives voted last month to approve no money for covert activities in
Nicaragua in the Intelligence Authorization Act for the 1984 fiscal year. The
Senate voted last week to continue financing the rebels, and the issue must now
be resolved by the two bodies in a conference committee.

The informal American intelligence network has also become something of a
liability to the C.I.A. because some of the network's activities surfaced in
public view, removing part of the secrecy that has shrouded rebel operations and
the methods used by the C.I.A. to support them. For example, registration
documents found in the wreckage of one of the planes that attacked the Managua
airport disclosed that the plane was once owned by two American companies
associated with the C.I.A.

Most of the network's activities, however, remain secret. There is considerable
evidence showing that the companies and individuals are involved in classified
military work for the United States, including projects for the C.I.A., but it
is not always clear how much of this work is directly connected to supporting
the Nicaraguan rebels.

Nor is it clear how much control the C.I.A. has over the group.

Planes From Vietnam War

The support network includes C.I.A.- owned airplanes used in the Vietnam War.
Although the C.I.A. has tried to conceal the ownership and movement of the
planes, public documents filed with the Federal Aviation Administration make it
possible to trace sales of the aircraft and maintenance work done on them.

The documents show that some of the airplanes are being equipped with weapons
and sophisticated electronic surveillance equipment and are being tested at
public airports.

The C.I.A., according to Administration and Congressional sources, has been
supporting both the Nicaraguan Democratic Force, based in Hounduras, and the
Revolutionary Democratic Alliance, based in Costa Rica. The Revolutionary
Democratic Alliance has said it was responsible for several attacks inside
Nicaragua, including the raid on Managua that resulted in the crash of a Cessna
404 at the Managua airport.

The ownership of the plane that crashed can be traced back to the Investair
Leasing Corporation of McLean, Va. Investair bought the plane in October 1982
from Summit Aviation Inc. of Middletown, Del., and the plane was stored and
maintained at the Summit airfield, according to public records and an Investair
official.

Companies Work for Government

Both the Summit company, which was established in 1960 by Richard C. DuPont Jr.,
and Investair, which was organized in 1982, do classified military work for the
Government and for the C.I.A., according to company officials and Congressional
sources. Both companies also employ officials formerly affiliated with the
C.I.A., according to published accounts.

In addition to the Cessna 404, Investair owns four other aircraft, according to
public records. Two of the planes, the records show, were formerly owned by
C.I.A.-owned companies. Investair officials have declined to comment about the
operations of the company.

When a reporter requested the files of some of Investair's airplanes at the
F.A.A.'s public records room in Oklahoma City last month, he was told by
aviation officials that they were under ''the control'' of an F.A.A. security
official acting at the request of another, unspecified Federal agency. The
files, however, were available for public inspection.

Modified for Military Activities

Summit Aviation, which maintained the Cessna 404 that crashed in Managua, is
involved in both civilian and military aviation work. According to Jane's All
the World's Aircraft, an authoritative aviation guide, Summit markets a Cessna
aircraft modified for military and paramilitary activities. According to Jane's,
the Summit plane, called the Summit Sentry, is suitable for light air-to-ground
attacks, light cargo transport, aerial photgraphy, psychological warfare, convoy
protection and airborne discharge.

Summit's customers include such countries as Honduras and Haiti as well as the
C.I.A., according to sources familiar with the company's operations. Last month,
a DC-3 registered to the Haitian Air Force could be seen parked on the ramp at
Summit's airfield.

Mr. DuPont, Summit's founder and president, is a member of the DuPont family
that founded the giant chemical company that bears its name. Other DuPont family
members are officers and directors of Summit.

Company Won't Comment

Edmund M. Conaway, executive vice president and director of Summit, said the
company would have no comment on any of its business affairs.

In addition to its work for Investair, Summit has maintained and modified planes
for Armairco, another company involved in a covert Government project, according
to public records and Armairco officials.

Armairco, based in La Jolla, Calif., was organized in 1982 and has offices
around the country, including two in Virginia. Armairco has bought several
planes in the last year, including two multimillion-dollar Beechcraft King Airs,
earlier this year, according to Beech and Armairco officials. These planes were
purchased directly from Beech, a procedure normally done only for military
projects, according to Beech officials and other aviation experts.

'May Well Be'

John L. Head, president of Shenandoah Aerolease, the division of Armairco that
purchases most of Armairco's planes, says Armairco has a Government contract
involving aerial reconnaissance and electronic testing of navigation and search
equipment. When asked whether Armairco's Government work included activities in
Central America, Mr. Head said, ''That may well be.''

Mr. Head said that Armairco was owned by a former Army major, Roger T. Sanders,
and that other employees of both Armairco and Shenandoah were also retired
military personnel. Mr. Head said Armairco planes were based at and maintained
by Summit Aviation.

A decade ago, the C.I.A. controlled a huge network of planes, pilots and
companies for use in paramilitary situations. With the end of the Vietnam War
and public disclosures about some covert operations, however, many of those
assets were dissolved or sold off. Consequently, when the Reagan Administration
sought to expand covert paramilitary operations in Central America and
elsewhere, the C.I.A. was forced to rebuild much of its capabilities, relying
frequently on outside assets, usually retained under contract to the agency,
according to intelligence officials.

Other Planes Have Crashed

Several other rebel planes have crashed inside Nicaragua in recent months, but
the exact source of these aircraft is unclear.

For example, a DC-3 carrying troops and supplies crashed in the mountains of the
Nicaraguan province of Matagalpa on Oct. 3. F.A.A. records show the plane was
owned by Westair International, which is based in Monument, Colo., and Tucson,
Ariz. Westair's owner, James R. Cullen, said he had sold the plane but refused
to talk further about the plane or his business. F.A.A. records show the plane's
last owner was Westair, which bought it in July.

According to records of the Tucson Aviation Authority and airport employees, the
DC-3 was parked in Westair's space at Tucson International Airport for about
five weeks last summer and was serviced by Westair employees.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AT 50, ESQUIRE MAGAZINE GIVES A TRAVELING PARTY

BYLINE: By JUDY KLEMESRUD

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 538 words


Esquire magazine threw itself a traveling 50th birthday party yesterday and at
the first stop, breakfast at Gracie Mansion, it announced the names of those
Americans that it dubbed ''50 who made the difference.''

The 50 people, 20 of whom are living, are profiled in the magazine's December
golden anniversary issue. Among those honorees who attended the second birthday
event, dinner at the Four Seasons, were Muhammad Ali, Betty Friedan, William S.
Paley, Philip Johnson, Dr. John Rock, a developer of the birth-control pill,
William Levitt, Dr. Benjamin Spock, Carl Bernstein and Ralph Nader.

Muhammad Ali, who drank Diet Coke at the dinner, said he had no idea why he had
been chosen one of the 50. ''Beauty is in the eye of the beholder,'' he said
with a sly grin.

Mr. Johnson conceded that he was pleased he was the only architect on the list.
''We're just as jealous and small-minded as sopranos, you know,'' he said.

Miss Friedan arrived at the dinner in a long red dress trimmed in gold. She said
that Esquire's birthday fell on the same day that the 20th-anniversary edition
of her book ''The Feminine Mystique'' had come out. ''It includes a new epilogue
on my becoming a grandmother,'' she said proudly.  Several guests commented on
Dr. Spock's navy-blue tie with red peace symbols on it. ''It's left over from
Vietnam days,'' he said, in between bites of a cracker spread with red caviar.
''I thought it was appropriate to get it out of mothballs, because I'm more
scared now than I've ever been in my life.''

Esquire's list includes both well- known and obscure people, ranging from five
former presidents to Elvis Presley to John Khanlian, a former Columbia
University student who was chosen as being representative of the Vietnam War
protester.

''It's kind of mind-boggling being with these people,'' Mr. Khanlian said at the
dinner, ''but I'm trying not to be too tacky about getting my camera out at the
wrong time.''

At the third and final birthday event, a gala for 2,000 last night at Avery
Fisher Hall in Lincoln Center, Gay Talese, the author, and Blair Brown, the
actress, narrated a film about the 50 honorees. The program also included a
musical tribute by Sarah Vaughan to the last 50 years.

Lee Eisenberg, the Esquire editor in charge of the anniversary issue, said the
50 honorees had been chosen from 600 candidates. ''We tried to be provocative,
but not perverse,'' he said.

The 50 winners were profiled by 50 writers described by Mr. Eisenberg as ''the
best American writers.'' Among those present at the birthday events were Kurt
Vonnegut Jr., Norman Mailer, Wilfrid Sheed, Marilyn French, Tom Wolfe, Frances
FitzGerald, William F. Buckley Jr. and Ken Kesey.

One listing in the ''Esquire 50'' that had some of the guests talking was the
lumping of Ernest Hemingway, William Faulkner and F. Scott Fitzgerald into one
winner.  Richard Ford, who wrote the profile of the three authors, said he
didn't think it was demeaning to combine them into one. ''I think Faulkner is
the greatest writer of the 20th century,'' he said, ''but that doesn't reflect
the least on Fitzgerald or Hemingway. I don't think they would have minded,
because writing is not a competitive business.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of guests at Esquire magazine party

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

A PSYCHOLOGY OF LIFE IN SPACE IS URGED

SECTION: Section C; Page 4, Column 3; Science Desk

LENGTH: 373 words


THE time is fast approaching, according to two psychologists, when behavioral
scientists should give greater attention to the potential effects of
long-duration space travel on the human psyche.

Although there have been few psychological problems so far, future space
journeys lasting months and possibly years are expected to require more care in
selecting those who fly, determining the compatibility of crews, arranging for
leisure activities and providing counseling during and after the mission.
Officials of the Soviet Union's space program, which has the most experience in
extended flights, have said that the only barriers to long missions are
psychological.



Need to Avoid a 'Costly Mistake'

The two psychologists, Joseph G. Ponterotto and Davis C. Hayden, said it could
be ''a costly mistake to delay investigating the psychological and socio
psychological effects of space travel until the problems actually land in our
laps.'' They urged young psychologists to consider specializing in space
psychology, which they said should be a growing field.

Mr. Ponterotto of the University of Virginia and Mr. Hayden of the University of
California at Santa Barbara called attention to the needs and opportunities of
this new field in a report earlier this year to the Western Psychological
Association.

They said there was a need for ''quality empirical research'' into the selection
of space travelers, who will be more numerous and heterogeneous in the future.
What personality characteristics, for example, are most advantageous for one's
smooth adjustment to outer space? Can present personality tests be of value in
predicting space-adjustment levels?

The psychologists also recommended the inclusion of behavioral scientists on
long-duration flights to serve as counselors and to observe group behavior and
dynamics. Similarly, space travelers may need counseling to help them readjust
to the earth.

''As with the returning Vietnam veteran and submarine sailor,'' the
psychologists said, ''novel symptomatologies will arise. Counselors will be
faced with new difficulties, and only with time and experience will they become
truly effective and efficient in dealing with space-related psychological
problems.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BYLINE: By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 794 words


WALTZ IN MARATHON. By Charles Dickinson. 276 pages. Knopf. $13.95.  TIGER THE
LURP DOG. By Kenn Miller. 214 pages. Atlantic-Little, Brown. $14.95.

HARRY WALTZ is a loan shark, the richest man in the fictional Michigan town of
Marathon. The people of Marathon look up to Harry Waltz, but mostly because he
lives on a hill that overlooks the town. Still, Waltz is a loan shark with a
difference. People pay him back not because he ever muscles them, but in order
to protect their good names. As Harry says at one point in Charles Dickinson's
fine first novel, ''Waltz in Marathon'': ''I was able to talk people into
believing there was nothing wrong with them taking my money. That is the source
of my fortune. I brought honor and gentlemanliness . . . and seemliness to loan
sharking.''

So when the ground begins to shift under Harry Waltz - when suddenly in the late
1960's his customers start defying him by not making their payments on time - it
represents not only a crisis in Harry's life, but also the change in American
values brought on by Vietnam, which, not incidentally, has cost Harry the life
of his favorite son, a brilliantly talented musician. Harry Waltz might be said
to be the prototypical American businessman, his method of operation being the
old handshake system of honor. When that system breaks down, we fear what will
take its place.

Harry's crisis is so effectively encrusted with the detail of the quotidian that
we almost forget its symbolic significance as the novel progresses. While trying
to collect from a recalcitrant customer, Harry, who is 62, meets and falls and
love with the deadbeat's sister, a 43-year-old lawyer named Mary Hale, and
proceeds to have a charmingly honest affair with her.

Harry's beautiful twin daughters have their own domestic problems, what with
both of them being in love with the same man, who also owes Harry money. (Twins
run in Harry's family, along with a tendency to live to be over a hundred.)
Harry's surviving son, Eugene, the twin of the musician who died in Vietnam, is
in jail because Harry disapproved of his use of muscle and weapons to collect
money and had him arrested. Mary Hale believes in Eugene, and threatens to abort
Harry's newly conceived child unless he lets her pull strings to get Eugene out
of jail.

In fact, one has to wonder if the author, too, hasn't lost sight of his story's
underlying significance in the welter of domestic detail. In the face of his
growing deadbeat crisis, Harry refuses to resort to violence. Yet it is violence
that eventually solves his problem, so in a sense he is having it both ways. On
the other hand, Mr. Dickinson may be exquisitely aware of the strain of
hypocrisy in Harry's coming to terms with his crisis. The very idea of his being
a principled usurer is precisely what makes Harry Waltz so interesting, just as
it is their self-contradictory behavior that makes all of Mr. Dickinson's
characters unusual. It isn't so much villainy they represent as a monumental
ordinariness that is fascinating.


Tiger, the flea-bitten Vietnamese dustdog who is the mascot of Team Two-Four of
America's Long-Range Reconnaissance Patrol (L.R.R.P. or LURP), may seem like a
sentimentalized, slightly anthropomorphized appendage of Kenn Miller's stark
first novel, ''Tiger the Lurp Dog.'' But Tiger appears only intermittently in
the story, most significantly when he is farmed out to a satellite unit (to hide
him from a commander hysterical over the threat of rabid animals) and manages to
escape through an obstacle course of concertina wire and Claymore mines.

The central plot development of Mr. Miller's unusual story is a mission
undertaken by a team of professional soldiers to learn what happened to, and
then to avenge the death of, several beloved sidekicks. It is not protesters and
acid-heads who are fighting Mr. Miller's war. It is the sort of soldier who
comes back early from his stateside R&R, disillusioned over discovering that his
girlfriend has become a ''peacecreep.'' So in the stark, wholly credible world
that Mr. Miller has created with his spare, knowing prose, such values as honor,
passion, love and revenge are rewarded with bloody, unheroic death. It is only
Tiger the Lurp dog that survives, and he, for all we may read into him, is
finally an animal, nothing more.

And so, by echoing the literature of beloved creatures - Albert Payson Terhune's
''Lad, a Dog,'' or the animal-heroes of Ernest Thompson Seton - Mr. Miller
nearly suckers us into sentimentality. But Tiger is merely a survivor, without
any sense of honor or altruism. Thus does Mr. Miller, with his simple piece of
realistic writing, make a mockery of cant and heroism and all of the wind that
the politics of Vietnam has blown up.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Charles Dickinson

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TV: THE TET OFFENSIVE IN VIETNAM

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 747 words


''VIETNAM: A TELEVISION HISTORY'' shows the seventh of its 13 episodes tonight.
It is ''Tet 1968,'' an examination of what was, and still is, the least
understood, most argued about, military action of the Vietnam War. It will be
shown at 9 P.M. on Channel 13.

On tonight's episode, Tet is examined without histrionics. There is the
television film from 1968, amplified by interviews. Harry McPherson, who was
counsel to President Johnson, recalls the ''awful contradictions'' - the
television images on one side, the cables from the battlefield on the other.
Meanwhile, Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap, who commanded the Communist assault, explains
that Tet had ''multiple objectives - military, political and diplomatic.'' He
seems to be saying that what North Vietnam lost on the battlefield it gained in
other places.


On Jan. 31, 1968, the Tet offensive brought Vietnam into American living rooms
in a way it had not been seen till then. Before Tet, the dominant television
image of the war was a distant puff of smoke, or perhaps a hovering helicopter.
The fighting was removed. And in the fighting that did take place, or so it was
said, enemy strength had been diminished. In November 1967, for example, Gen.
William C. Westmoreland said on television that ''the end begins to come into
view.''

A few months later, Communist forces struck throughout South Vietnam. The
television image changed. In living rooms now, American soldiers were trying to
recapture the embassy in Saigon. On NBC, a South Vietnamese general placed a
snub- nosed revolver against the head of a prisoner and pulled the trigger. NBC
edited out the plume of blood that spouted from the prisoner's head, but it was
certain that Vietnam was brutal. Moreover, television made clear, the Vietcong
were everywhere.

The television images were not made up; what we saw happening was really
happening. How one interpreted the images, however, was something else. On CBS,
Walter Cronkite, drawing his own conclusions, said the war was over. The only
''rational'' course, he said, was ''to negotiate.'' (On hearing this, President
Johnson is supposed to have said, ''If we have lost Walter we have lost the
country.'') A few nights later, Frank McGee, the ABC anchor, said, ''The war is
being lost.''

In fact, the Institute for Strategic Studies in London reported a year later
that the Vietcong had been defeated during Tet and that the Saigon Government
was stronger than before. Other studies agreed. Even the Communists, in years to
come, would admit that Tet had not been a military victory.

Television, however, had looked only to its own images. Viewers had looked to
them, too. Support for American policy in Vietnam lessened, not necessarily on
moral grounds but because Americans thought they were losing the war. Two-thirds
of the people who voted for Senator Eugene J. McCarthy, the peace candidate in
the 1968 New Hampshire primary, went on to vote for George C. Wallace for
President. Mr. Wallace promised to win the war.

Whether a clearer picture of Tet might have made a difference is arguable,
although it seems certain that the picture we had was of no use at all.
Political and diplomatic discussions about Vietnam were conducted under public
and private misunderstandings. American troops stayed in combat for five years
more.

Since then, a kind of moralistic interpretation has grown up around Tet. To say
that Tet was a Communist defeat or that the television images were misleading is
to be accused of revisionism, or somehow of condoning the war.


Robert Elegant, who reported from Southeast Asia for 20 years, wrote in the
British magazine Encounter that Vietnam was ''determined not on the battlefield,
but on the printed page and, above all, on the television screen.'' He may have
been wrong, but at least he was temperate. Morley Safer, replying to Mr. Elegant
in a CBS radio commentary, said the article was ''the kind of thing Joseph
Goebbels would have done.'' Mr. Safer's position was clear: Vietnam was immoral;
therefore, Mr. Elegant was wrong.

Similarly, when ''Vietnam: A Television History'' began, critical reception for
the public television series was generally positive. In much of the published
criticism, however, there was a rumbling of discontent: The series did not take
a moral position. The reporting was balanced and even-handed, but critics
expected it to make explicit comment, too. The old values of objective
journalism were not enough.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 9, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ACTOR WHO PLAYED AN ADDICT DIES, APPARENTLY OF OVERDOSE

BYLINE: By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 956 words


James Hayden, an acclaimed young actor who was portraying a drug addict in the
Broadway play ''American Buffalo,'' died yesterday, apparently of a heroin
overdose, the police said.

Mr. Hayden's death, coming six hours after he had received a standing ovation
for his performance as Bobby in David Mamet's play, typified the contradictions
in the 29-year-old, his closest friends said. He was reaching stardom while
struggling to escape the street life of his past, a past of which few colleagues
knew.

Mr. Hayden had dedicated his performances in both ''American Buffalo'' and last
season's ''A View From the Bridge'' to Michael T. Kuhul, a friend and roommate
who died of a heroin overdose in 1981.

Mr. Hayden had lived on the street as a teen-ager, according to friends, and he
won admission to the American Academy of Dramatic Arts without any prior acting
experience.

His performance as Bobby had struck a variety of critics as exceptionally - and
now chillingly - accurate.

''The young actor skillfully shows us a drug addict's weaving gait and unfocused
expression,'' Frank Rich wrote in The New York Times in reviewing ''American
Buffalo.'' Douglas Watt, in The Daily News, hailed ''the ghastly wreck of a
youth, superbly set forth by James Hayden.'' On the day before Mr. Hayden was
found dead in his Upper West Side apartment, his publicity agent, Jeffrey
Richards, sent a promotional letter to newspapers that said in part: ''Hayden
says he's met a lot of 'Bobbys' in his life. He's grateful to have avoided the
pitfalls of actually becoming another New York casualty.''

That Mr. Hayden apparently became precisely such a casualty shocked his friends
and co-workers.

''I don't know what could prompt him to put a needle in his arm,'' said Alan
Feinstein, who acted in ''A View From the Bridge.''

'' 'Buffalo' was his second show on Broadway in eight months. He had a movie
coming out with De Niro. He should've been on top of the world.''

''But people do send signals,'' said J. J. Johnston, who appeared with Mr.
Hayden and Al Pacino in ''American Buffalo,'' ''and I guess no one picked up on
them.''

One of Mr. Hayden's closest friends said the actor had been seeing a
psychiatrist to deal with depression. In the last year, Mr. Hayden had been
estranged from his wife, Barbara, who now lives in California.

Mr. Hayden was talking to his wife on the telephone at 4:30 A.M. yesterday, the
police said, when his voice suddenly ceased. Mrs. Hayden immediately called his
New York physician, Dr. Jacob Sperber, and he called the 911 emergency number,
the police said. Mrs. Hayden declined through friends to comment today and Dr.
Sperber did not return telephone messages.

The police said they discovered Mr. Hayden's body fully clothed, slumped over
the kitchen sink, telephone in hand, in his 14th-floor apartment at Broadway and
69th Street. On the kitchen floor, they said, was a hypodermic needle and three
or four glassine envelopes that they believe contained heroin. Mr. Hayden was
pronounced dead at St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center. An autopsy was to be
conducted late last night. ''American Buffalo'' went on last night with John
Shepard, Mr. Hayden's understudy.

Mr. Hayden's life had taken him from a troubled childhood in Brooklyn to the
verge of stardom. He ran away from his home in Bay Ridge when he was 14, said
Michael Urban, a friend who was a member of the crew of ''American Buffalo,''
and he occasionally supported himself by singing in Herald Square.

''Jimmy was looking for stability,'' Mr. Urban said, and so Mr. Hayden enlisted
in the Army in 1970, at the age of 17. Instead, he encountered drugs while
serving in Vietnam. ''I saw a lot of soldiers come home with drug problems,''
Mr. Hayden said in an interview last week with The Daily News. ''I've always
believed that the real casualty of the war was increased drug abuse.''

Shortly after his discharge in 1972, Mr. Hayden auditioned for the American
Academy of Dramatic Arts in Manhattan with a speech from Tennessee Williams's
''Glass Menagerie.'' He graduated from the academy in 1976, and went on to study
under Lee Strasberg at the Actors Studio, leaving memories of talent and
frailty.

''He wanted to be an actor,'' said Marie Hawthorne, a faculty member at the
academy, ''because he wanted to be anyone but himself. He always felt, even in
the middle of the crowd, very much alone. And so for every play he was in, that
was his life, his family. And if people applauded, he felt loved.''

Arvin Brown, who directed both of Mr. Hayden's Broadway plays, also noticed his
sensitivity. ''If someone looked at him cross-eyed,'' Mr. Brown said, ''he could
be upset for hours.''

What upset Mr. Hayden most, friends said, was the death in 1981 of Mr. Kuhul, a
friend since childhood. Mr. Hayden discovered his friend's body in the East
Village apartment they shared. It took friends a year, they said, to persuade
Mr. Hayden to move to a new high-rise on Broadway.

His career, however, thrived. Mr. Hayden was nominated for an Outer Critics
Circle Award for his performance as Rodolpho in ''A View From the Bridge,''
acted in films and was hailed by Mr. Brown as ''probably the best young actor
I've ever worked with.''

Yet, professionally and personally, Mr. Hayden returned to his past. He gave
money, food and clothes to homeless people, and sometimes let them shower in his
apartment, Mr. Urban recalled. He wandered through the drug- selling zones of
the Lower East Side, his publicity agent said, and attended meetings of
Narcotics Anonymous to prepare for playing Bobby in ''American Buffalo.''

Few friends, however, believe Mr. Hayden's heroin use was also part of immersing
himself in his character.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of James Hayden (page B7)

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 9, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
HOW REAGAN DOES IT

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 790 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 8


Reagan & Co. is the best public relations outfit this city has seen in many
years, and as the Presidential election approaches, everybody is analyzing how
they do it. Examples abound.

In the flap over how the Administration handled or manhandled the reporters
during the Grenada affair, they managed to persuade a lot of people that they
had to choose between the security of the troops and the freedom of the press,
and they chose security. It was a popular decision.

Obviously, they couldn't invite everyone in the news media on the first ride
into Grenada. This would have involved almost as many reporters as Cubans on the
island, and maybe as many cameras as helicopters. It would have been a disaster.

There was, of course, another way to avoid the dilemma, which is used all the
time. For example, when the President flew off to Japan and South Korea Tuesday
on Air Force One, he didn't ask the whole news corps to the party, but only two
or three reporters and photographers to represent the press and the people.

This is familiar to the Administration, and accepted by news organizations, as
the ''pool system,'' under which a few reporters are permitted to observe the
facts, and then, without undue burdens on officials, pass on or ''pool'' their
notes and film to their colleagues.

It's a sensible compromise between security and freedom, used by General
Eisenhower during the invasion of Normandy, and by every other President and
theater commander since then in the Korean and Vietnam Wars - none of whom
enjoyed the company of reporters but respected the right of the people to know
what was going on.

This illustrates P.R. Lesson No. 1, which is Dominate the Question. Emphasize
the popular and avoid the unpopular: security of the troops, which everybody
wants, rather than freedom of the press, which is not everybody's favorite
subject.  Also, get the key words straight: ''Invasion'' is not a kindly word;
''rescue mission'' sounds much better.  P.R. Lesson No. 2, invented by the first
Roosevelt and perfected by the second, was: Dominate and Manage the News. If you
don't, somebody else will.  Teddy saw the White House as a ''bully pulpit,'' and
attributed some of his P.R. success to his ''discovery'' of Monday. That is to
say, he found that he could get on the front pages of the Monday morning
newspapers because reporters were off duty on the weekend and editors had to
fill space.  F.D.R. used the Sunday evening fireside chat to reach the people,
before the days of TV pro football, in the hope that they would be in a
thoughtful mood.  President Reagan has employed these techniques and has added
two others. He works hard on his Saturday noon radio broadcasts, aiming to
attract the attention of the big-circulation Sunday papers. These have not been
a great success. But, more important than anything the Roosevelts did, Mr.
Reagan has mastered the art of the television camera in ways that arouse the
envy of both Hollywood and Madison Avenue - and infuriate the Democrats.

He is also lucky. He has a genius for being somewhere else at the point of
trouble. If some misguided idiot sets off a bomb in the Capitol of the United
States, precisely when things are really getting serious in the Middle East, it
is precisely at that moment when Mr. Reagan just happens to be flying off to
Japan and Korea.

As President Carter said of his old buddy Bert Lance when Bert was in financial
trouble, you have to give him credit. Mr. Carter was blamed for everything
because he paid attention to everything. President Reagan has a way of not being
blamed for anything for the opposite reason. Everything that goes wrong is
blamed on Judge Clark, or Jim Watt, or Cappy Weinberger, or on Congress.

This is a remarkable achievement of personality and public relations. Mr. Reagan
is an appealing figure, presiding with the utmost sincerity over the memorial
services for the marines killed in Lebanon, so good at it in fact that he makes
you forget why the marines were so exposed in Beirut, and who was to blame, and
why they were there in the first place.

There is, however, one question. Will it work? And maybe a couple of others: Is
there a policy back of all this, a clear mind with clear intentions? Or is it
mainly a triumph of short-run public relations?

This is what we'd like to know after the victory in Grenada and before the
coming crisis in the alliance and with the Russians over the emplacement of
cruise and Pershing 2 missiles in Europe.

The trouble with public relations is that without a product that really serves
the public, it leaves a drop of poison in its wake. It helps politicians but, no
matter how successful, it can defeat them if they rely on it too much.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 11, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Hope Is Revived For Drilling Ship's Crew

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 151 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, Nov. 10


Some of the 80 crewmen from the drilling ship Glomar Java Sea got off the vessel
safely before it sank and may now be in Vietnam, an official of the Global
Marine Drilling Company said today.

The official, Gary L. Kott, president of the drilling company that was operating
the Glomar Java Sea when it sank last month in a typhoon in the South China Sea,
said divers exploring the vessel Wednesday found no bodies. But he said they did
discover that both 60-man lifeboats were gone and at least one life raft was
''properly launched.''

Mr. Kott said divers spent 9 1/2 hours exploring the Java Sea, resting on the
sea bottom in 300 feet of water.

Mr. Kott said the State Department was trying to arrange permission from the
Vietnamese for a search of the Vietnam coastline. Mr. Kott said Global Marine
was informed that the Vietnamese promised to search the area and to return any
crewmen found there.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 11, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

RANGERS BACK FROM GRENADA REVELING IN PRAISE AS HEROES



BYLINE: , Special to the New York Times
By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 853 words

DATELINE: HUNTER ARMY AIRFIELD, Ga., Nov. 9


''America loves a winner,'' said First Sgt. William Acebes, one of the United
States Army Rangers who returned here recently from Grenada,

''When I came home from Vietnam,'' recalled the sergeant, a lean, 38-year-old
native of San Bernardino, Calif., ''I was treated like dirt. I even left the
Army at one point because I was so discouraged. But now - now I walk down the
street and people slap me on the back and say, 'Thanks.' You go into a bar and
suddenly everybody wants to buy you a drink.''

Especially the patrons of the Dallas Lounge, a mile or so down the road from the
post gates. ''Welcome Home, Rangers,'' reads a big sign on its roof.

The first combat in nearly a decade to involve American troops has left the
United States military establishment basking in hero worship, its first in the
better part of two decades.



'It's Great to Feel Wanted'

Nobody is loving it more than the Rangers, the lightly-equipped, fast-hitting
shock troops who did most of the hard fighting in Grenada. Most of them returned
to the United States last week.

''It's great to feel wanted,'' said Sgt. Tracy Hickman, a 23-year-old Ranger
from Las Vegas who said he knocked out a Cuban mortar position in the Grenada
fighting.

The bulletin board in the Ranger headquarters here at Hunter Airfield, on the
outskirts of Savannah, is plastered with thank-you letters - from American
medical students the Rangers rescued, from a doctor in Ohio, from old soldiers
who have faded away but now feel the juices flowing again and want to share
bittersweet memories of shot and shell. A number are from young people.

The notes flop over official orders, cover up schedules, spill in disarray onto
a nearby table. In any other situation, they would have been policed up long
ago.

''You are the leading edge of what makes America proud and free,'' says one of
the notes, from Stephen Ecklund, a Maryland businessman.

A letter from Alan Gotthardt, a Savannah student, concludes, ''I am glad that
there are still men like you in our country.''

Another student, Grey Parrybum, began, ''I really do thank you and all your
troops for protecting us over there. If I was old enough, I would go too.''

It Was What They Expected

The last previous combat involving American troops was the Mayag"uez incident of
1975, when marines were sent to Cambodia to rescue the cargo ship and her crew.
Forty-one Americans were killed in action.

Unlike many combat veterans, the Rangers who went to Grenada say the fighting
they experienced was closely akin to what they had trained for.

''That's because of the intense way we train,'' said Sgt. Manous Boles, 28, from
Thomasville, Ga. ''If you train like you're in combat, the combat will be like
your training. That's what Rangers say.'' The training, which involves more than
the usual amount of bivouacking and more than the usual amount of travel to
various climates and terrain, is one of the main attractions for Ranger
volunteers. But nothing in all the training prepared Sergeant Boles for one of
the problems he confronted after parachuting into Grenada.

His squad, he said, was having trouble getting across the runway of the Point
Salines airfield, their main objective. The first men who tried to make the dash
were cut down.

''We had to get across and take the high ground where the fire was coming
from,'' the sergeant recalled. ''So a couple of us somehow got an old bulldozer
started and then we had ourselves an armored vehicle.''

The sergeant, who had never before driven a bulldozer, climbed into the
operator's seat, bullets tearing the air and ground all around. Somehow he got
the machine skewed around, then found the lever that controlled the scraper
blade. The blade came up, providing an impervious shield.

A squad or more of Rangers crowded in behind the bulldozer. Sergeant Boles
nudged it into gear and it began to clank across the runway.

The enemy fire died down, then ceased. ''I'm no John Wayne,'' Sergeant Boles
insisted, bashfully.

Never Know What's Next

The Rangers say they never know where they might be headed next. But the
assumption is that they will be headed somewhere well over the horizon - maybe
tonight.

The clock in the briefing room at Ranger headquarters tells only ''Zulu'' time,
or Greenwich mean time; Rangers think globally.

When the Hunter Airfield Rangers returned from Grenada, they did not stand down
for a week or two or take a leave. The next morning, a Saturday, their
commander, Lieut. Col. Wesley B. Taylor, ordered them to fall out and begin
cleaning up their weapons and gear, ''just in case.''

That done, he relented a bit and told them to take off Sunday, and even Monday.
But at daybreak on Tuesday, he had them back in formation once again, off on a
five-mile run.

''The only thing he didn't make us do that day was those damn stomach muscle
exercises he loves so much,'' Sergeant Acebes recalled. ''Seems like every
Ranger colonel has some favorite muscle exercise designed to torture you. But on
that Tuesday, Colonel Taylor let up - just for Tuesday, you understand.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 11, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Memorial Gets 68 New Names

BYLINE: United Press International

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 67 words


Larry Century, left, carving one of 68 new names that were inadvertently left
off the original list of honored dead at Washington's Vietnam Memorial. The
additions Wednesday include the name of the first American killed in the Vietnam
conflict, Capt. Harry G. Cramer, who was a U.S. Army adviser killed there in
1957. The work is expected to be completed in time for Veteran's Day ceremonies
today.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 11, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 11, 1983 International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 860 words


Vagueness on the pullout schedule of United States forces in Grenada was
indicated by Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger. He said he could not give a
''target date'' or even set clear criteria for the withdrawal. Mr. Weinberger
cited new incidents of sniper fire in the Grenadian hills and suggested there
might be an extended role on the island for United States military engineers and
other units. (Page A1, Column 6.)

Receptions accorded U.S. troops returning from Grenada contrast sharply with
those given the troops who returned from Vietnam. ''When I came home from
Vietnam I was treated like dirt,'' said an Army Ranger. ''But now, I walk down
the street and people slap me on the back and say, 'Thanks.' '' (A1:5-6.)

A Central American defense bloc, founded under United States sponsorship in 1963
and now being revitalized, is studying the legality of a joint military action
against Nicaragua, according to a report of a secret meeting last month of the
military chiefs of staff of El Salvador, Guatemala, Panama and Honduras. (A1:5.)


Syrian antiaircraft batteries opened fire on four American F-14 fighter jets as
they were flying a reconnaissance mission over Syrian military positions in
Lebanon, a military spokesman in Damascus said. The Defense Department confirmed
that a single American Navy F-14 had encountered apparent antiaircraft fire
during a routine flight, but it said the plane was not hit and returned safely
to its carrier base. Defense Secretary Weinberger discounted the incident as
routine. (A:2.)

Yasir Arafat was reportedly asked by a Lebanese Moslem politician to leave the
city of Tripoli, where he has taken refuge from rebel Palestinians attacking his
nearby stronghold. Reports from Damascus said the request came from former Prime
Minister Rashid Karami. He was quoted as saying that the Palestinian leader had
agreed to leave the city of 600,000. (A14:5-6.)

President Reagan urged Japan and its Parliament to join the United States in ''a
powerful partnership for good.'' Mr. Reagan, speaking as the first American
President to address Japan's national legislature, said the two countries should
work together to eliminate nuclear weapons. (A1:3-4.)

East Germany feted Martin Luther on the 500th anniversary of his birth in the
city of Eisleben. Bearing lanterns through the city's cobbled streets, thousands
of citizens of the Communist-led country gathered in the market square in a
setting dominated by a huge placard that read, ''God Over All Things.''
(A3:1-4.) National

A reconstituted civil rights panel will likely be established by Congress. At
least 55 Senators were said to be supporting a plan to transfer the United
States Commission on Civil Rights from the executive branch to Congress.
Proponents of the plan say the independence of the present panel can no longer
be guaranteed if it remains in an executive branch headed by President Reagan.
(A1:1.)

Dairy surpluses are pouring into Government warehouses and underground storage
caves across the country at a cost of $3 billion a year as thousands of dairy
farmers are expanding their herds to produce even more milk. The power of the
dairy lobby derives from the presence of dairy farms in nearly every
Congressional district in the country outside of cities. (A1:2-4.)

The explosives used in the bombing in the Capitol Monday night resemble devices
used in other recent bombings, according to William H. Webster, the F.B.I.
director. He said ''a number of individuals'' were under investigation, but
added, ''We don't know who did it.'' (A24:3-6.)

San Francisco voters rejected new restraints that would have sharply slowed the
construction of new skyscrapers downtown and approved curbs on where people may
smoke in the workplace. The margins of votes were paper-thin. (A18:2-5.)

Raymond L. Flynn is favored in public opinion polls in the mayoral race in
Boston. Mr. Flynn is running a populist campaign against Melvin H. King, a
former state legislator and the first black to become a Boston mayoral finalist.
Mr. King has also run a strong campaign. (A18:1-2.) Metropolitan

In an effort to limit fare increases on buses, subways and commuter rail lines
needed early next year, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority is considering
a plan to raise the tolls on the Triborough Bridge and five other crossings it
operates to $1.50 from $1.25. The added revenue would be used to hold the
proposed transit fare at 90 cents and avert a threatened $1 fare. (A1:1.)

Two jobless youths were charged with murder in the slaying of a 21- year-old
Pratt Institute student who lived nearby in the Fort Greene section of Brooklyn.
The police said that Ann Pfreundschuh of Boonton, N.J., who was due to graduate
with honors in June, had been beaten, bound, gagged and drowned in her bathtub
during a robbery. (B1:3-6.)

Violators of the ''bottle bill'' were issued 17 citations by two dozen state
conservation officers throughout New York City in an effort to improve
compliance with the two-month-old container-return law. (B4:3-6.) Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 11, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Quotation of the Day

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 59 words


''When I came home from Vietnam, I was treated like dirt. I even left the Army
at one point because I was so discouraged. But now - now I walk down the street
and people slap me on the back and say, 'Thanks.' You go into a bar and suddenly
everybody wants to buy you a drink.'' - First Sgt. William Acebes, an Army
Ranger back from Grenada. (A1:5.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 11, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

REMEMBERING CITY'S WAR VETERANS

BYLINE: By ROBERT E. TOMASSON

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 921 words


Sixty-five years ago today - Nov. 11, 1918 - the Great War ended in the trenches
of Europe. And as has happened on this date ever since, French citizens, along
with some visitors from the United States, will bring flowers to the six
American cemeteries within France. The largest is the Meuse-Argonne, near
Verdun, where 14,246 American men are buried. In New York, the anniversary will
be observed with a parade, a harbor tour and a poetry reading.

The Great War has been renamed World War I, and what was named Armistice Day in
1918 was renamed Veterans Day in 1954 in the United States to honor the American
dead of all wars, as well as the 30 million men and women who have served in the
armed forces.

Each year, the roster of men who took part in World War I, now in their 80's and
90's, grows shorter. This year, for example, Robert E. Condon will not be
sitting in the grandstand at the Eternal Light Monument at Fifth Avenue and 24th
Street. Last year, General Condon, who served in World War I, World War II and
in Korea, and who helped found the American Legion, died at the age of 87.



Marching Down Fifth Avenue

But Tullio Fuligni will travel from his home in Rutherford, N.J., as he has for
two decades, to march in the annual parade down Fifth Avenue. Mr. Fuligni, who
is 85, remembers his first Fifth Avenue parade, in March 1919, when the 27th New
York National Guard Division returned from France. A forward artillery spotter,
Mr. Fuligni went on to become a Broadway electrician and stagehand.

Today's parade will start down Fifth Avenue at 9 A.M., heading from 39th Street
to 24th Street, this year with two names added to the roster of wars and distant
lands where Americans troops have died: Lebanon and Grenada. Actually, this
year's commemoration began last night, with a party in the Seventh Regiment
Armory on Park Avenue to mark the 208th birthday of the Marine Corps and to
honor recently fallen comrades.



Tour of Military Installations

Reminders of past wars abound in the metropolitan area, and tomorrow National
Park Service rangers will conduct an unusual and free historical tour of some of
the military installations of New York Harbor. Indeed, historians say, the site
of the harbor entrance and the development of the city owe as much to
considerations of defense as to commercial accessibility from the sea. The
three-hour bus tour will take place twice, at 9 A.M. and 1 P.M., starting from
the visitors center at Fort Tilden off Rockaway Beach Boulevard in Queens.
Reservations are required and may be obtained by calling 474-4600.

The first stop is Fort Tilden itself. First fortified for the War of 1812, this
fort at the point of Rockaway Peninsula was greatly expanded in 1917. There in
1924, General of the Armies John J. Pershing established Battery Harris, named
after Col. Henry L. Harris. It had two 16-inch guns, each requiring 800 pounds
of gunpowder, which could fire a 2,100-pound shell 30 miles. The batteries were
decommissioned after World War II, never having been used.

Also on the tour is Fort Hamilton in Brooklyn, built between 1825 and 1831, with
its cannon walk commemorating the fort's artillery origins and the home of
Robert E. Lee when he was post engineer from 1841 to 1846.

Brooklyn's Floyd Bennett Field, rich in the nation's history of aviation, will
be another stop.



Memorials Around the City

As well as forts and fields, the city has a number of World War I memorials that
are passed daily by thousands with hardly a glance. A list of some of these
follows for those interested in seeking them out or simply to identify them for
those who know them only by sight:

In Abingdon Square, Hudson and Eighth Streets, is the Greenwich Village War
Memorial by Philip Martiny, a 1921 bronze figure of an American soldier carrying
a flag.

Broadway, between 45th and 46th Streets, is Father Duffy Square, with its 1937
memorial by Paul Keck to the Rev. Francis P. Duffy, the ''fighting chaplain'' of
the 69th Regiment and once pastor of Holy Cross Church in the theater district.

In Central Park, on the east side of the reservoir, 90th Street, near Fifth
Avenue, is the John Purroy Mitchel Memorial, a 1928 statue by Adolph A. Weinman
to the New York mayor who served from 1914 to 1917, lost his re-election bid,
enlisted and died in a World War I plane accident.

On the park side of Fifth Avenue at 67th Street is one of the largest World War
I memorials, dedicated to the dead of the Seventh Regiment, 107th Infantry. This
1927 bronze on a granite base, by Karl Illava, depicts a martial group, bayonets
bristling.

On Broadway and 167th Street, is the 1923 Washington Heights and Inwood
Memorial; sculptor, Gertrude Vanderbilt Whitney.



Another View of War

Another face of war and its aftermath will presented tonight at 8:30 on the
stage of the Colonnades Theater, 428 Lafayette Street in Manhattan. There, men
who served in Vietnam, ranging from a Marine infantryman to a conscientious
objector, will read their poems of war.

William Cooner, 40, who was in an intelligence unit in the Vietnam War and who
teaches photography in Chinatown, will recite poetry that he said reflects his
changing beliefs from support of American involvement to opposition. John
Balaban, 40, a conscientious objector who spent two years working with refugees
in Vietnam and is the author of ''After Our War,'' will also read his poems,
some of them in Vietnamese.

Admission is free; the number for reservations is 673-2222.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 11, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
 By Robert Manning;

SECTION: Section C; Page 27, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1082 words


RUSSIA: Broken Idols, Solemn Dreams.

By David K. Shipler. 404 pages. Times

Books. $17.95.  IN the nearly 40 years of uneasy

ritual that has engaged the two

post-World War II superpowers

- wary circlings and angry snortings relieved only occasionally by
manifestations of the mating dance - many Americans have comforted themselves
with the thought that, deep down inside, the Russians are very much like us. The
bad news in this book, as if we needed more bad news about Soviet-American
relations, is that the Russians are very, very different from us; the Siberian
permafrost will boil over before there is any meeting of minds between us,
either governments or peoples.

Perhaps that is a more dire message than David K. Shipler intends to deliver
with his diligent, perceptive distillation of what he saw, heard and learned
during four years (1975-79) as a New York Times correspondent in the Soviet
Union, but it comes roaring in like the surf at almost every turn of the page.
Building (with due credit) on such other valuable journalists' reports on
post-Stalin Russia, notably those of Robert Kaiser and Hedrick Smith, Mr.
Shipler ventures a trip into the Russian psyche, that expanse of some 100
nationalities, ethnicities, tongues and paranoias that Winston Churchill called
''a riddle wrapped in a mystery inside an enigma.'' It is a fascinating yet
disturbing journey - fascinating because Mr. Shipler presents real Soviet
citizens of almost every level of society, people with whom an American would
spontaneously hope to identify; disturbing because many of the most attractive
and intelligent of them prove to be caught in lassitude, in fear and in a
lamentable dependence on higher authority, despicable as they might find that
authority to be.


In the Soviet Union of the late 1970's, when the miasma was beginning to close
in again after the brief zephyrs of detente, Mr. Shipler found almost a yearning
for the return of Joseph Stalin, or some equally strong, even tyrannical leader
to replace the bloblike figures who now govern. ''Stalin is less dead today than
he was 20 years ago,'' he is told by one of the several dissidents with whom he
was able to converse in the Soviet Union, and later in their places of exile. He
found widespread among the Russian people a desperate fear of ''besporyadak,''
which literally means ''without order,'' and in almost every Russian he came to
know he found neither acceptance nor comprehension of the Western value of
individualism.

All these years after the great revolution, he found, manual labor is looked
down upon by the middle class and the elite. So much for all those huge steel or
stone statues of gleaming muscular workers in the city and town squares. The
communal apartment, once an acquisition to be proud of, is now a mark of shame.
In the whole of Soviet society, Mr. Shipler concludes, there are only a few
''real believing Marxists.'' Special privileges abound. Black marketeering is
endemic. Status determines the educational and employment opportunities for the
young. ''One thing the citizens of the classless society understand is class.''

The forced-labor camps and political exile to Siberia continue as an
ever-threatening part of the system. The K.G.B. is still watching, tapping and
taping. Official paranoia - the kind of twitching fear that provoked the
shooting down of the Korean airliner - is such that only until recently weather
maps were forbidden to be printed in newspapers, and textbook publishers are
still restrained from showing pictures of bridges (potential military targets).
The degree of oppression has, of course, receded since Stalin's time, and the
emotion that comes through in Mr. Shipler's Russia is a state of weary
resignation. He found no signs that Russians might rise up against the glum
stagnation of their lives. Indeed, he came to feel that the citizen does not
even blame the system ''for failing to provide meat,'' Mr. Shipler writes, ''but
blames himself for not living in Moscow where it's available.''

Moscow is where it's at, ''the center'' where most Soviet citizens with any
aspirations want to live. The place to which only those outlanders with luck or
pull can hope to move. In his four years, Mr. Shipler made contact with hundreds
of Muscovites (as well as many in the outlying republics) - kindergarteners and
their teachers, university students, black marketeers, bureaucrats, literary and
artistic folks. He found Communists who believe in God and Orthodox priests who
do not. Journalists there enjoyed reporting on America's extensive crime
problems, while maintaining the criminals in the Soviet Union were occasional
exceptions among a law-abiding people.

Not surprisingly, dissidents were far more outgoing than people in positions of
power. Mr. Shipler's intercourse with some of them, notably Roy Medvedev, the
historian, and Lev Kopelev, who was forced into exile in West Germany, cuts
through the gloom. He also came to appreciate the intelligence and courage of
Andrei Sakharov, the most distinguished and inspirational of Soviet dissidents,
but was startled to discover how Mr. Sakharov and his wife, Yelena Bonner,
displayed contempt for working-class efforts to start a Solidarity-type union
movement, as if workers were beneath such idealism.


In fairness to Mr. Shipler's careful reportage, it should be noted that all is
not dismal in the Soviet Union. People at all levels (well, at all levels except
the highest) still joke, usually at the expense of their leaders and their
system. Russians still drink and sing and dance, still display the kind of
warmth and conviviality that probably is the cause of our belief that they are
much like us. Ah, but think again. Most of them, Mr. Shipler is convinced, don't
want to be like us. To enjoy something like our material well being, to wear our
jeans, to play our hi-fi sets and cassette recorders, to reach for our dinner
plates - these things many Russians aspire to almost blatantly.

But to trade their system, their Motherland - including all that is wrong with
her - for what they have been taught to see as the corruption, inequality and
vapidity of American life? Not at all. As Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn has made clear
- and George F. Kennan in his differing way - about the best the two societies
can do is to cleanse their respective selves and try to understand each other.

Robert Manning is editing ''The Vietnam Experience'' book series.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of David Shipler

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 12, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

WEINBERGER NOW SAYS U.S. FORCE TO QUIT GRENADA IN 'SHORT TIME'



BYLINE:
By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 542 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 11


Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger said today that the United States troops
still on Grenada would return home ''within a short time,'' possibly within the
60- day period set by Congress under the War Powers Act. But he again refused to
set a specific date.

On Thursday Mr. Weinberger said he could not offer ''a target date'' or even set
clear criteria for the withdrawal of the troops. He cited reports of new sniping
incidents in the Grenadian hills and suggested there might be an extended role
on the island for United States military personnel.

President Reagan once predicted privately to Congressional leaders that the
troops would be out within a week of the Oct. 25 invasion.

Other officials said later that the Americans would be out by the end of this
month or certainly by Christmas. Members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff told
Congress this week that the soldiers could be out within two or three weeks.



Tours Display of Weapons

Mr. Weinberger made his remarks today after touring a public display at Andrews
Air Force Base in Maryland of Communist-bloc weapons captured in the United
States invasion of the Caribbean island. On Thursday Vice President Bush viewed
the same display.

The display will be open to the public for 10 days. It includes Soviet
antiaircraft guns, armored personnel carriers and automatic weapons, dozens of
cases of mortars, clothing and other weapons the Administration says were
supplied to the Marxist Government of Grenada by the Soviet Union, Cuba and
North Korea.

Mr. Weinberger, asked what he thought of the display, said, ''What this tells me
is that what we did was right.''

At the end of his tour, Mr. Weinberger met with about 50 Army Rangers and
paratroopers who took part in the invasion. He praised them for an
''extraordinarily effective job'' and said they ''showed enormous skill.''

He said the warm greeting given the returning soldiers was ''180 degrees
different'' from the reception that American servicemen returning from Vietnam
often received.  The soldiers presented Mr. Weinberger with a captured Soviet
AK-47 automatic weapon.

Later, in a Veterans Day speech in Birmingham, Ala., Mr. Weinberger again
praised the military action.

He said the ''huge arsenals of weapons'' on Grenada ''indicate that the Soviets
and Cubans clearly intended to use Grenada as a staging area for terrorists and
as a base against the United States.'' A copy of his specch was made available
in Washington.

''However, that is not why we launched our rescue operation in Grenada,'' he
said. ''We did that because there were many American students and citizens whose
freedom and lives were threatened by the anarchy and murdering gangs on the
island.''

He also said a poll, which he did not identify, had shown that more than 90
percent of the Grenadian people ''are equally relieved and happy and grateful to
have had the American and East Caribbean forces rescue them from chaos and
terror.''

Last week a CBS News poll of 304 Grenadians in 30 sections of the island found
that 91 percent welcomed the American invasion. The majority said they felt the
American troops had come to free them from the influence of the Cubans and to
prevent the construction of a military base.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 12, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

V.A.'S UNHELPFUL DATA ON AGENT ORANGE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 363 words


To the Editor:


At a recent meeting of the American Chemical Society, the Veterans
Administration presented data from its Agent Orange Registry. That presentation,
which generated considerable publicity, has only confused the question of
whether or not health problems in Vietnam veterans arise from their exposure to
defoliant chemicals.

The registry is part of the V.A.'s Agent Orange Screening Program, under which
any Vietnam veteran can obtain an ''Agent Orange screening examination'' - a
standard physical providing a general health assessment. The results, entered
into a computer, constitute the registry.  The registry is intended to identify
concerned veterans and to see if any unusual patterns of illness emerge.
Summaries for 85,000 people were presented, and the message was that nothing
unusual was found, with the possible exception of one class of cancers, for
which more data are needed.  In a report in October 1982, Congress's General
Accounting Office found the registry so defective that it said it should be
discontinued. The examinations themselves vary from a careful job to a cursory
one, the documentation of the results and of exposure and medical histories is
poor and the coding of these already bad data for computer entry is full of
errors.  The V.A.'s own Inspector General found that 43 percent of the records
entered into the registry in 1980 contained coding errors. Three of every four
tumor entries were wrong for this reason. When questioned at the meeting, the
V.A. did state that it has corrected the tumor entries for the group on which it
was reporting, but other accumulated errors had not been corrected. It is
unclear what led the V.A. to present data from which one can conclude absolutely
nothing about the health of Vietnam veterans. The public suspicions that are
aroused by such a presentation and its attendant fanfare make the ultimate
public acceptance of good work more difficult, and from that no one is the
gainer.

PETER C. KAHN New Brunswick, N.J., Nov. 1, 1983

The writer, associate professor of biochemistry at Rutgers, is a member of the
New Jersey State Commission on Agent Orange.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 12, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CADETS IN HIGH SCHOOL WEIGH DUTY AND RISK

BYLINE: By SUSAN CHIRA

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1106 words

DATELINE: LINDENHURST, L.I., Nov. 11


Marine Cadet First Lieut. Joann Stroh, 17 years old, faced her unit of 100
fellow Junior Reserve Officer Training Corps students and called them to
attention in the high school cafeteria. In camouflage uniforms and combat boots,
in green tunics, trousers and spit-shined shoes, they stood in silence,
remembering the marines who died in Beirut.

In the hallway, other Lindenhurst Senior High School students and teachers
pressed against the glass windows. Some shook their heads and walked away;
others stayed, transfixed by the sight of high school students in military
uniforms on Thursday afternoon commemorating the 208th anniversary of the
founding of the Marine Corps, Nov. 10, 1775.

With memorial services and parades, formal dances and cakecutting ceremonies,
that birthday was also celebrated this week in two other high schools in the
metropolitan area with Marine Corps Junior R.O.T.C. courses. They are Yonkers
High School in Westchester County and St. Pius X Regional High School, a
Catholic school in Piscataway, N.J.

Marine Corps officials said the program, established in 1964 for boys and
extended in 1973 to girls, is now enjoying a revival from lean years in the
1960's and 1970's, when the nation was divided over the Vietnam War. The Army,
Navy and Air Force also sponsor such courses in high schools throughout the
region and have reported a similar rise in interest.

Sparked Interest and Debate

The recent terrorist bombings in Beirut and the invasion of Grenada have sparked
even more interest, and debate, over these courses, the Marine Corps instructors
said. They teach their students that the Marines stand for a clear set of values
- discipline, respect for authority, the duty to protect their country and the
willingness to die for that cause - that not every student is willing to accept.

And it is often during adolescence that students struggle to decide just what
these ideas mean to them, whether patriotism means invariably supporting their
Government or speaking out to criticize it.

''I'd be glad to go to Beirut or Grenada,'' said Russell Kenngott, a Lindenhurst
High School junior and a second-year R.O.T.C. student. ''Other marines died.
That's the way of the military life, you've got to risk your life to protect
others.''

''I can't see going to war - it doesn't make sense,'' said Michelle Meyers, a
sophomore who said she would not join although some of her friends had.

Waiting List for Entrance

Of the 106 students enrolled in the Lindenhurst program, about 15 are women,
with more on a waiting list, said Sgt. Maj. Frank W. Grotschel, a retired marine
who is the senior instructor.

Students in the Junior R.O.T.C. program are under no obligation to join the
military, he said. If graduates do enroll in the Marines and complete boot camp,
they would be eligible for immediate promotion to private first class, with a
slightly higher salary.

The course, which is given during the regular school day for credit toward
graduation, aims to teach good citizenship - ''Chevrolet, Mom and apple pie,''
Sergeant Grotschel said. The textbook covers topics like leadership, courtesy,
military history, drills and marksmanship. No military strategy or tactics are
taught.

Students in the course may also participate in field trips. A weeklong one is
planned next summer for the Camp Lejeune Marine Base in North Carolina.

''What the Boy Scouts are to the general populace, the Junior R.O.T.C. is to the
young men and women of the Marine Corps,'' said Staff Sgt. Mark Gentile, a
publicaffairs officer for the Marines.

But the sight of military uniforms and crew cuts in high school unnerves some
teachers at Lindenhurst.

''I'm a veteran of a war, but I don't feel this belongs in public education,''
said one teacher who would not give his name. ''These 14-year-olds are so
malleable. They are still having adolescent problems. They can be very easily
brainwashed.''

Edward J. Murphy, Lindenhurst's principal, said several faculty members have
spoken out against the presence of R.O.T.C, in the school, now in its second
year.

''We do not want it to be a military school,'' Mr. Murphy said. ''In a
comprehensive educational program, there should be a place for it, because it's
going to help some of our kids, just like the chess club, the football team or
the advanced placement program.'' Other teachers said that with the alternatives
including drugs, sex and nights cruising in parents' cars, students who say
''Yes, sir'' and hold open doors for teachers set a good example.

Standing at Attention

In Sergeant Grotschel's classroom on a recent afternoon, students stood at
attention while he inspected their uniforms. He told some to get a haircut, to
polish their brass buckles on both sides, to clip dangling threads. They said
''Here, sir,'' when he called the roll and stood up when they asked questions.

The textbook used in class included sections reading ''Profiles of Greatness,''
with biographical sketches of George Washington and Dwight D. Eisenhower,
quotations from books such as ''How I Raised Myself from Failure to Success in
Selling'' and descriptions of famous Marine Corps battles.

Miss Stroh said she felt more at home in the structured atmosphere of R.O.T.C.

''I don't fit in with other kids in the school,'' she said. ''They all think
about partying. I go home, I do my homework. We stand out. We think of ourselves
as a little bit better than some of the other students.''

She is the commanding officer of the Lindenhurst unit, and in that role she led
the corps through the birthday ceremony that included the Pledge of Allegiance,
the playing of the Marine Corps hymn, watching a videotaped message from the
Commandant of the Marine Corps and cutting the birthday cake with a sword.

She presented one piece to the oldest marine present, Sergeant Grotschel, and
one to the youngest - 13-year-old Cadet Pvt. Frankie Sladky.

The ceremony was to have been followed by a formal dance, but the students
decided to cancel it in honor of the marines who died in Beirut.

After they were dismissed, they stood with pieces of cake and bottles of Coke
and talked about Beirut and Grenada and military service in general.

''I wouldn't mind going if it's for my country,'' Mr. Sladky said. ''I'd do it
for liberty and freedom.''

''As long as it's right,'' said Mike Wilshin, another R.O.T.C. student.

''Whether it's right or wrong, if it's for your country, it has a purpose,''
said Cadet Second Lieut. Robert Brite, a junior in high school. And the debate
ended as they went to get more cake.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Marine Corps cadets at Lindenhurst Senior High; photos of
training corps program, Master Sgt. Gerard Haddock

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 12, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Francis W. Carpenter, Ex-Aide For U.S. Mission to the U.N.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 28, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 155 words


Francis W. Carpenter, director of news services for the United States Mission to
the United Nations from 1957 to 1967, died of a heart attack Thursday at
Bridgeport (Conn.) Hospital. He was 76 years old and lived in Bridgeport.

Mr. Carpenter was also chief of public-affairs projects of the Vietnam bureau of
the Agency for International Development and public-affairs adviser to the
Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs. From 1946
to 1957, he was United Nations correspondent for The Associated Press in New
York and Paris. He retired in 1970.

Mr. Carpenter was born in Decherd, Tenn., and graduated from Emory University.
In World War II, he served as a first lieutenant in the Army's
Counter-Intelligence Corps and was awarded a Bronze Star.

Surviving are his wife, the former Marjorie Alling; a son, David; two daughters,
Martha Lane and Elizabeth Ann McKay, and eight grandchildren.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ANDROPOV AFTER A YEAR: UNCERTAINTY AT THE HELM

BYLINE: By SERGE SCHMEMANN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2444 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Nov. 12


In the last years of Leonid I. Brezhnev's life, portraits of Stalin began to
appear in the windows of trucks, evidence of a dimly defined blue-collar longing
for a tough boss who could check the corruption, sloth and indirection spreading
through Soviet life.

When Yuri V. Andropov came to power a year ago today, many thought the time had
come. The new man had spent 15 years running the secret police, he denounced
corruption and laziness from party pulpits, he promised improvements and he sent
the police into the grimy beer bars and Turkish baths to chase workers back to
their factories. But a year later the faded portraits of Stalin are still in the
trucks.

No one would deny that Mr. Andropov has firmly seized power at the top, that he
wrought some changes in style and discipline, or that wheels have been set in
motion to nudge the cumbersome economy onward.

But what promise Mr. Andropov may have held out a year ago has been overshadowed
by the same doubts and questions that gathered over Mr. Brezhnev in his last
years in power: Does the man at the center have the vigor, power or above all,
the time, to take charge?

The questions arose last June when Mr. Andropov missed his first meeting with
the visiting West German Chancellor, Helmut Kohl, and they increased when he
dropped from public view in mid-August. But when the paramount leader failed to
mount Lenin's Mausoleum for the annual Revolution Day parade last Monday,
pleading a cold, a tangible sense of trouble swept through Moscow. The occasion,
the central ritual of the Soviet state, is a ceremony Mr. Brezhnev had felt
obliged to attend only three days before his death.

Nobody knew how ill Mr. Andropov really was. But suddenly the waning daylight of
a gray, cold November seemed to presage yet another winter of political
uncertainty, international tension, economic immobility and renewed longing for
''a boss,'' as Stalin used to be called.

It was a far cry from the mood of a year ago. Change was in the air in those
first months of a new leadership. Some high-ranking heads rolled, including
Nikolai A. Shchelokov, the Interior Minister, whose degraded department had come
to symbolize the corruption of the Brezhnev era.



Drastic Changes Were Debated

Newspapers debated drastic changes in economic structures. Mr. Andropov assailed
''all kinds of disorder, mismanagement, violation of law, money grabbing and
bribery'' among party professionals. Statistics registered small but tangible
improvements in labor productivity and industrial output.

Never in Soviet history had a new leader made his mark so fast. Mr. Andropov
himself was a presence. At Mr. Brezhnev's funeral he exercised some personal
diplomacy, and within two months he traveled to a Warsaw Pact meeting in Prague.
In his first speech to the party he spoke candidly of having no ''ready
recipes'' for the economy. After undertaking his dragnets against absent or
tardy workers, he himself walked into a Moscow machine-tool factory to discuss
their problems with workers.

Things have not returned to the general stagnation of the Brezhnev years. Work
discipline has perked up somewhat. A few experiments are under way in loosening
central controls over farms and industries. Vitaly V. Fedorchuk, the tough
Ukrainian whom Mr. Andropov brought into the Interior Ministry by way of the
K.G.B., is cracking a stern whip against corruption. Even food supplies are
marginally better, though whether this is the work of Mr. Andropov or the
climate is open to debate.

Reports of Politburo Meetings

Politburo meetings are at least reported in the press, although the formal
notices hardly reveal what goes on, and Mr. Andropov's public pronouncements
have been somewhat more personal and shorter than those Mr. Brezhnev used to
issue.

A series of nationwide ''accounting and election'' meetings of local and
regional party organizations is regarded as the start of a major shake-up of the
party bureaucracy.

Given the sheer bulk of the Soviet machine, with no institutionalized mechanisms
for changing personnel or easily adjusting the economy, Mr. Andropov may have
achieved as much as the system allows in the short span of a year.

But judged against the expectations he raised, Western diplomats and some
Russians have rated the changes so far minor and in large part superficial. ''If
Andropov needed a 30-degree shift in direction, then at best he achieved 2
degrees,'' one Russian said.

A Cautious Campaign On the Home Front

From the moment he came to power, Mr. Andropov made clear that domestic problems
were his paramount concern. In his first speech as General Secretary of the
Soviet Communist Party, he declared, ''The main thing is to speed up work to
improve the entire sphere of economic management, including administration,
planning and the economic mechanism.'' Slogans, he said, would no longer
suffice.

He began a war on tardiness, drunkenness, inefficiency and mismanagement, and
notions of new economic models were floated in the press.

Predictably, Mr. Andropov's lieutenants have sung the praises of his
achievements. Vadim V. Zagladin, a prominent party spokesman, writing in the
journal Novoye Vremya, said the last year was ''crammed with significant,
momentous events and accomplishments.''

'Vision and Foresight'

He specifically listed improvements in labor productivity, food and energy
supplies, management and worker participation in production. Mr. Zagladin went
on to say the ''positive developments'' were a credit to Mr. Andropov's
''indefatigable energy, rational firmness, vision and foresight.''

But Western diplomats have found that the statistical improvements over the year
probably reflect better weather in the case of crops and a slight upturn in
labor discipline in industry. Beyond that, they have found Mr. Andropov
considerably more cautious than his initial statements had led them to expect.

Above all, the diplomats have found no evidence that Mr. Andropov is prepared to
tamper with what Western economists regard as the crux of the problem: the
totally centralized Soviet system of economic planning, and the fear of
virtually any private initiative.

In a speech to party veterans in August, Mr. Andropov sounded his familiar
themes of overcoming ''accumulated inertia'' and ''half-way measures,'' and he
talked of making changes in planning and management and in economic mechanisms
by the next five-year plan, which begins in 1986.

A Soviet Hen Joke

But conscious, perhaps, of the fact that tinkering too actively with the economy
cost Nikita S. Khrushchev his job, Mr. Andropov also invoked the old Russian
proverb that it is better to measure seven times before cutting once. ''Of
course, comrades, it is necessary to be most cautious in dealing with an economy
of such a scale and such complexity as ours,'' he said.

His approach has characteristically found its most cynical expression in an
underground joke, this one starring a Soviet chicken. Under Lenin, she says, she
laid dozens of eggs. Under Stalin, she lived in such terror that her output
dropped. Khrushchev came and tried to teach her to fly, and under Brezhnev she
took to the bottle. Finally Mr. Andropov comes to power and the chicken asks,
''What should I do?'' He replies, ''Make sure you come to work on time.''

This facetious summary of Soviet economic history has at its base the notion
that if only left alone the hen would gladly start laying again.

Pick up 1st ADD YURI.  The big subheds are organized by topic and thus may not
be moved or deleted.

But the reality with which Mr. Andropov has to contend, and that probably led to
Mr. Khrushchev's overthrow, is that much of the Communist Party's power derives
from its centralized control over all aspects of Soviet life, including the
economy.

Resistance to change in the Soviet system comes less from workers and managers
than from the swollen party bureaucracy grown fat on its role as sole
interpreter and enforcer of directives from the center, and as distributor of
largess.

Ship of State Plows Through Ice Floes

Roy Medvedev, the dissident historian, likens the Soviet ship of state to a
giant icebreaker plowing through Arctic ice. Mr. Andropov may be unchallenged at
the helm, but advancing requires painstaking assaults on floes grown hard
through years of accumulation.

By most available evidence, Mr. Andropov has wasted little time consolidating
his position at the helm. He quickly assumed the titles Mr. Brezhnev took years
to accumulate: General Secretary, President of the Supreme Soviet and Chairman
of the National Defense Council.

At the Nov. 7 parade, his giant portrait was the first to pass the reviewing
stand, evidence that even in infirmity his position was secure. Konstantin U.
Chernenko, Mr. Andropov's rival in last year's succession struggle, seems safely
consigned to a prestigious but politically harmless role as chief of ideology,
and several of Mr. Brezhnev's former lieutenants have been retired.

Mr. Andropov has visibly pushed forward the younger men in the Politburo -
Mikhail S. Gorbachev, Grigory V. Romanov and Geidar A. Aliyev - making them
contenders, in the process, to fill his chair someday.

A Vast Bureaucracy

But seizing control at the top, in the Soviet system, is a far cry from gaining
control over the vast bureaucratic apparatus of the party. And it is control
over the lower levels - the oblast and city organizations - that Mr. Andropov
needs to push his programs through.

For one thing, the system limits the pool from which top officials can be drawn
to the 319 members of the Central Committee, which can be chosen only by a party
congress. The next congress is not until 1986. For another, the sheer size of
the apparatus requires enormous energy and homework to reshape.

Mr. Andropov has begun the slow process of culling out the entrenched,
change-resistant bosses grown powerful under Mr. Brezhnev through a series of
local and regional party elections scheduled through early next year. It is said
that Mr. Gorbachev has been assigned the task of picking the new men - a job,
incidentally, that could make him vulnerable in the near future to a rear-guard
struggle, but once completed could give him an impressive power base.

The new men could form the core of a Central Committee beholden to Mr. Andropov
in the future. Once in place, they could become an instrument for far-reaching
change. But the question remains whether Mr. Andropov or any successor raised on
notions of close control and party supremacy would ever order the party to shed
its powers.

And the more immediate question is whether Mr. Andropov has the time to complete
the changes he needs.

Andropov Doesn't Stray In Foreign Policy

In international affairs, most Western diplomats found that Mr. Andropov stayed
largely within the parameters set by his predecessor, probably because foreign
policy has remained in large part the domain of the Soviet official who has
managed it for so long, Andrei A. Gromyko, while military policy seemed dictated
by the generals.

Most of Mr. Andropov's public actions have been focused on arms control, and
specifically on the campaign to head off the deployment of new American
medium-range missiles in Western Europe. As the December deadline draws near,
the campaign has focused on building antimissile sentiment in West Germany.

Most analysts now believe that Mr. Andropov faces a first-round defeat. Some had
expected that his last package of proposals, made Oct. 26, would be dramatic
enough to challenge the deadlock at the arms talks in Geneva, but Mr. Andropov
offered a fairly timid package centered on an offer to trim the arsenal of
Europe-based SS-20's to 140 from the 162 previously floated.

There has been speculation that Mr. Andropov's political debts to Mr. Gromyko
and Defense Minister Dmitri F. Ustinov gave him little leverage for an effective
change of course, and the leader's evident physical weakness suggested that arms
control would remain the domain of his more robust comrades.

The Korean Airliner Incident

In the major international crisis of his first year, the Soviet downing of the
South Korean airliner on Sept. 1, Mr. Andropov stayed largely out of the
limelight, issuing only a belated endorsement of the widely criticized line put
out by the Kremlin.

There is no clear evidence yet whether Mr. Andropov had a hand in the initial
explanations given by Moscow, but whether he did or not, even among Soviet
officials there seemed to be an acknowledgment that the affair had been botched.

On other fronts Mr. Andropov did little to advance Moscow's fortunes. Relations
with Washington continued to worsen; Soviet troops remained mired in
Afghanistan, and Moscow remained saddled with expensive dependents in Angola,
Ethiopia, Vietnam, Cuba and elsewhere, without tangible improvements in their
welfare. Reconciliation talks with China continued at a snail's pace.

In the Middle East the Kremlin sent a huge new arsenal to its chief ally, Syria,
but then seemed to sit on the sidelines as the United States wrestled with
Lebanon's myriad factions and while Syrian-backed Palestinians sought to crush
Yasir Arafat, in what a Tass statement Friday made clear was in defiance of
Soviet wishes.

With the United States invasion of Grenada, the Russians won some international
support against American policies, but on balance suffered a setback to their
Latin American ambitions and a potential challenge to future relations with the
Governments of Cuba and Nicaragua.

Crackdown on Artists And Dissidents

Although his 15 years with the K.G.B. raised few hopes that Mr. Andropov would
be gentle with dissidents, it was at least thought that his reputation as a
cultivated man would give the arts some added elbow room.

But in the last year dissidents have been repressed as firmly as before, if not
more roughly. Josif Begun, a Jewish activist, was handed the maximum term of
seven years in labor camp and five in exile, while prominent dissidents such as
Andrei D. Sakharov and Anatoly B. Shcharansky have remained, respectively,
confined to the city of Gorky and in prison. Jewish emigration virtually
stopped.

In the arts, controls have remained tight. Yuri Lyubimov, the prominent director
of the Taganka theater, appealed personally to Mr. Andropov, a onetime
acquaintance, to let three suppressed plays be staged. He was rebuffed, and
fired off a bitter indictment of Soviet cultural repression that sent shudders
through the Moscow cultural elite.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Yuri Andropov (page 22)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SCREEN: 'BOAT PEOPLE,' IN VIETNAM AFTER WAR

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 78, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 490 words


''Boat People'' was shown as part of the 1983 New York Film Festival. Following
are excerpts from a review by Janet Maslin, which appeared in The New York Times
last Sept. 24. The film opens today at the Plaza, on West 58th Street.

The subject of Ann Hui's ''Boat People'' would not seem to lend itself to
ordinary movie-making tactics, because the film depicts the horrendous living
conditions to be found in the northern part of Vietnam in 1978, three years
after the war ended. However, Miss Hui brings a conventional - and for the most
part highly effective - storytelling talent to bear upon this material. She's
able to create both sensationalism and drama, even if her film never generates
an air of realism, or frees itself from coincidence and cliche.


Miss Hui's film could hardly be confused with either a political tract or a
documentary. The central character of ''Boat People'' is a Japanese
photojournalist named Akutagawa (Lam), who is on a lengthy return visit to
Vietnam under the watchful eye of a woman guide from the Cultural Bureau.

Initially, she escorts him to a New Economic Zone near Danang, where he is shown
a group of happy schoolchildren. They perform a song for him: Last night I
dreamed of Chairman

Ho.  I longed to hug him, to shower

kisses on him.  May Chairman Ho live 10,000 years.  The journalist is delighted,
saying ''I never thought I'd come back to find so many healthy, happy
children.''

The rest of the film gives the lie to this sunny image; before it's over, the
journalist has even returned furtively to the same zone and found the same
children sleeping naked in appallingly overcrowded barracks. Miss Hui, who is
from Hong Kong, made ''Boat People'' with the cooperation of the Chinese
Government, and shot it on Hainan Island. The film's view of life in Communist
Vietnam is unremittingly and, given the Chinese Government's enmity to the
Vietnamese, not unexpectedly harsh. And yet ''Boat People'' isn't as
controversial as might be expected, because its criticism is very much in the
service of its clear and simple dramatic needs.

The Cast

BOAT PEOPLE, directed by Ann Hui; screenplay (Chinese with English subtitles) by
K. C. Chiu; story by Tien Kor; director of photography, Chung Chi-Man; edited by
Wong Yee-Sun; music by Law Wing-Fal; produced by Chui Po- Chu. At the Plaza,
58th Street, between the Avenue of the Americas and Seventh Avenue. Running
time: 106 minutes. This film is not rated. AkutagawaLam The MadameCora Miao Cam
NuongSeason Ma To MinhAndy Lau Ah ThanhPaul Chung Inoue WongShau-Him Officer
NguyenQl Mengshi Comrade Le KiaMelying Comrade Vu LinShujin Cam Nuong's
MotherHao Jialin Ah NhacWu Shujun Second BrotherGua Junyl Commander of Zone
16Lin Tao First Officer in Zone 15Guo Henpbao Doctor in Zone 15Zhang Dongsheng
Second Officer in Zone 15Cal Jianzhou To Min's FatherWang Huangwen Woman
NeighborMeng Pingmel


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Lam in Ann Hui's 'Boat People'

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WEINBERGER TIED TO CURB ON PRESS

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 19, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 890 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 12


A Pentagon spokesman said this week that Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger
approved in advance the restrictions imposed on reporters in the first days of
the invasion of Grenada.

Mr. Weinberger himself said at a news conference on the second day of the
invasion Oct. 26 that the policy had been made by commanders in the field and
that he would not overrule them.

The Pentagon spokesman, Michael I. Burch, said in an interview that Mr.
Weinberger had discussed the issue of news coverage before the troops landed and
had decided to keep the press away.

On the same issue, the White House chief of staff, James A. Baker 3d, said he
had not known about the restrictions in advance but did approve of them and
would use them again in a similar situation, which he characterized as ''a
commando raid.''

Reporters were excluded from the island for the first two days of combat in a
move criticized by some members of Congress and the press as having denied the
public independent verification of military progress reports. In the next two
days, a small number of reporters were allowed on the island, and then only for
short, closely controlled visits to areas chosen by the military.

No Written Plan Mr. Burch and Mr. Baker said that there was no written plan for
handling the press and that the issue was not raised in National Security
Council meetings before the invasion. Mr. Weinberger was thus the highest
ranking civilian to pass on the propriety of the restrictions.

In the initial days of the invasion, officials implied that the curbs had been
imposed almost as an afterthought by the task force commander, Vice Adm. Joseph
Metcalf 3d. In an interview in which he said he had made the decision, he added,
apparently in jest, that press boats would be shot at if they tried to land.
Four American reporters who did manage to get ashore on the second day were
picked up, taken to the helicopter carrier Guam and held incommunicado for two
days.

The restrictions have prompted debate both inside and outside the
Administration.

The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. John W. Vessey Jr., is forming a
panel of officers and journalists to examine how the press curbs worked and to
suggest guidelines for future operations. Mr. Burch said Mr. Weinberger was also
discussing the issue with reporters to see what policies might be acceptable
both to journalists and to the military.

Lawsuit Being Considered

Journalists who protested the controls are considering bringing a lawsuit
against Mr. Weinberger and the Department of Defense. Jack Landau, director of
the Washington-based Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press, said, ''We
are exploring the possibilities and looking at the types of law available.''

Mr. Burch repeated the Pentagon's earlier assertions that reporters had been
excluded because of a need for secrecy and because the military could not assure
their safety.

Reporters have dismissed both arguments. They say any element of surprise had
already been weakened because Grenadian and Cuban leaders knew the invasion was
coming. They also said journalists had historically not held the military
responsible for their safety.

Mr. Burch said live reports transmitted by broadcast correspondents might have
given the opposing forces information about the disposition of American troops.
Journalists have said that they did not violate security embargoes in the past
and would not have done so in this case.

Mr. Burch also said that reporters might have been captured by enemy forces and
that the military would have felt compelled to go to their rescue.

Criticism From Baker

Mr. Baker said the White House would have had trouble selecting a pool of
reporters to accompany the landing forces, as some journalists have suggested
and as has been done in the past.

''We have 1,800 people accredited here,'' he said. ''We would have had such
backbiting and scratching that the hue and cry would have been worse.''

But he criticized the military for barring reporters on the second day of the
invasion, when the original decision called for giving them access. He said the
military had control of the situation and the President believed ''that the
commander should make that decision.''

There are no firm rules governing when reporters and cameramen should be allowed
on the scene of combat, and Pentagon press officers say there is no written
policy on the matter.

Many in the press say frequent conflicts between military claims and the
reality, as in Vietnam in the late 1960's, has made the public distrustful of
the Government even when it is telling the truth. Public opinion sampling about
Grenada, however, has indicated general support for the President and no
immediate or widespread skepticism about Pentagon claims.

Mr. Baker, who has authority over the White House press office, said the need
for secrecy also led to the decision not to tell that press office about the
plans in advance.

On the night before the landing, the White House press office dismissed as
''preposterous'' reports that such an action was imminent. Later the chief
spokesman, Larry Speakes, said the incident had undercut his credibility with
reporters, and his deputy, Les Janka, resigned, protesting the fact that he had
not been told the truth.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON RALLY DRAWS THOUSANDS

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 17, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 651 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 12


Thousands of people gathered here today near the White House and the State
Department to protest President Reagan's policies in Central America and the
Caribbean.

Planning for the protest began in June, but many demonstrators said in
interviews that their concern about United States intervention in the region had
deepened after the recent invasion of Grenada.

The rally, sponsored by a group called the November 12 Coalition, included
protesters from civil rights, Hispanic and religious groups, labor unions and
organizations seeking an end to the nuclear arms race. There were many young
people and college students, but also many veterans of the movement against the
Vietnam War.

Blustery, Overcast Day

Some demonstrators said they had hoped to see more people at today's protest.
Preliminary estimates by the United States Park Police put the size of the crowd
at 20,000.

They marched on a cool, blustery, overcast day from three small rallies to one
big, festive rally on the Ellipse, just south of the White House, where a reggae
band and the folk singers Peter, Paul and Mary entertained the crowd before the
speeches began.

One rally, outside the headquarters of the Immigration and Naturalization
Service, expressed support for refugees from El Salvador, Guatemala and Haiti,
some of whom were in the crowd.

At another rally, outside the Department of Health and Human Services, speakers
complained about the ''social costs'' of military intervention in Central
America, saying it drained money from social programs in the United States.
''Feed the People, Not the Pentagon,'' said one sign.

The Rev. Jesse Jackson, one of eight Democratic contenders for President,
addressed the rally. George McGovern, the Democratic nominee in 1972 who is
running again for the Presidency, sent a statement of support that said American
policy in Central America was based on the same wrong assumptions that ''put us
into Vietnam.''

Among the demonstrators, Risa H. Ehrlich, a mathematics teacher from New York
City, noted polls showing public support for the Grenada operation and said she
was pessimistic about the prospects for achieving a quick change in United
States foreign policy. ''A wave of righteous arrogance has taken over the
nation,'' she said, ''a lack of modesty and respect for other nations' right to
self-determination.''



'Bully Mentality' Deplored

Susan C. Edwards of Philadelphia deplored what she said was the new ''bully
mentality'' of the United States. ''I can't stand what our Government is doing,
the invasion of Grenada and, I think, the imminent invasion of Nicaragua,'' she
said.

Sister Joan Winn, one of eight Sisters of Mercy who came here from Windham,
N.H., said, ''Our military intervention in Central America does not meet the
needs of the people there.'' She said the United States should instead be
providing scientific, medical and technical assistance to the region.

Connie Hogarth, who came on one of three buses from Westchester County, lamented
what she said was ''the expansion of militarism'' in United States foreign
policy. ''I'm ashamed of our nation,'' she said. ''In 1984, people will
repudiate President Reagan, his false patriotism and his policies of machismo.''

The Rev. William Sloane Coffin, senior minister at Riverside Church in New York
City, who was a leader of the antiwar movement in the 1960's and 70's, denounced
Reagan Administration policies in Central America.  ''The American people,'' he
said, ''are meekly acquiescing in policies they are unwilling to examine in
depth.''

Park Service police broke up a group of about 100 counterdemonstrators who tried
to disrupt the rally. The police said there were several arrests but no other
incidents.


NOTE TO MAKEUP: PLS DO NOT CUT LAST GRAF. TAKE SECOND SENTENCE IN PENULTIMATE
GRAF IF A TRIM IS NEEDED. THANKS, FORN DESK



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

JUDGE SPEEDS UP AGENT ORANGE SUIT

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 31, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 900 words


In the month since he was selected to preside over the multibillion-dollar
lawsuit by Vietnam veterans against makers of the defoliant Agent Orange, Chief
Judge Jack B. Weinstein of Federal Court for the Eastern District of New York
has reshaped and accelerated the case.

At the same time, a continuing rivalry in the group of lawyers managing the
veterans' case has raised uncertainties about a possible pullout by one longtime
leading lawyer, Victor John Yannicone Jr. But other members of the group said it
would not disrupt the case.

Quickly putting his stamp on the group litigation in the name of all veterans
who say they suffered the effects of dioxin contamination, Judge Weinstein has
taken these steps:


- He has set a tentative date for the start of the trial, May 7, 1984.


- He has suggested that the trial focus comprehensively on the claims of six or
10 representative veterans and their children instead of the thousands of
alleged victims as a group, and that the verdict then be used to guide further
litigation.


- He has voiced strong interest in a settlement, possibly with the help of the
White House and the Congress.


- He has declined to let off two of the chemical manufacturers dropped earlier
as defendants, saying at a hearing Oct. 21 that ''everybody stays in until the
litigation is over, unless there is a very good reason to let them out.''

In the process, Judge Weinstein indicated some other differences with his
predecessor, Judge George C. Pratt of the United States Court of Appeals for the
Second Circuit, although, he said, ''Generally our views are converging, if not
identical.''

Pratt Cited Pressures

Judge Pratt had presided over the case in the Federal District Court in
Uniondale, L.I., since 1979. He withdrew Oct. 13, citing the increasing
pressures of his duties on the higher court. The trial was moved to Brooklyn
when Judge Weinstein took over.

The cases involve up to seven major chemical manufacturers and 40,000
plaintiffs.

Those suing for medical compensation and punitive damages mounting into the
billions of dollars contend that they, and in some cases their offspring,
suffered illness and genetic damage from exposure to dioxin that the companies
knew was in the herbicide when they sold it to the Government. Agent Orange was
the Army's code name for the herbicide, a mixture of the plant- killers 2,4,5-T
and 2,4-D, used to destroy crops and vegetation deemed helpful to Vietcong
guerrillas.

Position of the Companies

The companies, in pretrial arguments, have challenged the links of the veterans'
ailments to the companies' products. They have also sought to show that the
Government knew everything they did about any dangers and that they, as
contractors, were therefore blameless.

The five current defendants are the Dow Chemical Company of Midland Mich., the
Monsanto Company of St.  Louis, the Diamond Shamrock Corporation of Dallas,
Uniroyal Inc., of Middlebury, Conn., and the T.H. Agriculture and Nutrition
Company of Kansas City, Mo.

Two other defendants, Thompson Chemical Company of Newark and Hercules Inc of
Wilmington, Del., were dropped earlier by Judge Pratt. But Judge Weinstein has
agreed to hear arguments on whether they should be restored.

Among the most significant steps taken by Judge Weinstein in recent hearings was
to ask the lawyers for the veterans to select ''a half dozen or 10 of their best
cases, as they see them, in their best catagories, as they see them, and then we
will try those and see if there is anything to the case.''

According to this approach, if a jury then agrees with the veterans that the
defendants were culpable and sets compensatory and punitive damages, the
companies would be deprived of their basic defense and would be strongly
impelled to reach a settlement with the other veterans.

If, on the other hand, a jury should find no cause for action, Judge Weinstein
said, ''That is the end of it.''

Opposition to the Approach

But this approach drew some opposition, as did the Judge's suggestion of a Jan.
1, 1984 cutoff date for children fathered by plaintiffs in the suit, after which
they would not be covered by this action, although they could file subsequent
cases.

''Veterans are enraged because they don't want their future children
eliminated,'' said Frank McCarthy, president of Vietnam Veterans Agent Orange
Victims Inc.

Moreover, he said, ''Everybody is concerned about getting us money. We don't
want money. We want medical attention and research and testing.''

Mr. Yannicone, a Patchogue, L.I., lawyer who pioneered some of the first Agent
Orange cases and has since had a bitter falling out with some of his former
partners over control of the cases, said every veteran had an individual problem
and could not be covered by ''representative'' cases.

''Do we try Johnny Woods and his deformed children or Kerry Ryan and her birth
defects?'' he said, citing family members of two veterans whose cases have drawn
attention.

Mr. Yannicone said last week that he was considering action to withdraw veterans
he represented from the lawsuit. But two members of the plaintiff's management
committee, Benton Musselwhite of Houston and Thomas Henderson of Pittsburgh,
minimized Mr. Yannicone's threat and said they and veterans they represented
were happy with the way the case was developing.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AFTER GRENADA, COULD THERE BE A NEXT TIME AND PLACE?

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1594 words


QUESTION. After Grenada will it be easier for a President to use force?



Representative Hyde.  More difficult. The world reaction was largely negative.
Every exercise like this always has to be circumscribed by time and goal
limitations, although the message certainly is that the United States is capable
and has the will to use force in an appropriate situation.



Senator Tsongas.  There's no question this is a plus for the President in
domestic politics. And most of the people who made this decision feel they made
the right decision - (that) they sent a message to the Soviets and Cubans. The
arguments against would be - the evacuation rationale is less likely to be as
convenient in the next case; as the details and misinformation are brought out,
the invasion will look less attractive, and most important, you're not likely to
find another tiny island willing to give you such an easy opponent.



Mr. Hyde.  We were confronted with a situation involving real human beings, many
of whom I met at the Rose Garden the other day, and a Governor General who got a
message out that they were in serious trouble. Our response was decisive and
effective, but I don't see it as a pattern repeating itself. As for erroneous
information, every operation has its share. But the interviews with citizens of
Grenada and the people who were evacuated make the President's operation look
very good.



Mr.Tsongas.  Why was the press kept out? It was all right for the press to land
in Normandy (in World War II), where there was enormous danger.



Mr. Hyde.  For the same reason the press was kept out of the Iranian operation
to rescue the hostages. If you're an assault commander, your first
responsibility is the safety of your troops and the success of the operation. To
have to divert your attention to the press would certainly interfere.

Mr. Tsongas.  You can take the national security argument to the point where you
have no free press.



Q. Do you agree with House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill's latest statements,
notably that the threat to the students justified the invasion after all?



Mr. Tsongas.  Any President faced with the threat to his citizenry has an
obligation to react. As to the larger issue of whether the United States is
going to be in the business of changing governments through military
intervention, I agree with the Speaker that it would be ''hell on earth'' and
certainly would not have bipartisan support.

Grenada Versus Afghanistan?



Q. What price have we paid with our allies?



Mr. Hyde.  There is a price. The failure of our allies to support us is a bitter
lesson, particularly Margaret Thatcher in view of our support for her adventure
in the Falklands.



Mr. Tsongas.  Chapter 18 of the Organization of American States Charter, which
calls for nonintervention, has been violated. And from the European perspective,
Grenada is nickel-dime stuff compared to Euromissiles. We give the
anti-Euromissile constituency (in Europe) a major issue. Also, when you are on
the losing side of a 108-to-9 vote in the United Nations, you've got serious
problems. As the author of the resolution to support the Afghan rebels, I can
tell you this kind of venture makes that effort all the more difficult to sell.



Mr. Hyde.  Are you comparing Grenada with Afghanistan? These six countries in
the eastern Caribbean (Grenada's neighbors) have no army; the United States is
the only country that has the ability to withstand a subversive takeover of the
island. The only legal authority smuggles a message out for help. To even
compare that to the obscene invasion of Afghanistan with Soviet troops who are
there to impose tyranny is really reaching.



Mr. Tsongas.  There are clearly distinctions. But to take the position that the
world community will see no similarities is wishful thinking. I spent a year in
the West Indies; I know some of these islands reasonably well. The argument that
somehow it was going to be a major threat to the United States really just
stretches believability.



Mr. Hyde.  The entire Government was put up against the wall and assassinated;
there was lawlessness and fear and a shoot-on-sight curfew. We had 1,000
Americans present and we got a plea from the Governor General.



Mr. Tsongas.  The purpose was only evacuation?



Mr. Hyde.  No, it was evacuation plus responding, as the only legitimate,
effective authority, to the call of the Governor General. If you think the cause
of human rights and freedom is advanced by another Cuban-Soviet base in the
south Caribbean, then we don't look at these things alike.



Mr. Tsongas.  Wherever there is going to be a significant increase in Cuban
influence, the United States has a military option?



Mr. Hyde.  No, or we'd go right into Cuba. . . .



Mr. Tsongas.  Let's take Nicaragua. Nicaragua has an airport, too. Cuban
construction workers, the military presence, Marxism, military capability - you
can say the same about Nicaragua. Are we going to take on Nicaragua? I tell you,
as someone who was there in August, if you go into Nicaragua, you're going to
get all these 12 -, 13 -, 14-year-old students taking up arms to fight the
United States.



Mr. Hyde.  Except the Contras, on the other side.



Mr. Tsongas.  The Contras are an insignificant proportion of the population.



Q. Is there a real threat to Nicaragua?



Mr. Hyde.  The differences are profound. Nicaragua is surrounded by countries
that have a military establishment - Honduras, El Salavador. In the eastern
Caribbean, nobody has military capability. The likelihood of invading Nicaragua
to protect Honduras and El Salvador is minimal.



Mr. Tsongas.That is in sharp contrast to the arguments I've been hearing from
the Administration in the Foreign Relations Committee - (that) Nicaragua has a
force disproportionate to its population and its neighbors.



Q. In terms of the War Powers Act, Grenada, Lebanon, what lessons can we draw
about Congress's role?



Mr. Hyde.  I don't think the President can initiate, nor follow through on, any
substantial foreign policy undertaking without the support of Congress. That
includes both parties.



Mr. Tsongas.  On Grenada, Congress has been passive and low-profile - a direct
result of the fact that the invasion was popular.



Q. Should Congress be more aggressive?



Mr. Tsongas.  If you are going to have a Foreign Relations Committee worthy of
the name, and it's going to live up to the stature of its predecessors - which
is not the case - Congress is going to have to be an active participant. There
should be hearings, issues brought out.  When one looks back on the three years
of the Administration, the invasion of Grenada would be the single most
significant foreign policy success - at least to date - which speaks volumes
about the difficulty we're in.



Mr. Hyde.  That's a little unfair. President Reagan found the world in the
condition it was in; foreign policy successes are not within the control of the
White House. You have events, you try to control events.



Q. The Harris Poll last week showed people worried, 56 percent to 39 percent,
that President Reagan might get us into a war. Are there political risks in
Grenada?



Mr. Hyde.  It will be portrayed by the Democratic National Committee as a
further example of macho. But most Americans understand what was at stake (and)
admire somebody who isn't paralyzed by inaction. On balance, it will be a plus.
Decisiveness, the will to act on behalf of freedom, should not hurt.



Mr. Tsongas.  I would agree that people instinctively are drawn toward someone
who exhibits strength and decisiveness. The question is whether that is balanced
with an equal perception of someone who is willing to take a risk for peace and
believes in the diplomatic process. If you look at the Euromissile issue, you
had a commitment to the dual track: Put the missiles in and negotiate. There's
no question this President is as tough as anybody you're going to get elected.
The question in people's minds is the other half of the equation. To go through
one's entire first term and never meet a Soviet leader is not the kind of thing
the average American can quite understand.

Congress and Public Opinion



Mr. Hyde.  These meetings don't necessarily solve anything. (Mr. Reagan) will
meet if there's something to talk about. This has to be settled on a lower level
so the chiefs of state can talk about something other than just balance a
teacup. Risks for peace have been taken by this President. We have made four
different proposals on arms control, all rejected by the Soviet Union.



Q. Can Congress stand up when a President is doing something the country is
excited about and likes?



Mr. Tsongas.  The ideal is that Congress is a counterbalance, that we introduce
a process of deliberation. The fact is, we are a Presidential system. Go back
and look at Vietnam, Watergate. Congress is unfortunately a reflector of public
opinion.



Mr. Hyde. Why unfortunately?



Mr. Tsongas.  Because principle and public opinion may be in conflict. What you
get from the Congress is basically what you get out of (pollsters) Lou Harris
and George Gallup.



Mr. Hyde.  I agree largely with Paul on that. You have a diffusion of authority.
You've got a hundred Senators, 435 House members; they can share the blame and
the responsiblity. You've got one President.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Representative Henry J. Hyde; photo of Senator Paul E. Tsongas
; photo of American troops in Grenada

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN, POWER AND THE WORLD

SECTION: Section 6; Page 77, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3520 words


Leslie H. Gelb is The Times's national security correspondent, based in
Washington. By Leslie H. Gelb



 WARE OF THE IMPACT OF MILITARY power yet lacking in diplomatic follow- through,
excessive in rhetoric but usually cautious in action, skilled in domestic
politics but inexperienced with the world, bold and erratic and often mired in
personal and bureaucratic struggles - these have come to be the trademarks of
the Reagan foreign policy. In two and one-half years, President Reagan has
earned grudging respect for the United States in some quarters, fear and
bewilderment in others. He has been long on developing and deploying American
military power and on sidestepping catastrophic failures, but short on concrete
diplomatic results.

Even by the reckoning of Reagan Administration officials themselves, they have
yet to achieve their first diplomatic success. And they see the chances for
negotiated breakthroughs in Lebanon, Central America or with the Soviet Union as
increasingly remote.

Resort to military force over diplomacy as a way of protecting interests is now
commonplace in international politics, as with the United States invasion of
Grenada and the Soviet Union's invasion of Afghanistan. There is a mounting
sense that the world has become a more dangerous place in recent years, and that
President Reagan has not done much to reduce these dangers.

His overthrowing of the anti-American dictatorship in Grenada is being
proclaimed by many as a turning point, a necessary demonstration of American
power and stemming of the Soviet-Cuban tide. But it should be remembered that
President Johnson's swift, decisive and successful takeover and
redemocratization of the Dominican Republic in 1965 was quickly overwhelmed by
the Vietnam War. Events in Lebanon - or in Central America or in the
Soviet-American missile-deployment race in Europe, for that matter - could
easily overshadow victory in Grenada unless it is quickly followed by lasting
achievements there and elsewhere.

It is obviously too soon for final judgments. Foreign policy is an elusive
commodity to evaluate. Who is to say that the policies leaders profess are what
they really intend? Who is to say whether the words they utter are not actually
designed simply to quiet or frighten the critics. Perhaps what looks like a
disaster at one point will turn out to be farsighted and courageous later. Of
new dangers and stalemates, how much is attributable to Mr. Reagan, to others,
to the general world situation?

But now, almost four years to the week since Iran took Americans hostage, and
more than halfway through Mr. Reagan's term and with elections less than a year
away, there will be stocktaking. We do know enough now to have some insight into
the strengths, weaknesses and style of Mr. Reagan and his team and to make some
preliminary estimates of where and why he and his team are likely to succeed and
fail in the pursuit of their espoused goals.



 Y THIS TIME IN THE NIXON AND CAR ter Administrations, there were a number of
concrete accomplishments: arms treaties with Moscow, openings to China, Middle
East agreements and, in Mr. Carter's case, a Panama Canal Treaty as well. Few
expect achievements abroad from election-year diplomacy.  But prior to this
election year, why have like successes eluded Mr. Reagan?

I think the answer is not Mr. Reagan's failure to grasp the idea of power, but
his lack of understanding about the world and of diplomacy.

The late Hans J. Morgenthau wrote: ''The national interest of a nation that is
conscious not only of its own interest but also that of other nations must be
defined in terms compatible with the latter. In a multinational world this is a
requirement of political morality; in an age of total war it is also a condition
for survival.'' To this international theorist, who spent a lifetime fighting
both utopians and misusers of patriotism, the concept of national interest
''assumes continuous conflict and threat of war, to be minimized through the
continuous adjustment of conflicting interests by diplomatic action.''

The Reagan Administration has been found wanting on just these two counts: The
President does not clearly see that even though the interests and values of
dictatorships are seldom as humane and decent as ours, they are nonetheless
''moral'' to them and enduring. He also seems deficient in understanding that,
short of relinquishing our ultimate values and survival, ways must be found to
live together.

Mr. Reagan evidently does comprehend power, and this is an essential requirement
in governing and in conducting foreign policy. He does make tough decisions. His
dismissal of the air controllers showed conclusively that he would not allow the
Government to become hostage to its civil servants. His dispatching of the
battleship New Jersey could not have been disregarded by Syrian forces in
Lebanon, nor the Awacs radar aircraft unnoticed by Libyan troops in Chad, nor
the fleet steaming near Central America ignored by Nicaragua. Even our European
allies who feel that Mr. Reagan has overdone the military component in relations
with the Soviet Union generally prefer him to Mr. Carter.  There is a kind of
cold comfort in military might, despite the attendant anxieties. One need look
only at the fixation of Soviet leaders with military power to see that they
respect it as well.  The buildup and deployment of forces is a valid tool in
diplomacy. It can be a crucial means of creating incentives to negotiate. But it
cannot stand alone, and too often it seems as if Mr. Reagan uses it either as an
end in itself or as a device to compel capitulation rather than induce
compromise. This could be the case with Nicaragua now.  Force cannot stand by
itself. For its intended effects to be lasting, it must be harnassed to
diplomacy and informed by policies that make sense at home and abroad, whether
or not people like them. Mr. Reagan cannot continue to insist that the Soviet
Union is militarily superior to the United States and then realistically expect
Moscow to bow to American will. To avoid a hopeless and dangerous arms race, he
must offer achievable arms-control proposals that take into account the fact
that Soviet and American forces are different in their strengths and weaknesses
and that the two nations lack mutual trust. Given domestic and hemispheric
limits on tolerable military pressures in Central America, he cannot simply beat
opponents there into submission. If that area is not to be turned into
Vietnamlike rubble, he must seek compromises based on local social and
historical forces. Throughout history, mighty conquests - unless tied to larger
and compelling purposes - have vanished into these unyielding realities.

Contrary to a popular view, Mr. Reagan has not been rash in his actions. While
he and his senior advisers seem capable of saying practically anything, their
actions have been restrained and even cautious. They speak of Soviet leaders as
liars, cheats and beasts and call the Soviet Union ''the evil empire,'' but they
know they cannot avoid sitting at the table with Soviet officials. And for all
the Reagan rhetoric, he has not sparked any Soviet-American confrontations thus
far.

This pattern of colorful rhetoric and restrained actions has held, for that
matter, every time there has been a crisis somewhere. In Lebanon or the Sudan or
El Salvador, the Reagan team initially and unhesitatingly announced that the
United States had vital strategic interests in those countries. In diplomatic
parlance, ''vital'' means that Washington stands ready to fight. But while Mr.
Reagan then deployed forces to all of these trouble spots, he also kept them on
a tight leash. Grenada, where little opposition was anticipated, is the one
place where he let loose somewhat. Mr. Reagan's actions in most of these
instances are well within the tradition of most of his predecessors. Even his
use of covert action to try to put pressure on or topple the Nicaraguan
Government and his invading a Caribbean country are far from unprecedented.

From all indications, Mr. Reagan and his people realize they do not know much
about these foreign places and do not want to make big decisions about them.
Here, they have the great virtue of conservative politicians - namely, great
caution.

But this form of prudence should not be mistaken for pragmatism. Pragmatism
connotes setting a general direction and mov ing with moderate steps on a
trial-and-error basis. But the Reagan policy has been characterized often by
shifts from one extreme to another: In the Middle East, he began by calling for
a strategic consensus among Israel and the moderate Arabs, then looked to Saudi
Arabia for salvation and strained ties with Israel, and now is repairing
relations with Israel, seemingly without an overall strategic objective. In
recent weeks, he has condemned Syria as a Soviet puppet and offered to meet
Syrian interests in Lebanon.  With China, he started by edging closer to Taiwan
and nearly rupturing Chinese-American relations, then signed an agreement with
Peking promising to limit arms sales to Taiwan and then increased them, and now
is on the verge of selling Peking sophisticated military hardware.  With the
Soviet Union, he announced he would not even negotiate with Soviet leaders until
the military balance had been restored and Moscow had moderated its policies in
Afghanistan, Poland and elsewhere, but then initiated arms- control talks with
Moscow on the very eve of the crackdown against Solidarity in Poland and well
before any new American weapons systems were deployed. He labeled the SALT II
treaty with the Soviet Union as practically treasonous, yet ended up observing
it and accusing Moscow of cheating on it. A few months ago, he approved a major
new grain deal with Moscow pledging not to embargo grain for foreign-policy
reasons and also blessed the sale of oil and gas equipment. A few weeks later,
he practically read Moscow out of the community of nations for shooting down the
Korean airliner.



 T IS DIFFICULT TO ACCEPT THE ADministration's description of these swings as a
new realism and sophistication, of being appropriately tough and conciliatory.
The condemnations are too sweeping and the concessions are virtuallly
unilateral. Rather, the very extreme nature of the acts suggests a view of the
world as a simple struggle between good and evil and a keenly developed sense of
domestic politics.

The public rhetoric of Mr. Reagan and his team and their private conversations
all point to a deeply held belief that the world is a fight between the good
guys and the bad guys. They do not seem to see the difference between
compromising with an adversary and bargaining with the devil.  All adversaries
are devils. In their hearts, they simply do not want to make a deal with
Communists and radicals, all of whom they believe cannot be trusted to keep a
deal. The only way to deal with the devil is to keep your distance. The only
recourse with a bad guy is to beat him to the draw.

But Mr. Reagan and his top advisers are also political animals, and when they
felt strong pressures from home and from allies abroad, they bent - in a certain
way. If the critics wanted arms control with Moscow, they would get it - and
then some. The President proposed eliminating all medium-range missiles in
Europe and deep reductions in strategic-range nuclear forces. By all accounts,
he and every other top official clearly understood that there was no chance
Moscow would accept anything like these offers. Only now and very late is Mr.
Reagan putting forward more negotiable proposals. And by most indications from
Moscow, it is too late. Soviet leaders have apparently decided that they are not
going to give Mr. Reagan the political benefits of an arms-control treaty, that
they would rather take their chances on a Democatic President or see what
happens in a second Reagan term.

Not a single top Reagan Administration official has had much experience in
dealing with the Soviet Union. It is almost impossible to calibrate the effects
of rhetoric and action on Soviet leaders without knowledge of Russian history,
culture and politics. Soviet leaders are not abstract demons. They are tied to
their roots, as are our leaders. They do challenge and test us, but they also
show restraint in their international behavior, as Reagan officials will now
acknowledge. And they do have a history of making deals and keeping them. If Mr.
Reagan does not at some level believe this, he has no business seeking to
negotiate treaties with them even now.

Mr. Reagan and his top people have a similarly empty background about most of
the rest of the world. With few exceptions, their orientations were domestic.
That accounts for a great deal. It meant that when he ordered sanctions against
our European allies for selling oil and gas equipment to the Soviet Union with
the thought that they would desist from those sales, he understood little of
European interests and politics. They did not desist, and he had to lift the
sanctions to keep the alliance from exploding. It meant that when State
Department officials predicted last year that Syrian and Israeli forces would be
out of Lebanon by Christmas, he had no one to tell him that this was
preposterous.

Not knowing the history of places such as Lebanon and El Salvador, the Reagan
people rushed to put these places in the only context they felt they did
understand, that of East-West struggle. It is only dawning on the White House
now that Lebanon was never a truly unified and independent state, that it was
almost always ripped apart by civil wars and that Syria was almost always a key
actor there. The reality of El Salvador does not appear to have fully sunk in
either: that its present plight results principally from centuries of tyranny by
the wealthy few over the wretched multitudes, and only secondarily, at most,
from Soviet and Cuban machinations.

Reagan Administration officials say they are aware of these histories and accept
them as part of the story. But they continue to insist that the main cause of
trouble in Lebanon and Central America is the Soviet Union. Almost all experts
in these areas maintain that the Reagan Administration has got it backward.

Whichever side is correct, the fact is that all causes and interests have to be
accommodated or dealt with somehow, and this can be done either by fighting and
winning, or seeking diplomatic settlements, or allowing troubles to drag on
inconclusively and dangerously. The Reagan Administration is at pains to prove
that it has no intention of using American troops in combat in Central America
or Lebanon, that it will not seek to impose military solutions, and that it
recognizes that slow deterioration and stalemate are intolerable.

That leaves only diplomacy, ultimately, and diplomacy means compromise - often
big compromises - and this is anathema to the Reagan Admin- istration. Here is
where Mr. Morgenthau's truths are central. The fact is that, except under
extreme compulsion, nations do not have to make agreements with one another.
They do not have to get together and pass laws and an annual budget. They can
just keep pecking away at each other in terribly costly ways. Throughout
history, most nations have demonstrated a clear preference for suffering these
costs as opposed to making big concessions. That is why so few major disputes
have been resolved by diplomacy.

But again, the choice is talk or festering problems or war, and for diplomacy to
have a chance, a continuous dialogue or process has to be established. Often
little will come of this. But without it, nothing at all will come.

The Reagan Administration distrusts these diplomatic processes. Officials feel
that it is merely playing ''their game.'' In their view, negotiating with the
Salvadoran guerrillas serves only to legitimize them and undermine the
confidence of the Salvadoran Government. In their opinion, negotiating with
Moscow mainly creates opportunities for Soviet leaders to create rifts between
Washington and its allies.

Thus, diplomacy is undertaken with reluctance. It becomes something to be
pursued episodically rather than continuously. The essential ingredient of
diplomacy, persistent contact, is lost. The genius of diplomacy is to keep
things moving, to generate pressures for compromise, to look for openings,
opportunities, possibilities, where none previously existed. The temperament and
understanding for such a long and arduous process seems to be missing from the
Reagan Administration.

Mr. Reagan's difficulties here are compounded by the fact that he has not put an
end to the debilitating fights between his advisers in the White House and the
National Security Council staff - who look after his political as well as
strategic interests - and the barons of the State Department - who emphasize
long- term foreign-policy concerns. In fact, he has allowed yet another layer of
squabbling to emerge among the political advisers themselves.

The result has been a continuation of the killing off of top foreign-policy
officials. So far, Mr. Reagan has had three national security advisers and two
Secretaries of State. And the incumbent at State, George P. Shultz, was even
ruminating about leaving some months back. This rate of turnover seriously
impedes the development of orderly decision-making processes. It also disposes
of people before they know what kinds of compromises might sell in Managua,
Damascus or Moscow.

For whatever reasons Mr. Reagan may find diplomatic compromises difficult and
unpalatable, he is far from being alone. He has come to power at a time in
history when few, if any, leaders around the world are strong enough internally
to make significant concessions externally.

It requires enormous courage or political support at home for a leader to take
the risks of making compromises abroad. Most of the time, the easier course is
to flow with the tide of events and not alienate powerful domestic opponents.
There is no one around who appears to have the necessary stature and backing, as
did the late Anwar el-Sadat in Egypt to make peace with Israel, or the late
Charles de Gaulle in France to end the war with Algeria.

Leaders of governments almost everywhere are relatively weak and often under
serious challenge internally. In the Soviet Union, Yuri V. Andropov clearly does
not command the Politburo to the degree of his predecessor, Leonid I. Brezhnev.
In China, Deng Xiaoping lacks the authority of Mao Zedong or Zhou Enlai. In
Egypt, Hosni Mubarak does not pursue diplomacy in the manner of Mr. Sadat. In
Israel, Yitzhak Shamir does not begin to wield the power of Menachem Begin.
Japanese leadership is faceless, and most Western European governments rule by
bare majorities.

These domestic indispositions toward compromise are reinforced by military
realities on global and regional levels. Underlying virtually every conflict and
every trouble spot is a fairly stable military balance. This balance is
generally recognized by the parties, and it militates both against compromise -
because there is little fear of losing - and against escalation - for there is
little prospect of prevailing.

The Salvadoran Government and its guerrilla opponents are each sufficient to
prevent defeat by the other, but neither is strong enough to win. It will be a
long, grinding war. The ''contras'' in Nicaragua have enough sanctuary in
Honduras and enough outside aid from Washington to cause pain to the Sandinista
Government in Managua, but not enough to topple it. Iran and Iraq have been
fighting inconclusively for more than three years to a very slow mutual
exhaustion. Israel is sufficiently powerful to give pause to any Arab opponents
contemplating attack. Most important, there is parity in the overall
Soviet-American military balance.

Thus, in Mr. Reagan's world, leaders in the trouble spots are too weak
politically to make the compromises necessary for settlements and not strong
enough militarily to impose their will. As far as the eye can see, there is not
much hope for peace nor should there be panicky fear of conflicts escalating out
of control.

None of this is to absolve Mr. Reagan and his Administration from
responsibility. The United States remains the most influential nation in the
world, and what Mr. Reagan has been doing and not doing will shape future
opportunities and dangers. So far, he and his advisers can rightly claim not to
have lost a square inch of territory to Communists or radicals. Maybe that is
all they think can be done, and perhaps they are correct. If, on the other hand,
their policies result in the slow deterioration of American position and
influence in the world, they will be judged by a more rigorous standard.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Edward Rowny and Victor L. Karpov; photo of the battleship New
Jersey and flotilla; photo of President Reagan

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

JOHN GLENN: THE HERO AS CANDIDATE

BYLINE: By Howell Raines

SECTION: Section 6; Page 40, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 9962 words


Howell Raines is national political correspondent in The Times's Washington
bureau.



 IN SMALL TOWNS, ROUND-BELLIED legionnaires snap to attention, salute and rush
to tell Senator John Glenn the name of the atoll they helped defend in World War
II.

Babies are thrust at him. He is asked to autograph $20 bills or shirt cuffs or,
at a country airport in Iowa, the cover of a 1962 issue of Life magazine that
bears his photograph over the worshipful caption ''The Making of a Brave Man.''

At a meeting in Washington, the state and local officials of the A.F.L.-C.I.O.
industrial unions dutifully applaud former Vice President Walter F. Mondale, the
100 percent union man they will later endorse. But when John Glenn comes in,
they line up with their cameras to snap his picture.

That's what happens when celebrity achieved outside the political arena is
introduced into an election contest. Star appeal worked well for Ronald Reagan
in 1980, and it has enabled John Glenn to move from a back-of-the-pack post in
the Democratic Presidential sweepstakes to challenge Mondale for the lead. The
latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows Democratic voters narrowly split
between the two leading candidates, with 49 percent for Mondale and 41 percent
for Glenn. The newly released film, ''The Right Stuff,'' with its portrayal of
Glenn as an astronaut hero, has given his campaign a publicity send-off unlike
any in the annals of Presidential politics. And he is ideally positioned to take
advantage of the kind of pratfalls to which front-runners like Mondale are
historically susceptible.

Yet Glenn has a long way to go. He is still struggling to fashion a political
persona and a cogent platform of ideas upon which to campaign. And for all his
nine years in Washington, the Senator is still better known as an icon of the
Space Age than as a compelling leader whose speeches and legislation shape
public and Congressional opinion. In fact, many Democratic leaders insist that
unless Glenn can lift himself to that higher plane occupied by such masterful
campaigners as John F. Kennedy and Ronald Reagan, he will be unable to convert
his celebrity into enough votes to win the nomination.

Moreover, in a two-man contest with Mondale, Glenn gives away huge advantages in
money, organization and endorsements from powerful constituency groups and
political leaders. Even Glenn's own strategists maintain that they do not expect
him to finish the primary season with a majority of the delegates. Indeed, they
say that if he cannot knock the wheels off the Mondale bandwagon on March 13 -
the date of the ''Super Tuesday'' primaries - Glenn may be out of the running.
Victories in the South on Super Tuesday, however, could start him on a roll.

Such a result would have an impact far beyond the nomination battle itself. For
one thing, it might resolve the identity crisis within the Democratic Party,
torn today between loyalty to the ideas and political coalitions of the New Deal
and the need for fresh policies and a broader appeal to mainstream voters. A
Glenn nomination could also influence how Americans will select their
Presidential candidates in the years ahead. The role of party leaders in that
process, already weakened by the rise of Jimmy Carter in 1976 and Ronald Reagan
in 1980, may never be the same if John Glenn takes the nomination.

For some time, political experts assumed that President Reagan would probably
win re-election. But his economic and social policies have shredded the
grass-roots electoral coalition he built in 1980, and in the past few months
Reagan has become entangled in foreign crises. The death of more than 200
Marines in Beirut and the commitment of American troops to the invasion of the
tiny Caribbean nation of Grenada have led Democrats to revive the old charges
that Reagan is reckless and warlike.

The President's potential vulnerability could strengthen the hand of John Glenn,
whom the polls identify as Reagan's strongest Democratic adversary. But first
Glenn must get the nomination. He has only a few months in which to sell his
proposition that he is the most electable candidate of a party that is not yet
sure what to make of him.



 T WAS EARLY MORNING, AND THE candidate had settled back for the flight to
Mississippi. He would have preferred to be in the pilot's seat of this small jet
instead of in the passenger section, just as he would have preferred to be
reading a flight plan rather than the black-bound briefing book that his
secretary, Mary Jane Veno, had dropped into his lap. As he read, he also kept an
eye out for unusual cloud formations to point out to Annie, his wife of 40
years. The man who has spent thousands of hours squinting into the sky cannot
resist watching it.

Everyone who knows John Glenn well talks about him as ''a natural aviator.'' Not
even his most worshipful aides call him ''a natural politician.'' For Glenn,
elective politics is an add-on interest that came fairly late in life, and not
an original, ruling passion. But if this sturdy man who looks younger than his
62 years is not a ''natural,'' he is nonetheless a raw political talent of great
potential. He is also facing, in Mondale, one of the most deeply experienced,
best-organized and well- financed candidates to seek the Presidency in this era.
What is being tested is whether John Glenn's raw talent can be brought to a
state of refinement equal to the task before him.

In fact, the learn-as-you-go Presidential candidate has changed in the last
year. Two illuminating points in that process: A midsummer visit to central
Mississippi and a fall forum in New York City.

On the runway apron in Meridian on that sleepy July morning, a welcoming
committee





 pressed forward to meet the Glenn plane as it rolled to a stop.

''Annie, get your fanny out there,'' said the candidate as he scrambled out of
the jet. A tall, ruddy-faced stranger approached Glenn and introduced himself.
He was Maurice Dantin, the man in charge of the Glenn campaign in Mississippi.
''I'm your state chairman here,'' he said. ''Nice to have you.''

It was a telling scene. Mondale knows the Maurice Dantins of America - in many
cases, he knows their wives and law partners and staff aides - on a first-name
basis. John Glenn had to spend the first half of 1983 meeting such people for
the first time.

He does better with crowds, such as the hundreds of families at the Neshoba
County Fair down the road in Philadelphia, Miss. In a dusty, tree-shaded
campground, Glenn was virtually mobbed by autograph seekers. This John Glenn -
in shirt sleeves, sweat beaded on his balding pate - was in his element. He is
one of the rare politicians who makes firm eye contact and asks people's names
as he works a crowd. Other celebrity politicians hand out printed signature
cards; Glenn still signs autographs. Even in such hectic scenes, Glenn, who was
known in the space program for his preternaturally slow pulse beat, seems
unhurried and accessible.

But then it was time for him to speak. As usual, Glenn's oratory failed to
sustain the excitement created by his arrival. His voice skewed upward toward a
pipsqueaky tenor on his punch lines. His main gesture was the stiff,
double-handed chop of a man trying to show how long a fish he had caught.

Glenn's basic speech - outlined on a stack of intricately notated index cards -
was a blend of prairie populism and civics-book patriotism.  ''Everywhere that
Americans spread off the Eastern seaboard, heading west across this country,
they put up the schoolhouse first, hired a schoolteacher and put all the kids in
school,'' Glenn said. ''That was something new in our society, new in the whole
history of the world, that all the kids would be in school, that education was
not just for the wealthy and just for what would have been the kids from the
castle in Europe.''

As Glenn plowed ahead, it became clear that the speech was a battle map for
claiming the broad central terrain between Reagan and Mondale. He depicted the
President as a cranky ideologue who wanted to ''roll us back to days of yore.''
He warmly recalled the New Deal social reforms, but by adding a chastening word
about programs that ''went too far,'' distanced himself from Mondale.

When Glenn departed from his notecards, however, he ran into trouble. The
Neshoba County Fair has the strongest segregationist identity of any major
political event in the South. Glenn emphasized his strong record on civil
rights, but he played to the white crowd by omitting his usual detailed
criticism of Reagan for failing to enforce the civil-rights laws that are
already on the books. Later, in television interviews that reached Mississippi's
powerful black constituency, he compounded his political error by endorsing
''the old values, the old traditions that are epitomized by the fair.''

Glenn advisers later confirmed that the Neshoba example illustrated the
candidate's problems with political sensitivity. Glenn did not realize that for
many Americans the phrase ''traditional values'' means segregation or religious
discrimination or denial of women's rights. Early in the campaign, an adviser
commented that Glenn was simply ''not prepared for 90 percent of the groups he
goes before - women, blacks, Democratic regulars.''

By October, Glenn's campaign skills had improved. The problems of political
sensitivity still lingered - witness his suggestion at the annual convention of
the National Organization for Women that proponents of the equal rights
amendment had not worked hard enough for its passage. But there were incremental
gains in his speaking ability. ''He just got tired of hearing he was a lousy
speaker,'' said Robert J. Keefe, a Washington lobbyist who serves as a senior
consultant to the Glenn campaign, ''and exerted his competitive nature against
it.'' And the most striking development was the increase in Glenn's confidence
level. There was a general assumption among his opponents that Glenn would be a
pushover when it came time for debates with other candidates. In fact, in a
series of joint appearances with the other candidates, Glenn held his own,
demonstrating a well-developed ability as a rhetorical counterpuncher.

The first time all seven candidates appeared together was at Town Hall in New
York on Oct. 6. Glenn arrived eager to settle a score. Several days earlier,
Governor Cuomo had been quoted as calling Glenn a ''celluloid'' candidate.
Glenn, who had been courting the Governor in hopes of an endorsement, was
angered at what he saw as an implied connection between President Reagan's film
career and ''The Right Stuff.'' David Sawyer, Glenn's media consultant, and Greg
Schneiders, his press secretary, urged him to answer the charge at the forum and
offered to prepare a response. Both men recall that Glenn waved them off. ''No,
don't bother,'' the candidate said. ''I know what I'll say on that one.''

What Glenn said won him what might have been the biggest ovation of the night.
''As far as the celluloid charge,'' he said, ''I wasn't doing



 'Hellcats of the Navy' on a movie lot when I went through 149 missions. When I
sat atop that booster, it wasn't 'Star Trek' or 'Star Wars.' ''

It was an important moment in the political development of John Glenn. The way
in which he seized a chance to make his point showed some growth in his
confidence as a speaker. The candidate who had stumbled in Mississippi when he
strayed from his note cards could rise to an occasion.  What's more, he went on
that night to confound the predictions of Mondale aides that he would falter
when the candidates started mixing it up. At the end of the program, he
challenged Mondale, suggesting that his campaign was a captive of special
interests - ''any group with a letterhead and a mailing list.''

In the following weeks, Mondale and the newly combative Glenn went at each
other, and Glenn gave about as good as he got. He made some tactical errors -
for example, attacking Carter Administration programs he himself had supported -
but on balance, Glenn profited from the exchanges in several ways. Mondale and
the press had started treating him as Mondale's equal in what was now clearly
perceived to be a two-man race for the nomination. Glenn had cast doubt on
Mondale's boast that he would be the automatic winner in the series of campaign
debates scheduled to start early next year.

In general, the learn-as-you-go candidate had showed that he was educable. But
his speaking ability was still far from dazzling and the question of whether he
could become a galvanizing television presence was still unanswered. The job of
converting fame into political power was proving hard. Glenn was trying to
accomplish on his first time out what had taken Ronald Reagan three tries - and
Reagan was a ''natural.'' Sometimes, Glenn seemed to yearn for those simpler
days when it did not matter what a man said so much as what he did.

So, last summer, as John Glenn's campaign plane drifted across the moonlit Gulf
from Mississippi to Florida, where the next day he would face a union audience
that was not particularly eager to hear him, his thoughts turned to the things
that truly stir him. And he spoke longingly of airplanes and rocket ships, of
G-forces and of the unmatchable feeling of ''hanging in the straps'' as his body
floated free from the gravity - and cares - of the world.



 OHN HERSCHEL GLENN JR. IS A man with three birthdays. The private citizen,
World War II combat flier and career Marine officer was born on July 18, 1921.
John Glenn, astronaut and national hero, was born on Feb. 20, 1962, when he
became the first American to orbit the earth. And John Glenn, the politician,
was born one night in December 1962, when Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy
invited John and Annie Glenn to dinner at Hickory Hill, the Kennedy estate in
McLean, Va. Kennedy suggested that Glenn run for political office.

The proposal, Glenn recalls, did not come as a complete surprise. Psychologists
at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration had early on decided that
among the seven original astronauts chosen in 1959, Glenn was the most eager and
the best able to handle public life. In the period of wild adulation that
followed his 81,000-mile space journey in Friendship 7, the sandy-haired Ohioan
had rubbed shoulders with plenty of politicians, including President Kennedy,
and he had formed some definite impressions. For one thing, he told friends, he
was not interested in the House of Representatives. The publicity-hungry
Congressmen, always shoving to get into a picture with the hero of the hour, had
repelled him. But the Senate, that citadel of power and respectability, appealed
to Glenn. And the Senate was what Bobby Kennedy had in mind.

The Attorney General confided that his brother believed that Senator Stephen
Young of Ohio would be a liability in the 1964 election, when Kennedy would be
running for a second term. Robert Kennedy proposed that Glenn, with White House
political support and, it was hinted, with financial and technical help from the
powerful Kennedy campaign machine, return to his home state and run against
Young in the Democratic primary. But Glenn held back, in part because of a
feeling of loyalty to the space program.

President Kennedy's assassination in 1963 prompted a period of reappraisal.
Glenn began to think more seriously about the Ohio Senate race. But he worried
about exposing himself and his family to the deal-making and trade-offs that he
characterized to friends as the ''ugly side of politics.'' The question, Dr.
Robert Voas, a former NASA psychologist, recalls, was whether Glenn could
''become comfortable with the kind of compromises that are the lifeblood of
politics.'' Finally, while on a family vacation at Big Bear Lake in California,
Glenn reached a compromise with himself. He would enter politics with the goal
of reforming its ethical structure, rather than allowing politics to reshape his
own idea of integrity. Such was the origin of one of the leitmotifs of Glenn's
political career: the search for opportunities to stand up to political
authority figures and to reject the politically expedient course as a means of
proving to himself that he had not sold out.

The roots of Glenn's rigid moral code lay in New Concord, Ohio, and his parents'
example of Presbyterian rectitude. Glenn's apple-pie boyhood and his 23 years of
military life also helped form the cluster of related characteristics that Glenn
brought to politics. Ambition - quiet ambition, masked by Middle Western
heartiness and chastened by a genuinely devout religious faith, but strong
nonetheless - is one such trait. A kind of determination that lay on the border
between fanatical and comical is another. For example, Tom Miller, a retired
Marine Corps general, Glenn's close friend since they were rookie pilots
together in World War II and a next-door neighbor for many years, recalls that
Glenn even applied weight to his head to compress his height down to the
5-foot-11-inch maximum for astronauts. ''He wasn't going to miss a trick,'' said
Miller. ''He'd be sitting down reading with a big bunch of books sitting on his
head. In some cases, he'd put a belt kind of around his chin and hold them, or
if he was sitting real still reading, he could balance them up and read.'' The
Miller and Glenn children delighted in teasing the future astronaut about his
height-reduction regimen, recalled Miller: ''Mine would come back over here and
say, 'Uncle Johnny's over there with all them damn books on his head again.' ''

Glenn, who has a finely tuned sense of personal dignity and is touchy about his
public image, denies the scene so vividly described by Miller. But the anecdote
is in keeping with the nothing-is-too-much approach he took to the punishing
physical regimen required for selection as an astronaut.

Linked to this determination is a competitiveness and perfectionist drive that
makes any defeat or setback almost unbearable. The little- known private side to
Glenn's sunny public personality is a tendency toward sulkiness and hurt
feelings in the face of criticism or rejection. Miller recalled the funk that
descended on Glenn when NASA selected Alan Shepard and Gus Grissom for the
first, suborbital test flights. ''John was pretty hard to live with around
here,'' Miller recalled. ''I jumped him one day out in the front yard. I said,
'You're making everybody miserable because your damn pride is so high.' He
wouldn't go anywhere or anything. I kept telling him, 'I know they're saving you
for the orbit.' ''

The determination Glenn exhibited as an astronaut candidate came into play when
Glenn's first two Senate campaigns ended badly. A serious head injury suffered
in a bathroom fall forced him to withdraw in 1964. In 1970, Glenn ran a campaign
that relied on his celebrity and patriotic image to draw crowds to his stump
speeches. He lost the Democratic nomination to Howard M. Metzenbaum, who mounted
a polished, expensive television campaign that made Glenn's effort look
amateurish.

The most important formative experience of John Glenn's political career,
according to his close associates, came in 1974. Metzenbaum, who had lost the
1970 general election, had been appointed by Gov. John J. Gilligan to fill a
vacant Senate seat. As another Senate election approached, the Governor wanted
to avoid a divisive rematch between Glenn and Metzenbaum and decided that Glenn
ought to run for Lieutenant Governor. For Gilligan, who had national
aspirations, the plan had the extra benefit of boxing Glenn, a potential rival,
into a secondary position.  When Glenn balked, Gilligan lined up the major
county chairmen to pressure him to run for Lieutenant Governor. He also arranged
a private meeting where 33 members of the state A.F.L.-C.I.O. executive council
told Glenn face to face that they backed Gilligan's plan. ''He was going to
manage the state party against me, and labor would be against me, and everybody
would be against me,'' Glenn recalls. ''Then push came to shove and I shoved
back.''

Glenn's shove was a tell-it-all public speech to the state Democratic Committee
executive meeting in September. He described Gilligan's plan for him, including
the private session with the labor chiefs. Then he went on to announce his
candidacy to oppose Metzenbaum, saying he

would go over the heads of the labor and party leaders to the people. ''For
about a week, it really played big in the press: David attacks Goliath,'' says
William R. White, Glenn's campaign treasurer then and his campaign manager now.
''And it was a good move. It helped him raise money. It was perhaps the
beginning of the building of his financial base with the business community.''


But more important, the experience provided a powerful learning experience that
reinforced Glenn's deepest needs and instincts. The Gilligan pressure play
provided an opportunity for him to publicly stand for principle over political
expedience, proving to himself and the world that he had not been co-opted. His
eventual victory over Metzenbaum, aided by pollsters, professional consultants
and television commercials, demonstrated that he could not rely totally on the
astronaut appeal. He also became convinced, in a campaign that would provide the
model for his current Presidential effort, that he could run without the party
professionals and labor and still win a Democratic primary.  And Glenn got one
more thing in 1974 - a divorce from his original political sponsors. He had
campaigned for Bobby Kennedy in 1968, been with him in Los Angeles when he was
shot and later had broken the news of their father's death to some of the
Kennedy children. But in 1974, Kennedy's widow, Ethel, refused to campaign for
Glenn. Glenn was wounded because he felt that her brother-in-law, Senator Edward
M. Kennedy, had told her that it would be awkward for her to enter a Democratic
primary contest against Metzenbaum, a Senate colleague. The breach between the
Glenns and Ethel Kennedy was permanent. The incident also caused a chill between
Glenn and Ted Kennedy that still exists. But in the end, it was fortunate
politically. The voters have not been receptive to the kind of adopted Kennedys
that Glenn started out to be. Now, he could be seen as a new, independent
Senator rather than part of that sad, nostalgia-ravaged band trying to raise a
patchwork new Camelot from the wreckage of the old.

hold this space

After winning the election in 1974, Glenn came to Washington for a new Senator's
obligatory round of courtesy calls. When a friend asked about his visit with
Robert Taft Jr., the Republican senior Senator from Ohio, Glenn said he had no
plans to call on his new colleague. Informed that it was the expected thing to
do under the unwritten rules of senatorial courtesy, Glenn replied
incredulously, ''But he campaigned against me.''

It was a prophetic remark. Glenn, the competitor, did not understand that
senators do not let election-year battles disrupt the clubby chumminess that
prevails the rest of the time. As a member, he inhabited the borderland between
''loner'' and ''independent.'' His friendships - with younger Democratic
Senators like Sam Nunn of Georgia and David L. Boren of Oklahoma or party old-
timers like Edmund S. Muskie of Maine or the late Henry M. Jackson of Washington
- were firm, but not close.

Over the years, Glenn earned the respect of his colleagues as an upright and
candid man. But he never joined any of the informal caucuses that coalesce
around key issues or individuals in the Senate, and Glenn never bid for
leadership of such groups himself. For one thing, his celebrity status set him
apart. Rarely does a freshman Senator show up on the Vice-Presidential short
list, as Glenn did in 1976, after less than two years in Washington.

Also, instead of settling into the fellowship of the Senate, Glenn used it as a
theater where he could act out his independent impulses. ''I've seen him in
several situations where he was frank and candid at his own peril,'' said
Senator Nunn. ''He had an option of remaining silent in a couple of places and
not making anybody mad, when he came forth pretty strongly.'' Glenn's behavior
followed the familiar pattern in which he seemed to be asserting his prickly
sense of integrity as a means of proving that while John Glenn was now in
politics, he was not of it.

Glenn also became known for his slow-moving approach to decisions - Glenn's
staff preferred the term ''deliberative'' to describe his exhaustive and, to
some colleagues and staff, agonizingly slow review of all the facts. Then, once
he had taken a stand, he was almost impossible to budge.

In the Senate, the defining incident in this side of Glenn's character was his
feud with President Carter in 1979 over the SALT II arms-control treaty with the
Soviet Union. With the revolution in Iran, the United States had lost key
observation posts that would have enabled Washington to verify Soviet compliance
with the treaty. The Carter Administration assured doubtful senators that they
would soon have observation bases in other countries and an enhanced ability to
monitor the Soviet Union by satellite. Even such hawkish Senators as Nunn
accepted these assurances on the verification issue as adequate, but Glenn could
not be swayed. Hours of study of classified information in the high-security
''cage'' of the Foreign Relations Committee convinced him that Carter's promises
were empty, because, Glenn said, the capabilities of the new bases and the
satellites would not be known until they were in operation. Carter partisans
suggested that Glenn had a rifle-shot mind that made it impossible for him to
judge the treaty in its entirety once he became expert on the narrower issue of
verification. This criticism, that he gets bogged down in details and cannot see
the ''big picture,'' has haunted him ever since.

''I guess the idea was that I should be reasonable and just go along with this
hope that we could get something worked out. I wasn't willing to do that,''
Glenn says. ''I wanted to know whether we had monitoring capability so we would
know what they were doing. Fine, then I'll be for SALT. It was very simple.''

Finally, Carter, having seen an advance copy of a Glenn speech attacking the
treaty, called the Glenns' home just as the Senator was leaving to give his
speech. ''Fifteen seconds later and it wouldn't have happened,'' recalls a Glenn
aide. What happened, despite what Glenn calls his ''near reverence'' for the
Presidency, was a very heated exchange. ''It wasn't a yelling match on the
telephone,'' Glenn insists, ''but it was the sternest talk I've ever had with a
President in both directions, me to him and him to me, both of us.''

At Carter's insistence, Glenn agreed to drop a couple of paragraphs about SALT
II from his speech, but he refused to drop his opposition to the treaty.
Meanwhile, the text with the offending paragraphs had already been released to
the press, and when reporters asked about them, Glenn said he left them out of
his speech at the President's urging. Glenn came off looking responsible and
candid. It was the old formula used a few years before against Gilligan: Stand
your ground under pressure and then play the situation for maximum publicity.







On other issues, Glenn, by following his instinct for independence, has created
a Senate record that presents real difficulties when it comes to winning the
support of Democratic Party constituencies and to presenting himself as a man of
Presidential depth and range on the issues.

No one questions that Glenn has a quick, fact-crunching intellect, but doubts
about the breadth and formulative power of his intelligence persist. His
boosters argue that centrist, pragmatic and nonideological candidates are always
subject to the criticism that they are ''fuzzy on the issues.'' But those same
advocates acknowledge that Glenn's big task as a Presidential candidate is to
project an overarching grasp of policy that is not apparent in his Senate
record.

Economic policy has been a particularly troubling area for Glenn. His general
approach to fiscal policy is moderate, but on a key issue, the Republicans'
supply-side economic initiative, he has had trouble settling on a position. In
1981, for example, he voted for President Reagan's plan to cut income taxes by
25 percent over three years. Now, as a candidate, he is calling for tax
increases, saying the Reagan tax cut for which he voted was a windfall for the
rich and contributed to intolerably high deficits.

In a recent interview in his office, Glenn settled into an easy chair and talked
about his situational economics. While other Senators burrow into rooms where
the paneled walls are hung with Presidential portraits, Glenn's office is
furnished in the eclectic style of a suburban den. He has surrounded himself
with model airplanes, space artifacts and, atop a bookshelf, a cast of D"urer's
''Praying Hands.''

Asked to explain his support of the Reagan tax cut, the most critical economic
vote of his legislative career, Glenn chuckled. ''Oh,'' he said, ''I defend it
just by what happened at that time.'' His vote was a speculative one, he
explained, made after the Democrats failed to muster the votes for a more
moderate tax reduction. ''We couldn't do what we wanted and there was always the
chance the Reagan program might work as he claimed it would.'' He added, ''So I
voted for it with the idea that if it did not work, if it did not work as
advertised, then we would try to change it to tailor it to whatever was
happening.''

On defense, Glenn's record is more consistent and accessible. He says he would
now vote for the SALT II treaty because verfication is now adequate. Although he
warns against promiscuous weapons buying, he is generally counted a friend of
the Pentagon. He helped win approval for the B-1 bomber and recently voted in
favor of a Reagan proposal to spend $130 million on a new type of nerve gas.

On a number of issues, such as education, abortion rights for women, energy and
environment, Glenn's record has been that of a solidly progressive Democrat. But
in other cases, Glenn has refused to go along with other mainstream Democrats on
key policy questions, and he has paid a political price.

Three-quarters of the time, for example, Glenn voted with organized labor, but
the A.F.L.-C.I.O. has never forgiven his single vote against a common situs
picketing bill that would broaden the rights of construction unions to put up
picket lines. Also, whereas Glenn presented himself as rigorously pro-Israel, he
offended Jewish leaders by voting to sell F-15 aircraft to Saudi Arabia, by
criticizing the Israeli raid on an Iraqi nuclear reactor and by speaking
favorably of negotiations with the Palestine Liberation Organization.

Whatever the merits or flaws of Glenn's Senate record, it has earned him no
dependable base among the Democratic Party's constituent groups or its political
professionals. As Glenn's advisers prepared to mount a Presidential campaign,
they searched for a way of presenting John Glenn to the voters that would make a
virtue of his independence of mind, his lack of party credentials, his generally
centrist but politically flawed voting record and his refusal to tie himself to
labor or other interest groups. Bill White, the loyal administrative assistant
who guided the exploratory effort, kept in mind the ''well-remembered lesson''
of the disastrous 1970 primary campaign in Ohio. People would turn out to see
John Glenn the astronaut, but they would not vote for him in the absence of a
political theme that made sense. So, throughout 1982 and into early 1983, the
fledgling Glenn campaign was a campaign in search of a context for its
candidate.

hold this space

As the incident is depicted in the movie, ''The Right Stuff,'' John Glenn, whose
space flight has just been scrubbed because of bad weather, is called to the
telephone at Cape Canaveral. At the other end of the line is his wife, Annie,
back home in Virginia. She is afflicted with a stammer so severe that she
considers telephones ''an instrument of the devil.'' On this day, her stammer
has turned into vocal gridlock because she is frightened. Vice President Lyndon
B. Johnson is demanding to be admitted to her home so the network news crews can
film him comforting the wife of the astronaut over the cancellation of the
flight. Officials of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration tell
Glenn he must order his wife to admit Johnson to the Glenn home. Rebelliously,
Glenn, portrayed by actor Ed Harris, seizes the telephone and orders his mute
and terror- stricken wife to keep the door locked. Johnson is not to set so much
as one toe in the Glenn home.

Today, 21 years later, Glenn says the depiction was substantially correct.
''There were threats made back and forth,'' he recalls. ''They said word had
been passed that it would be possible that I could be replaced on the flight,
and that really teed me off. I said, 'If you want to call a press conference and
announce that I've been scrubbed off this flight because of this, you call your
press conference and I'll call mine right afterward, and we'll see who comes out
the best.' ''

It was a pivotal moment for Glenn and the space program. Through such
experiences, according to the movie, Glenn and the other astronauts realized
that their fame had become such that they could defy politicians and shape NASA
policy. For Glenn, the incident also provided the tactical model for his later
showdowns with Gilligan and Carter.

Annie Glenn and ''The Right Stuff'' are the two wild cards in this campaign.
Everyone who has been exposed to this remarkable woman and this unusual film
agrees that they could have a strong impact on the 1984 campaign. But no one is
precisely sure how to calibrate that impact.







For months, Glenn fretted privately about the film. His staff sternly rejected
invitations for him to attend the premiere in Washington on Oct. 16. They feared
that he would be satirized or ridiculed as the zealous moralizer depicted in Tom
Wolfe's book of the same title. When the first reviews made it clear that the
movie depicted Glenn as more heroic than puritanical, however, Glenn's advisers
immediately abandoned their strategy of downplaying the film's importance.
''Yes, it can have an impact,'' said William R. Hamilton, Glenn's pollster. But,
he added, analysts are uncertain what it will be. For one thing, the film has
gotten off to a slow start. What's more, the audience of most films today is
mainly among 18-to 24-year-olds whose attendance at the polls is light. Yet many
young people who do vote and upscale white professionals - already identified as
key ''swing constituencies'' by Mondale strategists - may also get to see the
film.

In any case, the movie gave Glenn a burst of favorable publicity at a time when
Mondale was piling up a series of union endorsements and straw-poll victories.
The film also reaffirms the linkage between Glenn and President Kennedy, who,
according to Hamilton's polls, is the most positively remembered former
President, even in conservative states, such as Alabama, where Kennedy was very
unpopular at the time of his death.

The film may also make Annie Glenn, who is already a popular figure in
Washington and a revered one among Glenn campaign workers, a celebrity in her
own right. As the movie brutally but accurately shows, for the first 50 years of
her life, while she was raising their two children, Carolyn and David, Annie
Glenn was the virtual prisoner of a stammer so severe that people sometimes
thought her retarded. But in 1972, she was one of the first patients in a
pioneering speech therapy program at Hollins College in Virginia. Today, she
still remembers the surprise telephone call that she placed to her husband and
children from Hollins as one of the triumphant moments of her life. ''I could
talk!'' Mrs. Glenn exclaimed in an interview. And on the other end of the line,
she recalled, ''John cried.''

So, in a way, the mute and timorous woman portrayed by the actress Mary Jo
Deschanel in ''The Right Stuff'' no longer exists. After a regimen of continued
therapy and daily practice, Mrs. Glenn speaks with a sporadic stammer that is
little inhibition to normal conversation. It becomes more noticeable when she is
tense or speaking without notes, but she is capable of word-perfect recitations
from a prepared text.

It is one of the rules of the Glenn campaign that whenever possible this small,
attractive woman with salt- and-pepper hair travels with the candidate. At all
times, she radiates the joy of someone who has achieved a new life. By doing
that, she has transformed herself from a ghost presence on the fringes of her
husband's life into, as one aide puts it, ''the warmth, the heartbeat'' of the
campaign. She is also being presented as a political asset in the Glenn
campaign's first half-hour television program. Broadcast recently in Iowa, the
program shows Mrs.  Glenn, speaking more haltingly than she does when the camera
is not on her, as she describes her husband's qualities of leadership. Finally,
she says, she knows he cares for handicapped people ''because I am one.''

Annie Glenn's presence in the campaign suggests a depth to Glenn's personality
that is otherwise hard to detect in a man whose history and conversation betray
a strict zero-defects mentality. Even close friends speak of the humanizing
''mystery'' that Glenn would marry someone with so obvious a handicap. ''One of
the reasons I like him so much is his relationship with Annie,'' says a longtime
family friend. ''Here is this macho guy, a test pilot; his whole life was
devoted to perfection, and sure, Annie was gorgeous - but she stuttered. It just
wasn't important to him. He simply loved her.''

Some associates of John Glenn see another advantage that they are reluctant to
discuss publicly. In a general election contest with Reagan, Annie Glenn's image
as a plucky helpmate may be a much more comfortable fit with Middle America than
Nancy Reagan's Rodeo Drive image of queenly indifference.

hold this space

Greg Schneiders had just arrived at his cluttered office in the Hart Senate
Office Building when the telephone rang. Glenn was calling from his condominium
in Vail, Colo. The Senator had earlier told an arms-control group in Iowa that
if the Russians dropped a warning bomb in a remote area of the United States, he
would not respond in kind. Then, a couple of weeks later, Glenn reversed
himself. Now, he was calling Schneiders to ask how the newspapers were playing
his change of position.

''It's not great, but it's no big problem,'' Schneiders told him, fingering a
clipping. ''Whenever you have to make a decision on the spot like that,'' he
added gently, ''you're probably better off using language that supports or
amplifies the original statement, rather than saying, 'I shouldn't have said
it.' ''

It was, given John Glenn's history, a startling conversation. Throughout his
public career, he had never admitted a press secretary to his confidence. Yet,
since hiring Schneiders, a sharp-tongued 36-year-old with an erect, strutting
walk, Glenn had come increasingly to rely on his advice. Regretfully, Mondale
strategists concede that Schneiders has greatly reduced the chances that Glenn
will ''pull a Romney'' - that is, destroy his candidacy with a blunder such as
George Romney's admission that he had been ''brainwashed'' into supporting the
Vietnam War.  But in Greg Schneiders, Glenn had acquired more than a skilled
press aide. In 1976, Schneiders had joined the Carter campaign, in short order
became the candidate's traveling companion and close adviser and stayed on to
join the Carter White House. He brought badly needed national political
experience to Glenn's novice-laden staff.

Like Glenn, Schneiders was a man of conservative instinct. Life in the Carter
White House had left him with a deep distaste for the way in which organized
labor and other interest groups tried to pressure elected officials into
catering to them. To no small degree, he blamed the Democratic factions for
crippling the Carter Presidency. So, in February 1983, shortly after he joined
Glenn's staff, Schneiders wrote a lengthy memo arguing that Glenn could win the
Democratic nomination by defying the conventional wisdom of the party. Instead
of appealing to the various party constituencies and interest groups with a
something-for-everyone approach, Schneiders argued, Glenn should pitch his
campaign to the broader Democratic electorate, to the rank-and-file voters who
make up a group Schneiders called the ''constituency of the whole.''













In his memo, Schneiders wrote that it was a false premise of conventional
political analysis that leaders could deliver the votes of their members. For
example, most polls found that almost half of the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s members voted
for Reagan. Further, Schneiders contended, a majority of interest- group members
were more concerned with the general welfare of the nation than with the agenda
of their specific group.

In short order, Schneiders's ''constituency of the whole'' idea became the
guiding gospel of the Glenn Presidential campaign. Of course, the idea of
pitching a campaign toward the broad mass of voters, with television as the main
vehicle of communication, is a conventional general-election strategy. But
rarely, if ever, has a major candidate begun his primary campaign by adopting
this approach.

The phrase and the political theory it entailed fit perfectly with Glenn's own
deepest inclinations. It made a virtue of Glenn's lack of rapport with
Democratic professionals, activists and interest-group leaders - most of whom
were already pre-empted in any case by Walter Mondale. It provided an elevated
rationale for the Senate record that Glenn had built by following his instincts.
In sum, Schneiders had come up with the context for which the campaign had been
searching.

Glenn was also charmed by the idea because it fit exactly with his experience in
the 1974 Senate race when he won despite the open opposition of labor and the
party leaders.

''That's what I did back home in Ohio when they said they were going to oppose
me. I went to every union hall,'' he recalls. ''I went in and told the fellows
what my views on things were, asked them to compare them with my opponent's.
They didn't have to be led around. They were smart enough to vote their own
consciences and what they thought was important to the future. That's what they
did.''

Still, many politicians regard the ''constituency of the whole'' as a seriously
flawed strategy for a primary campaign. Their opposition to the idea rests on
the arithmetic of the delegate-selection process. Democratic leaders, still
smarting over the nomination of political outsider Jimmy Carter in 1976,
tailored those rules to make it harder for any candidate to win the nomination
simply by building up broad public popularity. The new rules, shaped mainly by
the political allies of Mondale and Ted Kennedy, give party leaders and
Democratic elected officials a bigger say in naming the 1984 nominee.

Thirty-one states and territories, five more than in 1980, will choose their
delegates in party caucuses where highly disciplined cadres such as labor unions
and feminist groups have a good record of delivering the vote for their
candidates.

Of the 3,931 delegates to the 1984 convention, 14 percent will be awarded seats
by virtue of holding elective or party office. These unpledged delegates, plus
the 31 percent chosen in the caucuses, are presumed to be friendly to a
candidate like Mondale who stresses party loyalty. This means that Glenn must do
extremely well in the 26 primaries that select 55 percent of the delegates to
either win the nomination outright or deadlock the convention.

That is why popular appeal is so essential to Glenn's strategy and why anything
that enhances that appeal, such as the ''The Right Stuff,'' is an asset. It is
known that John Glenn, in small crowds, can attract autograph seekers. But to
win the nomination, he must turn the primaries into what his pollster, William
Hamilton, calls ''broad participation events'' in which a surge of voters
overwhelms the blocs lined up for Mondale by unions and similar groups. To get
this kind of turnout, Glenn must carry his popular appeal to a new level. He
must be able to generate the kind of crowd response that John Kennedy did in
1960 and that Ronald Reagan did in 1980, and like those two, he must prove to be
electrifyingly effective on television. Those qualities Glenn has yet to
demonstrate. As for the overall design of the strategy, Hamilton pronounces it
risky but possible. ''John Glenn can win the nomination,'' he says. ''It's not
going to be easy, but it can be done.''

From the outset, Hamilton, media consultant David Sawyer and field director Joe
Grandmaison had doubts about the ''constituency of the whole'' strategy.
Grandmaison insisted on the need for a basic grass-roots organization to
supplement the media campaign by identifying Glenn voters and getting them to
the polls. Sawyer warned Schneiders about ''going too far'' in demonstrating the
campaign's independence. For Glenn, egged on by Schneiders, had seized the
concept as a license to taunt the interest groups. Glenn had to be reined in and
convinced, as one adviser carefully put it, that it was possible to approach
some issues ''with a bit more political sophistication without giving up an inch
of integrity.''

In other words, Glenn began speaking to union groups without reminding them that
he had voted against the common situs bill that would have broadened their right
to picket. And there were other concessions to political necessity. The United
Automobile Workers, a power in Glenn's home state, favored the so-called
''domestic content'' bill that would require most foreign cars sold in this
country to include some American parts and labor. Glenn pronounced himself
opposed to the bill in principle, but signed on as a sponsor on the grounds that
American automakers needed temporary protection.

Finally, under intense pressure from campaign aides worried about Mondale's
growing lead in gaining the political and financial support of Jewish Democrats,
Glenn delivered a series of speeches designed to paper over his past criticisms
of Israel.

It was special-interest politics of a special kind. Glenn had no hope of winning
over the leadership of labor or the major Jewish organizations. But his gestures
were intended to block any effort on their part to portray him as a pariah to
their members.

Aside from this damping of Glenn's instinct to assert his political
independence, the ''constituency of the whole'' theory has remained the
campaign's main strategic dogma. Two weeks ago, Joe Grandmaison resigned in
protest. It was a jarring reminder to Glenn and his staff of just how much of a
gamble they are taking by staking so much on a macropolitical strategy against
Mondale, the master of Democratic micropolitics.

hold this space

There is simply no comparison between the Mondale and Glenn organizations. In
1982, Mondale strategists decided that no candidate could build a personal
organization big enough to handle the ''front-loaded'' primary schedule. In a
period of about three weeks, set to begin in late February, there will be
caucuses and primaries in 23 states. So Mondale sought to graft existing
organizations, such as the A.F.L.-C.I.O. and the National Education Association,
onto his campaign structure.

The A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s endorsement of Mondale represents millions of dollars' worth
of vital volunteer services. In the 1982 Congressional election, the unions
mobilized 145,000 volunteers. The National Education Association, which has also
endorsed Mondale, has promised to provide campaign workers in every
Congressional district in the nation. Micropolitics - the taking of a political
party's bits and pieces and arranging them into a coast-to-coast machine - is a
process of addition, and Mondale has done it extremely well.

He has a similar, if less commanding, advantage when it comes to money. He is
expected to raise $9 million to Glenn's $6 million this year. For the first two
months of the primaries, Mondale's aides project a $6 million war chest. Glenn's
staff optimistically projects a $4 million fund for the same period - and Glenn
adviser Robert Keefe warns that it may not be enough for a media candidacy.
''Money is terribly controlling in Presidential politics,'' he says. ''People
don't lose; they run out of money. You're going to have to have $5 to $7 million
to spend in the first 60 or 80 days of 1984 to be minimally competitive.''

Mondale believes he has other advantages. He has repeatedly stressed his years
in the White House, a suggestion that Glenn lacks the depth of experience and
seasoning needed for the Presidency. Also, Mondale likes to say that he is the
quintessential ''real Democrat.'' As the campaign has heated up in recent weeks,
he has forced a major confrontation over Glenn's party credentials, an area of
real vulnerability for Glenn and one in which he has a record of
less-than-sterling candor.

At a Washington press conference in 1963, for example, Glenn said, ''I have no
political affiliations and have always and do now consider myself an
independent.'' Once he was quoted as classifying himself as a ''conservative
Democrat or a liberal Republican.'' Before announcing for his first Senate race,
Glenn met with the Republican national chairman and other G.O.P. officials and
said he had given ''careful consideration'' to both parties before finally
choosing to join the Democrats. He also said he sometimes voted Republican in
state elections.

Today, Glenn says that he ''was always'' a Democrat and consistently ''voted
Democratic.'' Both his parents, he says, were active Democrats who sometimes
held party meetings in their home.

By flexing its organizational muscle, the Mondale campaign hopes to bulldoze its
way through the primary season. Glenn's approach, by necessity, is more limited.
Even though he has adopted a broad, national strategy, he must hit a very small,
regional target of opportunity in order to stay in the running for the
nomination.

The contest opens with the Iowa caucuses late in February, followed by the first
primary, in New Hampshire. Then come the primaries and caucuses set for March 13
including Glenn's big opportunities in Alabama, Florida and Georgia. Says Bill
White, speaking of the Iowa and New Hampshire contests, ''We can probably come
in second in each of those states - if it's a good second - and be all right.''
But, he adds, ''Going South on March 13, we've got to win something, somewhere.
We can't have Mo Udall's problem and always be second.''

Many analysts believe that Glenn actually needs to sweep the South on ''Super
Tuesday.'' That would underscore his central contention that a traditional
Democratic liberal like Mondale cannot take conservative Sun Belt states away
from Reagan. Conversely, a Mondale victory in, say, Alabama would be a
staggering blow to Glenn. For after the South comes a series of tests in states
such as Illinois, where Mondale's standing with the Cook County Democratic
machine makes him an early favorite. ''If we did not do well in the South on
'Super Tuesday,' I wouldn't say the race was over,'' said another Glenn adviser,
''but we would clearly have to rethink our position.'' In the days since
Grandmaison's resignation, and the elevation of Keefe to a more powerful role,
both the candidate and his senior advisers have shown a sharpened awarenesss of
the need for a minimally competent grass-roots organization in the South and
elsewhere.

Regional popularity polls show Glenn either even with Mondale or slightly ahead.
What would be the impact of a big Glenn victory in the South? Greg Schneiders
believes that Glenn could use it to ''issue a populist call to arms to the mass
of Democrats to take the party back'' from the party leaders who have endorsed
Mondale. His theory: ''If people decide that Glenn would make a better leader
for this country, then no other political force, regardless of being better
organized or having the calendar in its favor, is going to prevail against
them.''

Theoretically, that could carry Glenn to the nomination. Short of that, he could
hope to arrive at San Francisco having proved that he is the popular favorite
and hoping for a deadlocked convention. That would put the nomination in the
hands of the 566 appointed and officially ''uncommitted'' delegates. Mondale is
thought to have the larger following among them, but they also take their cues
from popular sentiment in their home districts. ''It will be a long battle all
the way to the convention,'' White predicts, ''unless one candidate collapses
completely.''

Mondale and Glenn are not the only actors on the stage. The candidacy of the
Rev. Jesse Jackson may greatly enhance Glenn's chances in the South by cutting
into Mondale's support among blacks. Senators Alan Cranston and Gary Hart, along
with former Senator George McGovern, are fragmenting the liberal vote in a way
that hampers Mondale. On the other hand, former Florida Gov. Reubin Askew and
Senator Ernest F. Hollings Jr. of South Carolina are a drag on Glenn, north and
south. Some strategists predict Askew could get 10 percent to 15 percent of the
vote in New Hampshire, luring conservatives who would otherwise probably go to
Glenn.

On balance, conventional political analysis points toward a Mondale nomination
victory. But it is not that simple.

First, the Mondale-Glenn match-up is a test of whether traditional Democratic
campaigns are still viable in a media age. Like a man building the ultimate
catapult just as gunpowder is invented, Mondale has constructed a wonderful
political organization that may, in fact, be an anachronism,

Second, pollsters on both sides have identified the ''leadership for the
future'' issue as pivotal. Neither candidate has been able to put his stamp on
it. Glenn strategists believe that Mondale has played into their hands by
casting himself as the guardian of outworn Democratic policies. However, they
acknowledge that Glenn is in a ''critical definition'' period in which he must
transcend the image of the famous former astronaut and present himself as an
''integrative leadership figure.'' Says David Sawyer, ''As the movie comes out
and public attention is focused on him, it is terribly important to fill in the
gaps.''

Finally, the Mondale-Glenn contest is one between two public personalities, and
it is this aspect of the contest that gives Glenn's promoters in the Washington
political community the greatest hope. The tidal flow of the precampaign year,
they point out, has been in Glenn's favor. He moved from a blip in the polls to
a competitive position, profiting from the fact that Mondale's support seems
driven more by duty than by burning commitment. Throughout his career, one
Democratic Party official observes, Mondale has suffered from a ''passion gap.''
To such people, Mondale seems to offer the party the solid virtues of an
arranged marriage whereas Glenn presents the possibilities - and risks - of a
real romance.

There is one part of John Glenn's basic speech for which he never consults his
note cards. It is the part about war and peace. ''I believe we need a
President,'' Glenn says, ''who understands what it takes to defend this country
and what we must do to keep our country from stumbling into war.'' At this
point, Glenn's voice often thickens a bit with emotion. He speaks of visiting
the ''next of kin,'' and those who know Glenn know that he is probably thinking
of Monte Goodman, a young pilot from Pennsylvania. Goodman was Glenn's wingman
all the way through flight school, and he died in their first combat mission,
knocked down by Japanese antiaircraft fire off Maloelap Island. After the
battle, Glenn and Tom Miller refueled their fighters and searched for hours over
the blue Pacific waters, hoping that Goodman had somehow survived. All they
found was an oil slick. After the war, Glenn went to Harrisburg, Pa., to visit
Monte Goodman's parents.

''I served 23 years in the Marine Corps,'' Glenn continues. ''I served in World
War II and Korea. I don't take a back seat to anyone in my support for a strong
defense. But I know something else out of that background. I do not have to
watch late-night television, watch a movie, to find out what combat is like.''

This line has been in Glenn's speech for months. It is meant to remind audiences
that while Glenn and thousands of other young Americans were at war, Ronald
Reagan was making Army training movies in the safety of Culver City, Calif., and
that in a Glenn-Reagan race, Americans would have a choice between an incumbent
who made movies and a challenger about whom movies are made.

As recently as a year ago, some political oddsmakers believed that Reagan, given
a continued economic upturn, would be unbeatable in 1984. The economy has
continued to improve, but Reagan seems suddenly vulnerable in the foreign-policy
realm. Just as the President's aides launched his re-election campaign, two
events - the Marine massacre in Beirut and the American invasion of Grenada -
created a climate of military crisis that may strengthen Glenn's claim that he
is the Democrats' strongest candidate against Reagan. Now, with flag-draped
coffins being shipped home from foreign battles, Glenn's argument that a
soldier- President would know how to be both firm and restrained has a new
political sting.

Glenn has acknowledged that the military action in Grenada was probably
justified if American civilians on the island were in danger. ''But,'' he added,
''military force should be used only as a last resort and if the President is
right so far on Grenada, he has been wrong on Lebanon for a long time.'' Reagan,
he said, had put the Marines in jeopardy in Lebanon without defining either the
nation's diplomatic goals or a military mission for the troops.

Despite their differences in background and experience, Glenn and Reagan may go
into history as playing very similar roles in the histories of their parties. So
complete is Reagan's command of the Republican political structure that it is
easy to forget that the party establishment fought doggedly to prevent his
nomination, attempting as late as March 1980 to lure President Ford out of
retirement to block Reagan's march to the nomination. But Reagan reached over
the heads of the party leaders, using the medium of television as his main
vehicle of communication. John Glenn, in his way, is following the same course.

Today, the stage is set for a showdown of theories and personalities that may
have a big impact on the future of American campaigns. For some time, the
political parties have been in the twilight of their power as television
challenged their role as main mediator between voters and Presidential
candidates. Confronted by Glenn and his ''constituency of the whole'' candidacy,
Walter Mondale has rallied the Democratic establishment. It is a defining
moment. A Glenn victory in the primaries followed by a Glenn-Reagan general
election contest would strongly suggest that the parties had all but lost their
role as the instruments of candidate selection.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of John Glenn

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AND BEAR IN MIND

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 579 words


The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from about
2,000 bookstores in every region of the United States.  And Bear in Mind

Other recent books that in the opinion of the Book Review staff are of
particular literary, topical or scholarly interest:

THE ANATOMY LESSON, by Philip Roth. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $14.95.) The
concluding novel of Roth's trilogy finds Nathan Zuckerman, the once-triumphant
novelist, middle- aged, out of ideas, emotionally exhausted and living in a
state of chronic pain.

DASHIELL HAMMETT, by Diane Johnson. (Random House, $17.95.) A cool, steady-eyed
and engrossing biography of a writer who is perhaps as much fun to read about as
his most notable creation, the private eye Sam Spade.

THE ENTHUSIAST: A Life of Thornton Wilder, by Gilbert A. Harrison. (Ticknor &
Fields, $19.95.) If Thornton Wilder was a writer who wanted to be known as
Everyone's Uncle, his diligent biographer supplies a good deal of evidence that
the author of ''Our Town'' wasn't the affable Babbitt he made himself out to be.


GENERATIONS: An American Family, by John Egerton. (The University Press of
Kentucky, $19.50.) This affecting account of the Ledfords - Burnam, 102, and his
wife, Addie, 93, of Lancaster, Ky., both old enough to recall people who were
present at the nation's beginnings - reads like a biography of America itself.

IN THE LAND OF ISRAEL, by Amos Oz. (A Helen and Kurt Wolff Book/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $12.95.) The novelist, turning reporter, traveled throughout his
country last fall, interviewing people - mostly Jews but some Arabs - with
passionate and conflicting views of what sort of place Israel should be.

MEDITATIONS IN GREEN, by Stephen Wright. (Charles Scribner's Sons, $14.95.) A
soldier escapes the pain and horror of the Vietnam War through heroin and ten
years later in a hectic, violent American city becomes addicted again, in a
brilliant, scarifying first novel by a writer who served in Vietnam.

MYSTERIES OF MOTION, by Hortense Calisher. (Doubleday & Co., $17.95.) With Earth
being destroyed by its own wastes, 100 citizens board a space shuttle bound for
the first public habitat in space, in an unusual work that is at once a
defiantly risky species of science fiction and a thoroughly realistic
psychological novel.

TURTLE BEACH, by Blanche d'Alpuget. (Simon & Schuster, $14.95.) The first novel
by an Australian journalist to appear in America is set in a troubled and
changing Malaysia, and its author clearly knows how it smells and feels and how
its people, both Western and Eastern, think. An auspicious American debut.

VANESSA BELL, by Frances Spalding. (Ticknor & Fields, $22.95.) This biography
takes Virginia Woolf's elder sister from the shadow of Woolf's greater fame to
establish her identity as a remarkable and appealing woman and a gifted painter.


VARNISHED BRASS: The Decade After Serpico, by Barbara Gelb. (Doubleday & Co.,
$16.95.) A rare look at the secretive upper echelons of the New York Police
Department by a writer who was accorded extraordinary access to the machinery of
command decision.

VITA: The Life of Vita Sackville-West, by Victoria Glendinning. (Alfred A.
Knopf, $17.95.) A biography of the writer to whom Virginia Woolf dedicated
''Orlando.'' If the author cannot make this arrogant, selfish woman attractive,
she can - and does - make her vivid and memorable.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 769 words


142

PET SEMATARY, by Stephen King. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The new family in town
discovers the horrors that lie in a neighboring cemetery.  2111

POLAND, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) Seven centuries of history
in fictional form.  3210

CHANGES, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) The crises that arise when a
television anchorwoman and a glamorous physician fall in love.  4321

THE NAME OF THE ROSE, by Umberto Eco. (Helen & Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $15.95.) Unraveling the mystery of a murder in a 14th-century
Italian monastery.  5515

HOLLYWOOD WIVES, by Jackie Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The struggle for
money and power in Tinsel Town.  678

THE AUERBACH WILL, by Stephen Birmingham. (Little, Brown, $16.95.) Three
generations of a German-Jewish family in New York.  7611

WHO KILLED THE ROBINS FAMILY?, created by Bill Adler and written by Thomas
Chastain. (Morrow, $9.95.) The publisher offers a $10,000 prize to the reader
who submits the best answer.  8118

WINTER'S TALE, by Mark Helprin. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $14.95.) Heroic
lives in Manhattan between the late 19th century and the year 2000.  9139

MONIMBO, by Robert Moss and Arnaud de Borchgrave. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.)
What happens after Castro unveils a plan to stir racial tension in the United
States.  10914

AUGUST, by Judith Rossner. (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95.) The five-year
relationship of two women, a teen-age patient and her analyst.  11108

EVERYTHING AND MORE, by Jacqueline Briskin. (Putnam, $15.95.) Life after Beverly
Hills High School: the careers of four women.  121423

RETURN OF THE JEDI, adapted by Joan D. Vinge. (Random House, $6.95.) Illustrated
storybook based on the latest ''Star Wars'' film.  13 34

THE LITTLE DRUMMER GIRL, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $15.95.) A British actress
caught between agents of Israeli intelligence and of the Palestine Liberation
Organization.  141232

CHRISTINE, by Stephen King. (Viking, $16.95.) A car that kills is at large among
a Pennsylvania town's high school set.  151529

HEARTBURN, by Nora Ephron. (Knopf, $11.95.) A roman a clef about a marriage
breaking up.


 NONFICTION 118

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck.  (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  2244

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J. Peters and Robert H.  Waterman Jr. (Harper
& Row, $19.95.) Lessons to be learned from well-run American corporations.  3453


MEGATRENDS, by John Naisbitt. (Warner, $17.50.) Predictions about America in the
next decade based on an analysis of conditions today.

4611

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $17.95.) The rescue of two
Americans from an Iranian prison.  579

THE BEST OF JAMES HERRIOT.  (St. Martin's Press, $19.95.) Selections from the
writings of the Yorkshire veterinarian.  655

THE MARY KAY GUIDE TO BEAUTY.  (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) An illustrated guide
for women prepared by the staff of a cosmetic firm.  736

THE BODY PRINCIPAL, by Victoria Principal. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Exercises
for women by a television personality.  887

FATAL VISION, by Joe McGinniss. (Putnam, $17.95.) The case of Jeffrey MacDonald,
Ivy League graduate, respected physician and convicted killer of his wife and
daughters.  997

THE PETER PAN SYNDROME, by Dan Kiley. (Dodd, Mead, $15.95.) A psychologist's
analysis of the plight of men who have never grown up.  10124

VIETNAM: A History, by Stanley Karnow. (Viking, $19.95.) Profusely illustrated
history of the war: tie-in with the current PBS television series.  11107

OUTRAGEOUS ACTS AND EVERYDAY REBELLIONS, by Gloria Steinem. (Holt, Rinehart &
Winston, $14.95.) Essays by a leading feminist writer.  121125

CREATING WEALTH, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) Making money in
real estate.  13 1

A HERO FOR OUR TIMES, by Ralph G. Martin. (Macmillan, $19.95.) An anecdotal
account of the Kennedy years.  14152

TOUGH TIMES NEVER LAST, BUT TOUGH PEOPLE DO!  by Robert H.  Schuller. (Thomas
Nelson, $12.95.) Inspiration from a Protestant preacher.  151359

THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson. (Morrow, $15.)
How to increase the productivity of those with whom you work, as well as your
own.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 753 words

DATELINE: MASS MARKET Mass market paperbacks are soft


-cover books sold at newsstands, variety stores and supermarkets, as well as in
bookstores. This listing is based on computer-processed reports from bookstores
and representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 outlets across the United
States.

1

MISTRAL'S DAUGHTER, by Judith Krantz. (Bantam, $4.50.) The art world of the 20's
and the fashion business of the 80's: fiction.

2

SPACE, by James A. Michener. (Fawcett/Crest, $4.95.) The space program: fiction.

3

FOUNDATION'S EDGE, by Isaac Asimov. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $3.95.) The struggle to
keep civilization alive in a crumbling empire: fiction.

4

HEART OF THUNDER, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $3.95.) A headstrong beauty and an
arrogant outlaw in the Old West: fiction.

5

THE VALLEY OF HORSES, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $3.95.) A fictional saga of
human survival at the dawn of civilization.

6

A CRY IN THE NIGHT, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Dell, $3.95.) A newly rewed woman is
haunted by her past: fiction.

7

THE RIGHT STUFF, by Tom Wolfe. (Bantam, $3.95.) America's first manned space
program, recalled in high style: movie tie-in.

8

AND MORE BY ANDY ROONEY, by Andrew A. Rooney. (Warner, $3.95.) Essays by the
columnist and television commentator.

9

MASTER OF THE GAME, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $3.95.) The secret behind a
woman business tycoon's rise to power: fiction.  10

SECOND HEAVEN, by Judith Guest. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Love in various forms heals
three battered people: fiction.

11

LIFE SENTENCES, by Elizabeth Forsythe Hailey. (Dell, $3.95.) The bonds that tie
three classmates through the years: fiction.

12

THE CLAN OF THE CAVE BEAR, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $3.95.) The beginning of
the saga continued in ''The Valley of Horses.''

13

THE 13TH VALLEY, by John M. Del Vecchio. (Bantam, $3.95.) The war in Vietnam:
fiction.

14

LIFE, THE UNIVERSE AND EVERYTHING, by Douglas Adams. (Pocket, $3.50.) Concluding
volume in a trek through the galaxies: fiction.

15

THE OTHER WOMAN, by Joy Fielding. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) A woman's challenging
discovery on her fourth wedding anniversary: fiction.

 TRADE Trade paperbacks are soft-cover books usually sold in bookstores and at
an average price higher than mass market paperbacks. This listing is based on
computer-processed reports from about 2,000 bookstores in every region of the
United States .

1

THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson. (Berkley,
$6.95.) How to increase your productivity.

2

GARFIELD SITS AROUND THE HOUSE, by Jim Davis. (Ballantine, $4.95.) Cartoon
humor.

3

THE COLOR PURPLE, by Alice Walker. (Pocket/Washington Square Press, $5.95.)
Black men and women in the South: fiction.

4

GROWING UP, by Russell Baker. (NAL/Plume, $5.95.) The New York Times columnist
recalls his boyhood and youth.

5

COLOR ME BEAUTIFUL, by Carole Jackson. (Ballantine, $8.95.) Beauty tips for
women.

6

GARFIELD ON THE TOWN, by Jim Davis and Lorenzo Music. (Ballantine, $4.95.)
Cartoon humor.

7

CALDER BORN, CALDER BRED, by Janet Dailey. (Pocket, $6.95.) Conclusion of a
romantic saga of the American West.

8

LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo F. Buscaglia. (Fawcett, $5.95.) Inspirational
talks by a California professor.

9

THURSTON HOUSE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $7.95.) Three generations of a wealthy
San Francisco family: fiction.

10

BLOOM COUNTY, by Berke Breathed. (Little, Brown, $6.95.) Cartoon humor.

11

THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (S&S/Touchstone, $7.95.) Psychological
and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.

12

MORE ITEMS FROM OUR CATALOG, by Alfred Gingold. (Avon, 4.95.)

 A second spoof of the L. L. Bean catalogue.

13

WHAT COLOR IS YOUR PARACHUTE?  by Richard Nelson Bolles. (Ten Speed Press,
$7.95.) Guide for job hunters and career changers.

14

LIFE EXTENSION, by Durk Pearson and Sandy Shaw. (Warner, $10.95.) How to add
years to your life and life to your years.

15

THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $4.95.) Philosophical humor.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GASTON GOES TO TOKYO

BYLINE: By Alan Cheuse

SECTION: Section 7; Page 13, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1059 words


WONDERFUL FOOL

By Shusaku Endo.  Translated by Francis Mathy.  237 pp. New York: Kodansha
International/Harper & Row. $13.95.


''WONDERFUL FOOL,'' only now appearing in translation in this country, was
available in England nine years ago; actually, it was one of Shusaku Endo's
earliest novels, published in Japan in 1959. But Mr. Endo's American readers
have been given an odd notion of his career right along. ''Silence,'' the
historical novel that has been his best-known work in the United States until
now, was published in Japan in 1969 but not in an English translation until
1979. A gap of 21 years stands between Mr. Endo's other 1959 novel, ''Volcano,''
and its English translation. ''The Samurai,'' another historical novel of great
intensity, seems to be Mr. Endo's only work to get from Japanese to English
quickly; it

Alan Cheuse is the author of ''The Bohemians,'' a novel, and ''Candace & Other
Stories.'' was published in Tokyo in 1980 and in London and New York in 1982.

At least as prolific as those modern Japanese novelists whose work has been more
regularly published in this country, Mr. Endo, a French-educated convert to
Roman Catholicism, didn't seem to make any headway at all with the Western
reading public until Graham Greene praised his fiction - and suddenly he could
be sold as ''the Japanese Graham Greene.'' There's nothing new about such
cross-cultural reductionism, but Mr. Endo's readers soon discover how inexact
any comparison is.

In ''Wonderful Fool,'' the Western reader, like the Catholic missionaries who
arrived in Japan in the 16th century to convert the Japanese to their faith, may
at first find a lot of material that can be fitted into familiar paradigms.
Gaston Bonaparte, a hulking, horsefaced Frenchman, a former seminarian and the
''wonderful fool'' of the title, certainly plays a role we've seen before - the
innocent, virginal, redemptive and even Christ-like interloper who appears in
the midst of a decadent but probably salvageable society. Gaston, the longtime
pen pal of a young Tokyo clerk named Takamori, arrives by ship in postwar Japan
to visit him and his sassy sister, Tomoe. Life is never the same for these
polite but befuddled siblings or a number of other characters, including a
French-educated hit man suffering from the last stages of tuberculosis, whom the
novelist ironically names ''Endo''; an avaricious land surveyor from the north
called Kobayashi, who, as it turns out, is a war criminal with a great deal to
hide; and even a stray dog the gentle Frenchman adopts.

Gaston slowly discovers his true motive for traveling fourth class on the good
French ship Vietnam to the distant country he has known only through Takamori's
letters. And while he's floundering in the vastness of Tokyo, sometimes in the
company of his host and hostess, sometimes with his dog or alone, he becomes a
vehicle for the novelist's satirical presentation of Westernized Japanese
society. Whether he is in a car, the streets, a neighborhood restaurant, a
brothel on the seamy side of town or a pachinko parlor, where rowdy young
customers play a sort of horizontal pinball game, Gaston gives Mr. Endo a chance
to present the ordinary from a fresh and often comic point of view. Tomoe, for
example, thinks that the foreign visitor might enjoy a cafe that specializes,
the author tells us, ''in a kind of ersatz French atmosphere,'' a place where
Japanese Francophiles gather, ''berets on their heads and French books tucked
under their arms . . . to sigh over French chansons.''

As even this brief moment in Gaston's tour suggests, those of us who have no
reading knowledge of Japanese can still enjoy the gawky pilgrim's progress
against the backdrop of modern Japan in Francis Mathy's translation. But to read
the novel as a sort of ''Gulliver's Travels,'' as a reader who goes through it
too quickly might, would be to surrender to the lazy impulse of a tourist for
whom the foreign must be rationalized and thus rendered harmless. Once Gaston
becomes familiar with the strange country he is visiting, this mysteriously
resonant novel reveals there are more things in Mr. Endo's fiction than Western
philosophy or even the author's Catholicism can immediately explain.

We begin to get an inkling of this while Gaston roams the streets of the
nighttime city, his gaze switching back and forth between the stars above and
the passing crowds, yearning somehow to do something to alleviate the ''many
misfortunes and hardships and causes for grief scattered about the earth.'' Then
he runs into Endo the gunman, a former classmate of Takamori's, who kidnaps him
to use in an assassination plot with personal as well as historical dimensions
and who is then stalked by Gaston, who goes along with the plot to try to foil
it. In a narrative of great charm and intensity, the gunman heads north to the
Tohoku region, ''open country'' as opposed to the cramped spaces of the city,
and we follow him to the castle city of Yamagata, a place ''of ancient camphor
trees and the remains of old stone walls covered with moss, and old houses
reminiscent of the samurai houses of former ages.''


AT this point the novel itself becomes ''open country,'' its overt themes - the
dialectic between East and West, Shintoism and Catholicism, tradition and
modernity - continuing to unfold against the broad horizon evoked by its violent
climax in the Big Swamp outside Yamagata. Here, legend has it, a samurai named
Fujigoro quieted the waters stirred up by a dragon god and rescued a maiden who
had appeared to him in a dream. And here Gaston, the Frenchman with the as yet
to be realized vocation, thwarts the evil intentions of several lesser human
beings and wins the affection of the fickle Tomoe. ('' 'Wonderful fool!' Tomoe
had exclaimed the night before. . . . She repeated the words to herself now. She
wondered if she had been wrong in her critical estimation of men.'') Then he
disappears from the swamp, possibly transformed into a lonely egret, ''flying
across the rice fields, and slowly and gracefully climbing into the blue sky.''

As his books - whose range includes Eastern and Western, ancient and modern,
moral and mythic themes and scenes - become better known, Mr. Endo's reputation
in this country ought to soar as well.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FICTION IN BRIEF

BYLINE: By Joe Klein

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 340 words


DELCORSO'S GALLERY

By Philip Caputo.  352 pp. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.  $15.95.


Philip Caputo has written a celebrated memoir (''A Rumor of War'') and a novel
about the meaningless horror of modern war (''Horn of Africa''). He works the
same territory again in his new novel, ''DelCorso's Gallery.''

Nicholas DelCorso, a Vietnam veteran turned combat photographer, wants to show
the public the true face of war. It has become an obsession with him, an
attempted expiation of a momentary sin of callousness, a crusade that seems
inexplicable and tasteless to P. X. Dunlop, his former mentor. Dunlop has won
Pulitzer Prizes for his artful portraits of dignity and sacrifice on the
battlefield, but he is having trouble finding either in the squalid collapse of
South Vietnam or in Beirut during the Lebanese civil war.

With bemused revulsion, he watches DelCorso photographing mangled corpses. Their
rivalry, the emotional center of this book, reaches its climax in Beirut, a
place so awful that even the professional action junkies, the war
correspondents, have difficulty sustaining their macho existential pose. In one
particularly haunting scene, Dunlop watches two Christian Maronite gunmen
attempting to pick off a Moslem sniper on a balcony; the ''sniper'' turns out to
be a woman taking her clothes off the line. Of course, they kill her anyway; she
is Moslem.

Mr. Caputo writes with all the subtlety of a punch to the gut, but his
descriptions of combat photographers and correspondents at work are right on the
money. Like his hero, though, the author seems far more comfortable in ravaged
Beirut than in the putatively civilized professional world of New York. His
attempt to describe DelCorso's marriage to a cool Irish- American aristocrat
isn't nearly so compelling as the battle sequences. Mr. Caputo remains very much
a Marine - a bit awkward when it comes to domesticity and philosophizing but a
tiger in the field.

Joe Klein is the author of Woody Guthrie: A life.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 14, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

TRAIL IN WOUNDING OF 2 POLICEMEN AT BLACK WAKE OPENS TODAY

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1034 words

DATELINE: MONTGOMERY, Ala.


In February, in an incident that sharply increased racial tensions in this city,
a white police officer was shot and another knifed in a bizarre clash with black
mourners at a wake.

On Monday, the first of four black men from Michigan and Ohio charged in the
case are to go on trial here before Judge Randall Thomas in Montgomery County
Circuit Court.

Like the other defendants, whose trial dates have not yet been set, Worrie
Taylor of Warren, Ohio, 49 years old, is accused of attempting to kill the two
plainclothes policemen. He is also accused, in separate counts, of robbery and
kidnapping.

In a statement just after the Todd Road fight, as it has become known locally,
Police Chief Charles Swindall said that the two officers were ''beaten and
tortured'' by people he described as behaving ''in a manner of wild animals.''

It Was First of 4 Clashes

It was the first of four bloody fights between blacks and the police early this
year. In separate clashes after the Todd Road melee, two black men were killed
by bullets fired by police officers, including a black Vietnam veteran who was
shot by a black policewoman.

In another incident, a police officer shot in the back and wounded a black he
mistook for a robbery fugitive.

Black leaders say the incidents have contributed to a worsening of racial
relations in this city of 190,000 people known not only as the cradle of the
Confederacy, but also as the birthplace of the modern civil rights movement.

It was here, in 1955, that Rosa Lee Parks, a black woman, refused to give up her
seat on a city bus to a white man, precipitating a yearlong boycott of public
transit by blacks and the emergence of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.

U.S. Inquiry Is Urged

Local black leaders called this fall for a Justice Department investigation of
the police, and have gone so far as to request Federal troops to protect blacks
from the Montgomery Police Department.

Many whites, in turn, argue that the city's racial tensions have been overblown.
''The polarization is not between the black and white community,'' said Jess
Griffin, who ran the successful re-election campaign last month of Mayor Emory
Folmer, a conservative who has strongly defended the Police Department's
actions. ''The polarization comes from some of the leadership in the black
community, who are trying to use this situation for personal political gain.''

When the trial opens, prosecutors will argue that Mr. Taylor and the other
defendants savagely attacked and beat the two policemen after they followed a
suspect into a home where 30 men, women and children had gathered from out of
state for the funeral of a relative, Annie Bell Taylor,

One police officer, Leslie Brown, was shot once in the chest and once in the
left hip as he fled the house in a poor rural area near Montgomery. He is still
recuperating.

Other Has Returned to Duty

The other, Edward B. Spivey, was slashed across the throat and needed 75
stitches in his neck, hands and head. He has since returned to duty.

Defense lawyers concede that blacks in the house fought with the two men, but
argue that the people in the house did not know that the pair who burst in on
them with drawn pistols were police officers. The sides disagree whether the
policemen identified themselves.

The defense lawyers will also argue that Officer Brown was not shot by any of
the defendants, but was probably wounded as a result of gunfire from police
officers outside the home.

The other defendants awaiting trial are William James Taylor Sr., 47, and Larry
Gene Hill, 28, of Pontiac, Mich., and Elbert Taylor, 51, of Warren, Ohio.

The authorities are also seeking the extradition from Michigan of a fifth man,
Christopher Columbus Taylor, 21, who has been indicted on a charge of
kidnapping.

Six other people arrested in the incident were not formally charged.

Questions About Evidence

As the trial nears, there have been questions raised about the way the police
have handled both the suspects and the evidence in the case, leading defense
lawyers and some blacks here to accuse the police department of a cover-up.

''In all my years here I've never seen a case like this in terms of the total
effort by police to manufacture, suppress and distort evidence, and to silence
and intimidate witnesses,'' said Solomon Seay Jr., a Montgomery lawyer for 26
years and one of three lawyers representing the defendants.  Last month, in
response to a motion by Mr. Seay, Judge Thomas removed from the record remarks
made to the police by three suspects, including Worrie Taylor. The judge acted
on the basis of evidence that the defendants had been beaten by police officers
after their arrest.

In addition, blacks here have been suspicious of claims by the police that they
have lost or do not have evidence that defense laywers say is crucial.

For example, the police say they cannot find or have lost one of the four
pistols carried by the two policemen at the time of the incident. The police
argue that Officer Brown was shot with a weapon wrested from one of the two
officers.

Bullet Does Not Match Weapon

Since a bullet recovered from Mr. Brown does not match any of the three weapons
now in evidence, defense lawyers insist that the prosecution produce the fourth
pistol and prove it was the weapon that wounded Officer Brown. Otherwise, there
is no proof that he was shot by one of the defendants.

Moreover, if the missing pistol did fire the bullet that wounded Officer Brown,
defense lawyers say this would reinforce their assertion that the police officer
was likely wounded by a shot fired by one of the police officers who surrounded
the house during the fight.

The police deny this.

In addition, the police said that because of an equipment malfunction, they do
not have tape recordings of any telephone calls made to the Police Department
dispatcher on the night of the event.

Defense lawyers say that one of the people in the house called for help on the
night of the event, a point that they say underscores their argument that the
people in the home did not realize the two armed men were police officers.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Worrie Taylor

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 14, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ROCKEFELLERS RESTYLE FUND FOR THE 1980'S

BYLINE: By KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1465 words


The Rockefeller Brothers Fund, one of the country's wealthiest foundations, has
adopted a ''strategy for the 80's'' to accommodate the interests and style of a
fourth generation of Rockefellers.

The fund, with assets last year of $165 million, will also continue many of the
philanthropic undertakings on which it has spent $300 million over the years.

The plan was contained in a report adopted unanimously by the trustees of the
foundation. The Manhattan-based fund has been the main vehicle for the
Rockefeller family's charitable activities since it was set up in 1940 by the
five sons of John D. Rockefeller Jr., joined later by his daughter.

In the ranks of the 23 Rockefeller ''cousins,'' as they are called, are some men
and women who are environmentalists, who marched in anti-Vietnam War
demonstrations, worked in poor urban neighborhoods and give a share of their
wealth to efforts to halt the nuclear arms race.

A 'One World' Perspective

''This is a family statement,'' 42-year-old David Rockefeller Jr. said of the
report, which was drafted by a committee of family and nonfamily trustees he
led.

The report recommends that the foundation take a ''one world'' perspective and
focus on issues of resources and global ''security,'' including arms control,
international relations, economic development and trade and finance.

William M. Dietel, president of the fund, estimated that it would spend about $6
million a year, or three-fourths of its budget, on projects concerned with
security or resources and would be looking to other foundations for
''partners.''

Although the specific projects will not be determined for several months, Mr.
Dietel cited as an example of the fund's future activities the continued
financing of World Watch, a Washington-based research organization whose studies
have called attention to dangerously dwindling resources.

Knowledge of Other Cultures

Another official said the foundation would seek ways of improving Americans'
knowledge about other cultures.

''We see around the world trends of resources depletion, militarization,
protectionism and isolation that threaten to move us further away from the
cooperation, trade and economic growth, arms restraint and conservation,'' the
committee said in advocating the new course.

''In these circumstances, a primary objective of an independent philanthropic
foundation must be to contribute ideas, develop leaders and encourage
institutions that will make the transition to global interdependence,'' it said.

In preparing the strategy report, the committee called on dozens of experts and
invited close collaboration with the cousins who participated and also replied
to questionnaires about their priorities - most underscored security and
conservation and human rights.

The move to engage the younger generation in planning was initiated 18 months
ago by David Rockefeller Sr., who at 68 is the only active board member left
from the foundation's founders.

Four of the others - John D. Rockefeller 3d, former Vice President Nelson A.
Rockefeller, Winthrop Rockefeller and Abby Rockefeller Mauze died in the past
decade - and the sixth, Laurance S. Rockefeller, has become a trustee emeritus
since reaching the mandatory retirement age of 72.  The attitude of the younger
members toward the family philanthropy has changed from earlier years when a
number insisted on pursuing an independent course, David Rockefeller Jr. said.



Pressures Differ by Generation

''There is no way that our generation would have been interested in working on
the Brothers Fund 20 years ago because it really belonged in a very real sense
to the brothers' generation and was an outgrowth of their personal giving,'' he
said.

Mr. Rockefeller's father does not disagree but said, ''pressures differ in each
generation.'' He also argued that the key issues preoccupying the younger
Rockefellers were also basic concerns of the founding members. ''We were not
afraid to deal with controversial or difficult issues,'' he said.

But he is ''comfortable'' with the committee's conclusions, he said, and regards
the recommended emphasis on ''security'' matters as probably its newest element.
''I would not have been comfortable if the report advocated some kind of
unilateral nuclear disarmament but it does not.''

The arms question is important to all family members, said David Rockefeller Jr.


Whether to Support Activism

''The questions which would have different answers from my generation, I'm
certain, would be, do you support activist interventions?'' he said. ''Do you
work through the political process or do you work through the more intellectual
channel, mostly through universities and so-called arms-controllers? Do you work
on the United States alone, bilaterally or multilaterally? These are questions
around which we would come up with different answers.'' David Rockefeller Jr.
also pointed out that family members have a number of options for making their
philanthropic imprint: working within the Brothers Fund, or through the
Rockefeller Family Fund, a much smaller foundation set up in 1967 by the
''cousins,'' which has concentrated on urban problems, conservation and the
women's movement, or by individual giving from their substantial fortunes.

''We're not pretending to be inventing anything, but I think we are hoping to
participate in a philanthropic response to issues which are being raised now
with a new sense of urgency,'' said David Rockefeller Jr. ''Frankly, I think
this response has been quite slow to come.''

He said the committee hoped for increased financial support for the Brothers
Fund from family or nonfamily members, noting, ''There is so much enthusiasm
about what we are trying to do on the one hand and also recognition that our
assets are not adequate to the task.''

More Contact With Recipients

He anticipates a change in the foundation's style as well as redirection, with
more frequent meetings between the younger trustees and grant recipients than in
the past. Among the cousins, he said, there is a heightened sense of ''direct
proprietorship and shared ownership.''

The style of the third generation ''uncles'' reflected their greater visibility
and leadership in well-defined areas, said Abby M. O'Neill, a daughter of Mrs.
Mauze and the first of the ''cousins'' generation to serve on the foundation
board and who is seen consequently as ''bridging'' the two groups.

The older generation members were deeply involved in chosen fields, said Mrs.
O'Neill, who referred, for example, to Laurance Rockefeller as ''Mr.
Conservation'' and to John D. Rockefeller 3d as ''Mr. Population.''

''The younger Rockefellers have worked in socially different ways at a lower
level which has given them a different perspective but one that is no less
important,'' she said. ''Everybody sees the 'cousins' rather obviously as a
group,'' she said, ''but we are as unstereotyped as a group can be. We may not
agree with each other, but the unifying elements are a sense of family,
affection and the respect we have for each other's independence.''

Gifts to Major Institutions

The grant-making by the Brothers Fund in the past decade has included a number
of large gifts to major institutions in which one or more of the founding
members had particular interest.

In 1973, after the death of Winthrop Rockefeller, the surviving brothers
initiated a review that led over the decade to the foundation's disposing of
nearly $100 million, or almost half its assets, in major capital grants to
insure the future of more than 20 institutions and causes. The recipients
included Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, Rockefeller University,
Colonial Williamsburg, the Museum of Modern Art and the Population Council. But
the dispersal of assets also precipitated a controversy over the issue of how
much control family members should exercise. This prompted John Gardner to
resign from the board after complaining nonfamily members seem to be regarded as
advisers to the brothers rather than as trustees.

The incident created an impression of controversy which belied the customary
unity in which the foundation operated. It was a ''flash in the pan,'' said
David Rockefeller Sr.

The new report reiterates that the goal of the Brothers Fund is to ''help
realize the shared ideals of the Rockefeller family.'' But in its preparation,
there was no distinction between the proposals made by Rockefellers or by
outsiders, according to Peter C. Goldmark Jr., a trustee of the foundation.

''I don't know of another foundation that would have produced a bolder
statement. But there's a difference between writing and doing, and we're all
painfully aware of it.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 15, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW SCENE IN THE CITY: A 'VILLAGE' RECORD SHOP

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 864 words


In a city where daily life often takes on theatrical overtones, where department
stores, bookstores and delicatessens are transformed into events, one of the
latest stage settings is a three-story, neon-lighted, pulsating,
raspberry-and-black-walled record store in Greenwich Village.

''This place is like central casting,'' said Will Friedwald, a salesman at Tower
Records on Broadway, ''People hang out here. Instead of going to the movies,
they say, 'Let's go to Tower.' ''

Tower shows its own movies, along with MTV, the all-rock cable-television
channel, on 17 large video screens. The scene at what is billed as the world's
largest record store is continual, 365 days a year, from 9 A.M. to midnight.

There is the usual leather-jacket, leather-pants and punk-haircut crowd, along
with men and women in mink coats and teen-agers wearing multiple Menudo buttons.
Celebrity sightings are frequent. Yannick Noah, the French tennis player, was in
last week. Joe Jackson, the rock star, regularly visits the classical
department.



Import From the Coast

Some 6,000 customers visit Tower on a Saturday or Sunday, store employees say. A
number of the visitors wear sunglasses, an affectation that brings an
appropriate California touch to what is the first East Coast branch of the West
Coast Tower Records chain.

Mr. Friedwald, singing along with an Ella Fitzgerald album playing in the
nostalgia and show tunes department one recent evening, did not miss a beat when
a customer asked, ''Do you have anything by Human Sexual Response?''

''Downstairs,'' directed Mr. Friedwald.

While acquainted with such pop groups as Human Sexual Response, Mr. Friedwald,
who professes a longing at the age of 22 to fall in love, prefers singers from
another, more romantic era. The proud owner of 200 Bing Crosby albums, he said:

Soon to Be Expanded

''I used to be vehemently anti-rock- and-roll. I used to blame it for everything
that was wrong with my life. Now I accept its existence.''

The bins of the store's 16 departments are filled with 500,000 records and
tapes, from Frank Sinatra to the Smurfs and from the Rolling Stones to Ronald
Reagan on radio. The discount stock is huge. One can buy records from Tahiti and
Vietnam, an entire album of whale sounds and any number of self-improvement
cassettes, including one called ''Relationship Reprogramming.''

The musical variety brings all kinds of people together in Tower's
soon-to-be-expanded 25,000-square- foot space. Most of the members of an
accountants' touch-football team were shopping on a recent weekend afternoon,
still in sweat pants and sneakers, straight from their 8-to-6 victory over a
team of lawyers in Central Park.

''We're celebrating with mass purchasing,'' said one of the accountants, Ken
Golden, 24, from Queens.

A couple of 9-year-olds from Red Hook, N.Y., browsed knowledgeably through the
Bob Dylan albums on the main floor, where the Rolling Stones' latest album,
''Lust for Life,'' was reverberating.

'I Think We're Addicted'

Upstairs, in the more sedate classical division, Gene Gaudette, a salesman with
an undergraduate degree in composition, was telling a customer, ''Brahms was
probably the foremost composer from the 19th century.''

Louise Buxhoeveden, a retired secretary, and her husband, Alexander, were
spending a pleasant afternoon among the bins of classical records.

''I think we're addicted,'' Mrs. Buxhoeveden said. ''It's a good thing it's
music instead of dope, isn't it?''

Unexpected encounters and conversations are part of the experience at Tower, at
692 Broadway, at Fourth Street.

Three young men who were looking for Betty Boop albums were wearing on their
lapels small, smiling men that appeared to have been cut out of rubber. The
material turned out to be sponge neoprene, the preferred medium of one of the
three, a 23-year- old artist named Michael Bartalos.

Impromptu Verdi Aria

''I was rummaging through Canal Rubber one day, and I said, 'This is it, this is
it!' '' Mr. Bartalos said. ''It's really beautiful to touch.'' Mr. Bartalos said
he generally gave his sponge neoprene men smiles. ''They're all happy,'' he
said. ''I'm a happy guy.''

One of Tower's most impassioned regulars must surely be George Martynuk, who
says he can easily spend five hours in the store. The classical department
seemed a fitting place for Mr. Martynuk to tell the story of his odyssey 10
years ago from the small northeastern Pennsylvania town of Olyphant to New York.
He was 20 and wanted to be an opera singer. For his audition at Juilliard, he
selected one of Verdi's most difficult arias.

''They told me I wasn't good enough then, but that I should try again,'' he
said. ''I took this as the last rejection.''

After a stint selling records at Sam Goody's, Mr. Martynuk found his current
job, in the public-relations department of a construction company.

As if to demonstrate his heart remained elsewhere, Mr. Martynuk suddenly began
singing, in a strong, clear baritone, a few bars of the same Verdi aria that had
been his downfall at Juilliard. It being Tower Records, no one paid him any
attention.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Tower Record store

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 15, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Charlotte Curtis Excluding the Media

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 822 words


JOHN CHANCELLOR scrapped his announced speech at New York University the other
night and, in view of the situation in Grenada, discussed and deplored the
exclusion of the news media from covering the invasion and the fighting. What
troubled him, he said, was not just the ban but that many Americans cheered it.

''Things get dangerous when the government takes unto itself the function of
informing the public,'' he said. ''It is dangerous because every government
likes to put its best face forward, and because no government likes to admit its
mistakes. When your friendly government press agent, military or civilian, is
your only source of information, you have to be worried.''

Mr. Chancellor, a news commentator for NBC News and a former anchorman, said a
free society is defined in part by the freedom of its press, and though it is
''imperfect, contradictory and inefficient,'' it ''is infinitely preferable to a
flow of information which comes solely from the government.''

He said in banning the press the Reagan Administration's dubious accomplishment
was ''to keep the deaths off television,'' decreasing their visual impact upon
the American public and reducing the deaths to statistics. In effect, he was
arguing that Americans have a right to see the horrors of war, regardless of how
it affects them, and that it was just such horrors, rather than television's
reporting of them, that ultimately turned the nation against the Vietnam war.

''One pool reporter, just one,'' he said, ''would have preserved this honorable
American tradition.''

When he finished, the crowd of 450 students, faculty, guests and journalists
applauded long and hard, gathering around him to shake his hand. Clearly, their
attitudes toward the media are somewhat different from those many citizens
across the nation who have been doing the cheering and writing in support of the
Administration. As part of his presentation, Mr. Chancellor quoted excerpts from
letters favoring the ban. He said they were among the 500 letters and phone
calls that flooded NBC after he criticized the Administration's position on the
Oct. 26 Nightly News program.

The letters, he said later, ran 5 to 1 against his commentary, and the network
was ''besieged'' with phone calls. ''The assumption that the public is on the
side of the press is wrong,'' he added. ''There has always been criticism of the
press, back to the days of Jefferson. But this is different. Now, the attitude
seems to be, 'Who invited you?' ''

The occasion was the fourth annual Chet Huntley Memorial Lecture honoring the
late NBC newsman, and it has become something of an event at N.Y.U. Before the
speech, John Brademas, president of the university, gave a dinner in the Elmer
Holmes Bobst Library, inviting campus people and an array of what Mr.
Chancellor would later affectionately describe as ''media barons, press lords
and nattering nabobs of negativism.''

Guests had cocktails in Dr. Brademas's spacious office overlooking rainy
Washington Square 12 floors below, and then had dinner at lavender and purple
tables in an adjacent conference room. The color scheme, said Dr. Mary Ellen
Brademas, the president's wife, derived from N.Y.U.'s colors: purple and white.
The university's nickname for its athletic teams, she noted, is the Violets.

Theodore H. White, author and political analyst, was there, noting that the
problem with the 1984 presidential campaign so far was that no major theme had
emerged. Pat Bradshaw, whose husband, Thornton, is chairman of the RCA
Corporation, NBC's parent company, said the clutter on Dr. Brademas's desk made
her feel at home. ''You should have seen it before I straightened it up,'' Dr.
Brademas replied.

The president had Tippy Huntley Conrad, Mr. Huntley's widow, on his right and
Barbara Chancellor on his left. Laurence A. Tisch, chairman of Loews Corporation
and N.Y.U.'s board of trustees; Henry Anatole Grunwald, editor in chief of Time,
Inc.; Harry Reasoner of CBS's ''60 Minutes;'' Mr. Bradshaw and Harold Levine of
Levine, Huntley, Schmidt and Beaver, the advertising agency Mr. Huntley helped
organize, were among the other guests. After dinner, Dr. Brademas directed
everyone to the auditorium where Mr. Chancellor was to speak.

''When you leave the building,'' he said, ''turn left, and this is not a
political statement.''

The auditorium was packed despite the weather. Tom Brokaw arrived at the last
minute, stuffing his Burberry raincoat beneath his seat just as Dr. Brademas
started up to the platform. The president was especially proud, he said, that
N.Y.U. was the lecture's home and he thanked the sponsors who made the evening
possible. He also introduced Elizabeth Drew, The New Yorker magazine's
Washington correspondent, who said there were two requirements for being a
journalist: ''Zest for knowing what's going on, and character,'' and that Mr.
Chancellor, whom she presented, had them both.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 15, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SCIENCE WATCH

SECTION: Section C; Page 4, Column 4; Science Desk

LENGTH: 200 words


Agent Orange Placebo

Properly designed scientific studies nearly always include a placebo, or
control, group to objectively assess the effects of extraneous influences, such
as the subjects' belief that a drug will help them. A study by two University of
Minnesota psychologists graphically demonstrates the importance of applying this
research principle to studies that attempt to measure the ill effects of
environmental exposures.

Dr. Gregory P. Korgeski and Dr. Gloria R. Leon found that Vietnam veterans who
believed they had been exposed to the toxic defoliant Agent Orange were more
likely to say they had such psychological problems as depression, anxiety and
interpersonal difficulties than veterans who did not think they were exposed.
However, when the veterans were evaluated according to their actual, rather than
presumed, exposure to the chemical, no difference was found in the incidence of
psychological symptoms. This was so even though those actually exposed to the
defoliant suffered from more medical problems, especially digestive and skin
disorders.The findings also suggest that worry about exposure to a known hazard
can be sufficiently stressful to produce symptoms.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 16, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

42 Vietnamese Escape

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 53 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia, Nov. 15


Forty-two Vietnamese refugees arrived in a fishing boat at an oil rig 24 miles
off the coast of Malaysia today. The National News Agency quoted what it called
informed sources as saying that the ''boat people,'' half of them children,
landed at 8 A.M. About 10,000 Vietnamese refugees are now in Malaysia.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 16, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PENTAGON;
FOR NEW COMMANDERS, A KEY WORD IS CAUTION

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1296 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 15


The changing of the guard among the top commanders of United States military
forces is all but complete.

Within the last five years, most of the four-star generals and admirals who
spent their formative military years in World War II have retired. Among the
five members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, only the chairman, Gen. John W.
Vessey Jr. of Army, fought in that war.

Replacing them is a new generation of commanders whose early military experience
was in the era of the Korean War and who fought in Vietnam as middle-ranking
officers. From those conflicts, and from more than three decades of watching the
world's nuclear arsenals grow steadily, they seem to have acquired a cautious
attitude about military power and leadership.

Pentagon officials say the Joint Chiefs told President Reagan they were
reluctant to send marines to Lebanon and were hestitant to invade Grenada
because the operation was hastily planned with insufficient intelligence. They
have urged the President to avoid seeking a military solution to economic and
political problems in Central America.

In drills where senior civilian officials and military officers act out
conflicts, Gen. Charles A. Gabriel, the Air Force Chief of Staff and one of the
new guard, reports that the civilians are the most hawkish. ''I think you'll
find today in all the war games we run,'' he said, ''that the military are by
far the more cautious of any of the players. The civilians are more aggressive
than the military when it comes to playing a scenario involving escalation.''

The Lesson of Vietnam

The Korean and Vietnam Wars seem to have had a special impact on the new
military leadership. ''Probably the most important lesson to come out of those
wars, especially Vietnam,'' said General Gabriel, ''is that we never should
fight a war that we don't intend to win.''

The new generation, which possesses not only its share of combat medals but also
a notable number of advanced university degrees, is led by the four service
chiefs, all products of the early 1950's. Adm. James D. Watkins, Chief of Naval
Operations, was graduated from the Naval Academy in 1949. General Gabriel and
Gen. John A. Wickham Jr., the Army Chief of Staff, were graduated from West
Point in 1950, days before the Korean War started. Gen. P. X. Kelley, Commandant
of the Marine Corps, was graduated from Villanova University that same year and
was commissioned in 1951.

Among the 29 other full generals and admirals who lead armies, fleets, air
forces and unified commands with troops from all services, only Gen. Bernard W.
Rogers of the Army, who heads United States forces in Europe, was an officer in
World War II.

In marked contrast are the military commanders of the Soviet Union, most of whom
are 15 years older than the Americans and had their main military experience in
World War II.  General Gabriel's counterpart, Chief Marshal of Aviation Pavel S.
Kutakhov, flew 367 missions in that war while Admiral of the Fleet Sergei G.
Gorshkov became a naval officer in 1931 and has led the Soviet Navy since 1956.

Nuclear Threat Cited

Compared with their predecessors, the new American commanders also tend to avoid
the public eye, unlike the flamboyant George Pattons, Curtis Lemays, ''Bull''
Halseys, and ''Chesty'' Pullers of yesteryear. But it is their chary approach to
the use of military force that most marks them.

General Gabriel, the first of his service's chiefs to go directly into the Air
Force rather than into the old Army Air Corps, suggests that the tremendous
destructive power of nuclear weapons is one explanation. ''You have to be very
careful that whatever it is that you're recommending doesn't right away risk a
sudden escalation,'' he said.

General Vessey has cautioned against deploying military forces as political
instruments. ''I think one has to think through very carefully putting American
troops in any kind of an operation where we're using them as a political
lever,'' he said recently. ''Certainly, I would urge caution in any such
operation.''

The end of the draft changed the nature of military leadership, even though the
Air Force has always been a volunteer service, General Gabriel said. Until 1973,
when the all-volunteer force began, many young men enlisted in the Air Force to
escape the infantry.

A Call for Sensitivity

Today, with better-educated, questioning young people enlisting, General Gabriel
said, ''you just can't have the same authoritarian approaches with these kids
that we've had in the past.''

''The people who we have in the service today are here because they want to
be,'' he added. ''I think that makes a difference. I think you have to treat
them with sensitivity. You just don't give an order and expect it to be carried
out without some understanding by the troops of what it is you're trying to
do.''

Jet aircraft have helped change military leadership because generals in
Washington can easily go to see troops, General Gabriel said. ''I don't see just
those that they serve up,'' he said. ''I talk to the guy who turns the wrench.'

Of his visits to the Air Force Academy in Colorado, General Gabriel said: ''They
really hit you with the gut questions. Right off the bat, they get to the heart
of things.'' In responding to the cadets, he said, ''you're going to have to
convince them that you know what you're talking about and what you're asking
them to do is the right thing.''

Moreover, the ease of communications produces more feedback from the field. ''I
think we have an open, two-way channel to the troops,'' the general said. But
the news is not all good. ''Unfortunately,'' he said, ''whenever there's a
foul-up, I'll see some of it.''



Emphasis on Education

The new generation of top military commanders is well educated. They have
experienced command in both war and peace and have won combat decorations. They
have served as staff officers, managers and, in many cases, as aides to senior
officers where they had an early taste for life at the top.

Of the 34 four-star officers, 33 are college graduates. Only Gen. Billy M.
Minter, commander of United States Air Forces in Europe, made it to the top
without a college degree. But he is a graduate of the Air War College, his
service's senior school.

Beyond that, 26 of the four-star officers, including General Gabriel, hold
master's degrees. General Wickham earned two master's degrees at Harvard. Adm.
William J. Crowe holds a master's degree from Stanford, another from Princeton
and a doctorate from Princeton.

As a fighter pilot, General Gabriel flew 100 combat missions in Korea and 152
more over Vietnam. He led a tactical reconnaissance wing in Vietnam and was
commander of United States Air Forces in Europe. His decorations include five
Distinguished Flying Crosses and two Legions of Merit.

Concern for Public Support

As a lieutenant colonel, he was a planning officer in the Pentagon; as a
colonel, an assistant to a senior general in Europe, and as a major general, the
deputy chief of staff for operations for the Tactical Air Command at Langley Air
Force Base in Virginia.

The new commanders appear to thirst for the public support their predecessors
enjoyed, but seem uncertain about how to earn it.

General Gabriel noted that ''we lost the support of the people'' because the war
in Vietnam was dragged out. ''And when you lose the support of the people for an
operation,'' he said, ''the military suffers.''

''Americans will back a logical and just use of military power, as we have
clearly seen in the recent operation in Grenada,'' he added. ''But they resent
seeing their sons and loved ones sent into battle with one and sometimes both
hands tied behind their backs.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gen. Charles A. Gabriel

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 16, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

COMMITTEE CELEBRATES 50 YEARS OF AIDING REFUGEES

BYLINE: By KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1043 words


For half a century, refugees uprooted by war or fleeing from religious, racial
or political persecution have been helped by the International Rescue Committee
to find safety and make a new start in the United States and other countries.

The organization celebrated its 50th anniversary last night at a dinner at the
Sheraton Centre. Vice President Bush was among the guests at the affair, which
was co-sponsored by Lane Kirkland, president of the A.F.L.- C.I.O., and two
prominent citizens who arrived here as refugees, former Secretary of State Henry
A. Kissinger and Felix G. Rohatyn, the investment banker who is head of the
Municipal Assistance Corporation.

Despite the festivities, the group's leaders were concerned about the increasing
numbers of refugees who continue to live in squalid camps in Thailand, Hong
Kong, Pakistan, the Sudan and elsewhere.

''Compassion fatigue'' is spreading, said Charles Sternberg, executive director
of the committee. He has worked with refugees since he fled Czechoslavakia to
escape the Nazis.

Fewer Admitted by U.S.

''Such a term may be a cliche,'' he said, ''but in more and more countries, the
readiness to assist and receive refugees is diminishing. It is not just in the
United States, it is a universal phenomenon.''

This year, 60,000 refugees were admitted to the United States, compared with
97,355 last year and 159,252 in 1981.

From the committee's unpretentious office in midtown, Mr. Sternberg supervises
centers in in 15 countries in addition to a dozen in the United States.

He said he saw an alarming trend toward more repressive governments that would
further swell the tide of individuals seeking escape. A United Nations report
recently estimated the worldwide refugee population at 10 million.

Reluctance Seen Increasing

''As conditions get bloodier and conflicts more acute, refugees have to run,''
Mr. Sternberg said.

Governments troubled by economic difficulty and unemployment are increasingly
reluctant to take in refugees, he observed. As a consequence, many countries are
discouraging immigration. In Asia, many refugees are confined to closed camps
under prisonlike conditions, denied a chance to work and penalized if they
sought jobs, he said.

''A policy of 'humane deterrence' has become widely adopted which is seldom
humane but seeks to keep refugees where they are by making the only alternative
detention in a closed camp,'' he said.

The committee recently received an unpublished United Nations report describing
several camps in West Germany that ''painted a picture of neglect, deprivation
and antirefugee animus which makes life close to intolerable for
asylum-seekers,'' he said.

Concerned With 'Boat People'

More shocking, Mr. Sternberg added, was the unchecked piracy against refugees
fleeing Vietnam in small boats. ''The response to these repeated acts of
violence, killing, robbing and raping has been tepid,'' he said, ''and no real
effort made to stop it.''

Four years ago, the world was aroused when the ''boat people'' were pushed back
to the sea, he recalled. ''But there are still boat people,'' he said. ''They
still drown; yet not much attention is paid to them.''

There have been many such frustrations during the committee's 50 years, Mr.
Sternberg said. The organization was founded shortly after the Nazis came to
power in Germany, when Albert Einstein asked a small group of Americans to
assist Germans suffering under Hitler.

The committee expanded its activities with each demand for assistance, helping
first the victims of the Nazis and then those fleeing from Soviet- dominated
countries.

Aided by U.N. and U.S.

The organization was in the forefront of efforts to resettle Hungarians in 1956
and Czechoslovaks in 1968. In 1960, when Fidel Castro came to power, the
committee helped resettle thousands of Cubans. It also aided refugees from
Greece, Uganda, Iran and China.

Last year, it provided health care for 200,000 Afghan refugees, helped hundreds
of Polish emigrants and arranged processing in Thailand for Indochinese heading
for this country.

Most of the group's work is financed under contracts with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the United States Government.
It also depends on foundations and individuals for its budget, which totaled
$10.8 million this year, $3.7 from private sources.

Mr. Sternberg said it was difficult to give the total of refugees resettled over
five decades, because ''we are oriented toward the present.''

Early Days Downtown

The records of field activities fill dozens of file cabinets in his office.
There are no archives, but many of the dramatic events are captured in an
anniversary yearbook, ''Escape to Freedom,'' by Aaron Levenstein, a retired
professor at Baruch College and volunteer worker for the committee.

He relates how, in the early days of World War II, the committee was organized
in a little room in the offices of the The Nation magazine, overlooking Trinity
Church. From there, the group's staff made the contacts that helped many
anti-Nazis evade the Gestapo.

Mr. Sternberg, 72 years old, is reticent about his own role, but recalled the
''heroic phase'' after France fell, when committee members operated at personal
risk. ''These were the days of false passports, clandestine border crossings and
all the rest,'' he said.

The escape of celebrities received the most attention, but it was not an elitist
operation, Mr. Sternberg said. ''The life of a worker or a farmer, a mother or a
child is no less important than a famous man,'' he explained. ''But a Marc
Chagall evokes more public recognition than a John Q. Worker.''

Testifying before a Senate subcommittee last year, Mr. Sternberg appealed
against a rigid interpretation of immigration laws that had led to a high
rejection rate of Vietnamese applicants.

He cited an American official who denied entry to a Vietnamese mother,
suggesting she had sent her two small children ahead on a dangerous boat trip
across the South China Sea to use them as ''anchors'' in seeking admission.
Under eased guidelines, the Vietnamese mother has since been admitted and
reunited with her children.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of refugees

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 17, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET LOOKS BACK WITH NOSTALGIA ON HALF-CENTURY OF U.S. RELATIONS

BYLINE: By SERGE SCHMEMANN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 958 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Nov. 16


The Soviet Union marked 50 years of diplomatic relations with the United States
today with bleak appraisals of the present situation and wistful evocations of a
time when Americans were respected models, allies and almost friends.

The nostalgia seemed to betray a lingering admiration and sense of affinity that
have survived the decades of rivalry and tension.

(In Washington, the State Department marked the occasion by pledging to seek a
constructive relationship, but saying that there was ''the honest question of
whether the Soviet Union is as committed to peace as we are.'' Page A10.)

The Moscow commemorations recalled Franklin D. Roosevelt and John F. Kennedy,
the World War II alliance and the meeting of Soviet and American soldiers on the
Elbe River, the beginings of detente and the 1975 Apollo- Soyuz rendezvous in
space as golden moments of the past. in a fading past.

But there was a sense in interviews and articles on this anniversary that
relations had returned to point zero. Commentators focused on President Reagan's
depiction of the Soviet Union as an ''evil empire.''

Georgi A. Arbatov, the Soviet expert on American affairs, said in an interview
that Mr. Reagan had undertaken a ''campaign of demonization, of dehumanization
of the other side,'' that added a perilous element to any crisis.

This perception was not limited to official spokesmen. Roy A. Medvedev, the
dissident historian, said Mr. Reagan had ''stepped over the boundaries of
rhetoric and onto the level of policy'' when he labeled the Soviet Union an
empire of evil.

''That was not criticism, but a direct insult,'' Mr. Medvedev said. ''How can
Andropov meet with Reagan after a statement like that?''

Still, the anniversary was a time to remember better days, whether real or
imagined.

''I remember the impression of childhood - I was 12 at the time - when the name
Bullitt was one of the best known American names,'' said Mr. Arbatov, referring
to William C. Bullitt, the first United States Ambassador. ''We perceived the
establishment of relations with the United States as a major event.''

But disputes about Czarist Russia's debt, the distrust and isolation of
foreigners, the terror under Stalin, the difficulties of doing business with the
Russians, the compulsive secrecy, the surveillance, censorship and all the other
repressive features of Soviet society soon soured American attitudes.

By 1936, Mr. Bullitt's dispatches took a tone that has since marked the attitude
of many Americans who have lived in the Soviet Union.

''This is the best school in which to Americanize our countrymen perhaps there
can be found,'' the envoy wrote, summing up a long list of grievances. ''No
nation has more need of foreigners, and none is so jealous of them.''

But beyond his personal disillusionment, Mr. Bullitt also took note of the
admiration for Americans that coexisted then, as now, with the suspiciousness
and envy.

''These remarks have no special reference to Americans,'' he wrote. ''On the
contrary, Americans rank as high here as any other people.''

In another dispatch, he said:

''Above all, we should guard the reputation of Americans for businesslike
efficiency, sincerity and straightforwardness.''

''Businesslike efficiency,'' for which the Russian word is ''delovitost,'' has
remained a trait most often associated with the United States and its people.

''For us, American 'delovitost' has become almost proverbial,'' Mr. Arbatov
wrote in an article on Soviet-American relations.

Mr. Medvedev, the dissident historian, agreed.

''Russians have always had huge respect for the United States,'' he said. ''In
the early days, 'imperialism' was associated with Britain, France and Japan, and
the United States was a distant economic giant in which we saw no threat, but
rather a model to be emulated.''

The admiration found its apex during World War II. For Russians who remember the
war, the high points were the lend-lease aid that the United States sent to the
Soviet Union and the Allied landing in Normandy in 1944.

''I clearly remember the opening of the Second Front,'' Mr. Arbatov said. ''I
was in a hospital after being wounded, and the opening of the Second Front was
like a major battle won.''

Mr. Medvedev, recalling the flow of American aid in 1942, said:

''Relations were at their height. There was genuine good feeling among people,
bordering on gratitude. I was a boy, and the Germans were moving east. They had
seized the Ukraine, Byelorussia, the Northern Caucasus. I was in Georgia, and
felt the threat. And suddenly American Studebaker trucks began arriving, big,
heavy trucks moving north, and we felt genuine strength on the move, a strength
that would change things.''

No American President was to match Franklin D. Roosevelt in Soviet estimation.
Mr. Arbatov recalls:

''I was a first-year student at the Institute of International Relations in
April 1945. The geography professor entered and asked us all to rise. A great
man has died, he said, and we wish that his death will not harm our relations.''

George F. Kennan, the former ambassador, speaks in his memoirs of a spontaneous
demonstration of ''almost delirious friendship'' held by 200,000 people outside
the American Embassy on Victory Day in May 1945.

Relations plunged into the cold war as Stalin made contacts with foreigners
dangerous and anti-Communist sentiment swept the United States.

Only one other President was able to capture the Soviet imagination to any
degree comparable with Mr. Roosevelt, and that was John F. Kennedy.

The record of subsequent relations is one of alternating highs and lows, marked
by the Vietnam War, the Soviet-led invasion of Czechoslovakia, the strategic
arms accords, Afghanistan.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 17, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MANY BOYCOTT HERZOG SPEECH

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 318 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Nov. 16


Some 70 countries were absent when President Chaim Herzog of Israel addressed
the General Assembly this morning. The absentees included virtually all the
Communist countries; the Arab countries, except Egypt, and many countries
espousing nonalignment.

Most of the absent delegates simply did not attend the session, though several
Arab represenatives, including Algeria, Iraq, Libya and Syria walked out of the
Assembly hall as Mr. Herzog was coming to the podium to speak.

An Israeli spokesman, whose delegation here made note of the representatives who
were not present at today's session, said that some delegations commonly miss
General Assembly meetings and that the absence of those countries should not be
seen as an anti-Israeli gesture.

It has been a common practice for many years here for a large group of countries
to boycott Israeli appearances before the General Assembly.

According to a list prepared by the Israeli Consulate, the members that did not
attend today's session included Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Benin, Botswana, Bulgaria, Burundi, Byelorussia, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, China, Comoro Islands, Congo, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, East Germany,
Ethiopia, Gabon and Gambia.

Also not present were Ghana, Grenada, Equatorial Guinea, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Laos, Lebanon,
Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan and Poland.

Others were Qatar, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Somalia, Southern Yemen, Soviet Union, the Sudan, Suriname, Syria,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, the Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, Upper
Volta, Vanuatu, Vietnam, Yemen and Zimbabwe.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of President Herzog (page A1); photo of Iraqi delegation members
leaving meeting (page A1)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 17, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

TV: STREISAND WORLD

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 27, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 484 words

DATELINE: THE assumption behind Geraldo Rivera's one


-hour interview with Barbra Streisand on ''20/20'' tonight is that we all share
the same insights, the same knowledge and the same sympathetic understanding of
Miss Streisand. The contradiction is that she is not interviewed very often,
either on television or in print, and so we know her only as an entertainer, or
in what we pick up now and then in the gossip columns. No matter. On ''20/20''
tonight, at 10 o'clock on ABC-TV, Geraldo, Barbra, you and I - we are en
famille.

Actually, it's not a bad atmosphere for an interview. Miss Streisand is guarded,
but not aloof, and Mr. Rivera is ever so pleased to be talking to her. Still,
because we're all pals Mr. Rivera doesn't think some questions are worth asking,
or some things worth explaining.


Early on, for example, he calls Miss Streisand ''one of the most controversial
figures in Hollywood.'' Maybe she is, but for heaven's sake why? Did she go to
Hanoi with Jane Fonda? Did she play No"el Coward the way Elizabeth Taylor did?
Or is ''20/ 20'' just getting excited?  Or, after Miss Streisand says that Judy
Garland once called her and said, ''Don't let them do to you what they did to
me,'' Mr. Rivera just nods. But who's ''they'' and what did they do? You may
well ask that; Mr. Rivera won't. Maybe he doesn't know, either.

However, he does ask, ''What about Pierre Trudeau?'' - a man you may think of
only as a Canadian politician. ''You mean you want to know about my love life?''
Miss Streisand answers. (She does this with great charm.) But the matter is
dropped right there, which is probably just as well, because only minutes later
Mr. Rivera is talking to Jon Peters. ''Are you prepared to let Barbra go?'' he
asks. ''No,'' Mr. Peters says. That gets dropped, too.


Meanwhile, ''Yentl,'' the film that Miss Streisand has directed, produced and
starred in, winds in and out of the program. The film opens tomorrow, and
granted that Miss Streisand has seized on the interview as a way of publicizing
''Yentl,'' some scenes of her at work on the film make up the best part of
''20/20.''

This is because she is a professional, and what professionals do, not what they
are, is what makes them interesting. We see Miss Streisand in a studio, for
example, supervising the mix, the electronic transcription, of a song. ''Is
Barbra the creative tyrant she's been cast as, or is she a perfectionist?'' Mr.
Rivera asks when he introduces the segment. But certainly that's not the point.

The point is that it's a fine thing to watch a professional at work. Miss
Streisand seems terribly intent on getting the mix right, and when the result
pleases her, she glows; she is beautiful. ''20/20'' says it took well over a
year to put together the program about Miss Streisand, and that Mr. Rivera had
to travel 25,000 miles to do it. Better he had just hung around the recording
studio and watched Miss Streisand for an hour.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MONDALE-GLENN ARMS DEBATE TERMED 'IRRELEVANT' BY HART

BYLINE: By PHIL GAILEY

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 527 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 17


Senator Gary Hart of Colorado entered the political debate over national
military policy today, asserting that former Vice President Walter F. Mondale
and Senator John Glenn of Ohio were engaging in an ''irrevelant'' argument over
the past. All three are contenders for the Democratic Presidential nomination.

In a foreign policy speech to students at Georgetown University here, Mr. Hart
sought to use the latest clash between Mr. Mondale and Mr. Glenn over military
spending to underscore his contention that neither candidate had anything new to
offer on this issue.

''One candidate says the other has opposed too many major weapons systems, has
not offered any positive defense policy and therefore doesn't deserve the
nomination,'' Mr. Hart said. ''The other candidate says the first has opposed
arms control agreements, voted for nerve gas, given the Pentagon a blank check
and therefore doesn't deserve the nomination.''

Pausing, Mr. Hart observed, ''I say they are both right.''

Dispute on Issue Erupts

Today's speech had been scheduled for several weeks, but Mr. Hart reworked parts
of it in an effort to exploit the political fight that erupted earlier this week
between the two leading candidates at a policy forum sponsored by conservative
Democrats.

Mr. Glenn accused Mr. Mondale of ''a fundamental lack of support for an adequate
defense.'' Mr. Mondale counterattacked by charging that Mr. Glenn was an ''out
of step'' Democrat who offered the Pentagon ''a blank check.''

Mr. Hart contended that neither Mr. Mondale nor Mr. Glenn offered any real
alternatives to President Reagan's policy. ''Neither offers this country a
positive foreign policy alternative to Ronald Reagan's dangerous and
destabilizing philosophy,'' Mr. Hart asserted to the applause of his young
audience. ''Neither candidate has proposed comprehensive and detailed plans to
reform our military structure to provide the most effective defense, not the
most expensive.''

Approach on Military Outlays

Mr. Hart said he would emphasize modernization of conventional forces over new
weapons systems that ''glitter with technological complexity.'' He has called
for a 4 percent annual growth rate in military spending.

''Since Vietnam,'' he added, ''our discussions of defense have been monetary
rather than military. We have argued, and we're still arguing, about how much to
spend, with conservatives generally saying spend more and liberals generally
saying spend less. How much to spend is the wrong question. The right question
is how to build an effective defense at a cost that won't bankrupt the
country.''

In Iowa on Wednesday, another contender for the nomination, former Senator
George McGovern, said Mr. Mondale and Mr. Glenn differed from Mr. Reagan only in
the percentage of increase in military spending each had proposed.

''If you want a 10 percent increase in military spending every year, vote for
Ronald Reagan,'' Mr. McGovern said. ''If you want a 7 percent increase, vote for
Glenn. If you want a 5 percent increase, vote for Walter Mondale. But if you
want a 25 percent decrease, vote for George McGovern.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
SITTING IN JUDGMENT

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 811 words

DATELINE: UNIONDALE, L.I., Nov. 17


Two weeks ago, before the first Federal District Court hearing in the Baby Jane
Doe case got underway, Judge Leonard D. Wexler said he wanted the lawyers to
know that President Reagan recently appointed him to the bench.  He asked if
that made a difference, and the lawyers said it did not.  The 59-year-old
judge's decision to mention the President, particularly since the case was
brought by the Administration, surprised none of his friends.

''He likes to get to the point,'' said Bernard Meyer, his law partner for 27
years and a close friend. ''He is nobody's man.''

Mr. Wexler was regarded as one of Suffolk County's top criminal lawyers when he
was nominated last May by Mr. Reagan for the lifetime judicial post.

During his more than 30 years of practicing law, he represented clients in
nearly 2,500 jury trials, mostly criminal cases. He has represented an array of
public officials, including county leaders and members of the House of
Representatives.

'What You Think Is Right'

In an interview, the judge said the transition from lawyer to judge had been an
easy one. ''You don't have the problems of the office, of your clients,'' he
said. ''You just do what you think is right.''

He said he considered the Baby Jane Doe case ''an extraordinary one, a case of
great challenge.''

''I think the founders of our Constitution were brilliant in making a Federal
judge a lifetime position,'' he said. ''There is no pressure on me as to what
others may think of the outcome. It's my decision and I have to live with it. I
don't care what others may think and that is what I consider to be total
freedom.''

The judge is so new to the bench - he was sworn in last June - that he is yet to
have an office or a direct telehone line in the Federal courthouse here. His
temporary quarters are in what was once the grand-jury room.

Judge Wexler, who rarely speaks above a whisper, said he had been working until
8 P.M. or 9 P.M. every day on the case, which he said he suspected might reach
the United States Supreme Court.

Leonard Davis Wexler was born in Brooklyn on Nov. 11, 1924, 15 years after his
parents came to the United States from Russia. His father worked in the garment
district. The youngster attended public schools and graduated from Thomas
Jefferson High School in Brooklyn in 1943.

World War II interrupted his schooling. He was sent to Germany, where he served
in an antitank battalion. He was wounded in action in Germany, and was awarded
two Bronze Star Medals. He was discharged in 1945.



'Didn't Want the City Life' He was graduated from Indiana University with a
Bachelor of Science degree in 1948. Two years later he was awarded a law degree
from New York University Law School.

''I liked Indiana,'' he said. ''And I didn't want the city life. So I moved to
Suffolk County.'' He joined a small law firm in Bay Shore.

After seven years, he formed a firm, Weismann, Meyer & Wexler of Smithtown. The
firm changed its name in 1965 to Meyer & Wexler.

In Mr. Wexler's varied law career, he was the first civilian lawyer to defend a
soldier in Vietnam on a charge of murdering a civilian. The soldier, who lived
on Long Island, was convicted and sentenced to serve one year in prison in the
United States.

In the mid-70's, he represented policemen, firemen and railroad employees who
claimed the right under the Constitution to wear their hair at a length of their
choice.

What Judge Wexler brings to the bench, his associates say, is a quick mind, a
perceptive, analytical approach to solving problems and the ability to get to
the heart of an issue.



'Great Common Sense'

''He is innovative, insightful and has great common sense,'' said Henry G.
Wenzel, a former Suffolk County District Attorney and a friend of the judge for
30 years ''He thinks for himself. He is very independent.''

Mr. Wenzel and Mr. Wexler met in the early 50's, when both were young lawyers
starting out in practice in Bay Shore. At the time, Suffolk County was mostly
farm land. Both settled in Islip, where they still live.

Mr. Wenzel recalled that Mr. Wexler had formed an organization called the Young
Attorneys. ''We met from time to time and tried to help each other get to know
the county, which was foreign to us,'' Mr. Wenzel said.  ''And we did what all
lawyers do: we picked each other's brains.''

Mr. Wexler married his wife, Barbara, in 1953. They have three grown children -
Allison, Robert and William.

The Wexlers live in a house on the Great South Bay. Judge Wexler's hobbies are
sailing and European travel.

Talking of his European trips, he said, ''I like to rent a car, put on a pair of
jeans and a sweater and just drive along the countryside.''

Or, his friends say, he can spend hours, sitting on a sailboat in the Great
South Bay, smoking his pipe, caught in thought.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Judge Leonard D. Wexler

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 19, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

TV: 'KENNEDY, 'FIRST OF A 3-PART SERIES ON NBC

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 51, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 950 words


''Kennedy'' is an imitation of history. It is not really a re-rendering, and
there is not much monkeying around with what we know really happened. When the
three-part, seven-hour re- enactment takes a point of view, it's personal, not
political, and this doesn't so much deepen our insights as it does reawaken our
memories. We supply the interpretation ourselves because ''Kennedy'' is
something like a montage of old newspaper headlines: great events stand out, but
the details are buried somewhere beneath. The first episode, three hours long,
will be shown on NBC-TV tomorrow night at 8 o'clock, with two- hour programs at
9 Monday and Tuesday nights.

''Kennedy,'' of course, is about John F. Kennedy. It opens on the day he died,
20 years ago next Tuesday, moves back quickly to Election Night 1960, and ends
in Parkland General Hospital in Dallas. In between are the 1,000 days of his
Administration, along with a cloud of actors playing the major and minor figures
of the time.

Consequently, part of the entertainment is simply identifying the characters who
tumble in and out of the seven hours. The actor playing Peter Lawford sits on
the stairs of the house in Hyannisport, Mass., on Election Night. He has lost
his luggage; he has forgotten to vote. He is not seen again in the series.
Edward M. Kennedy, who is hardly seen after the first episode, either, says of
the election, ''What's dad going to say if we've blown it?''


Elsewhere we see the Kennedy parents, sisters, colleagues and friends. We do not
have to be told who they are; we know. Care has gone into the casting. Actors,
helped along by makeup, hair style and costume, resemble the people they are
playing. Our memory banks open up. We do not have to be told that the woman who
falls into the pool at a big party is Ethel Kennedy. Viewers of a certain age
remember when it happened.

Much of ''Kennedy'' looks like big picture spreads from Life magazine. Some of
the tableau, in fact, seems to have been lifted almost intact from back issues.
''Kennedy,'' which will be seen in 27 countries, has aimed in a way at the
lowest common denominator - the things we all recall.

It makes it hard, one supposes, on the actors. They have to play against
remembered history. We superimpose our own recollections on their performances,
and the stronger the recollection the more difficult it is for the performance
to break through. The Rev. Martin Luther King Jr., for example, shows up to give
his ''I have a dream'' speech, but the actor playing him has the rhythm and
cadence all wrong. In our memory, the original drowns out what we hear on the
screen.

As John Kennedy, Martin Sheen carries the heaviest burden of all. He does not
resemble Mr. Kennedy, but he must play out remembered public scenes. He is
credible, although there is no aftertaste to his performance.  Blair Brown, who
looks astonishingly like Jacqueline Kennedy, does better, probably because she
can work up more of the character. Mrs. Kennedy's image was celebrated, but it
was also vaporous. Miss Brown creates a person.

Winding through the seven hours of the series, meanwhile, is J. Edgar Hoover. If
Mrs. Kennedy's persona was indistinct, just beyond our grasp, his was
nonexistent. He had no public personality, only a name and a reputation.
Therefore, Vincent Gardenia, who plays Hoover, and Reg Gadney, the British
scriptwriter, and Jim Goddard, the British director, could create almost anyone
they wanted. Their Hoover is a capo Mafioso with sexual problems. He is meant to
be malevolent, but he is mostly low comedy and high camp.

Quite unintentionally then, he is the most memorable figure in ''Kennedy.''
''The Kennedy weakness is sex,'' he says when we meet him. In fact, he is never
off the topic. He is the foil on which ''Kennedy'' can suggest that the
President played around, but without suggesting anything distasteful. This
Hoover, after all, gets his information from peeping through keyholes. That
minimizes anything John Kennedy might ever have done.

''Motels,'' Hoover-Gardenia says, for example, are ''homes of disease, rape,
murder, thievery, illicit relations.'' He says he'll never allow John Kennedy to
turn the White House into a motel. The corners of Hoover- Gardenia's mouth turn
down; his eyes are afire; shadows darken his face. You can imagine what he
dreams about at night, but you'd really rather not know.


Most of the characters in ''Kennedy,'' however, come off pretty well. Lyndon B.
Johnson may get his; he is seen as a rube and a warmonger. Richard Bissell of
the Central Intelligence Agency appears as a slightly lunatic bookkeeper. But
almost everyone else is blessed with charm or strength or both. E. G. Marshall
makes Joseph Kennedy Sr. into a family man, full of sentiment. Geraldine
Fitzgerald, even without the dialogue to work with, turns Rose Kennedy into a
believable matriarch. Her innocence is touched with indomitability. The motif is
Camelot, but not soupily so.

It is a picture of an idealistic but tough-minded Administration, run by
attractive people. A glimpse of the Inaugural Ball indicates a blending of the
Hapsburg Empire and an Ivy League prom. Kennedy-Sheen, skeptical of the Joint
Chiefs, rules out force and demands a political solution in South Vietnam. In
fact, when he died there were 16,000 American soldiers in Vietnam, with more
apparently committed.

On the other hand, so what? It's almost warming to look at the Kennedy
Administration the way we do in ''Kennedy.'' Old arguments are forgotten; the
world appears to have been working then reasonably well. Things weren't
necessarily better then, but they seem to have been. It's like a respite from
today.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Martin Sheen

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LEGISLATORS DOUBTFUL OF DEALING WITH BUDGET BEFORE '84 ELECTION

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 2660 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 19


As members of Congress scattered for home today for a two-month vacation, they
left behind a $200 billion budget deficit and expressed little confidence that
they would deal with the problem before the 1984 election.

Early in the year, cooperation between the Republican leadership of the Senate
and the Democratic leadership of the House produced some major legislation,
particularly a plan to rescue the troubled Social Security System. The lawmakers
also took pride in passing 10 of the 13 appropriation bills needed annually to
finance the Government, the most to clear Congress in recent years.



Not a Dollar on Deficit

But by fall, political calculations so pervaded Capitol Hill that the lawmakers
failed to make any significant impact on the budget deficit. Congress promised
in its budget resolution to trim $85 billion from the deficit over three years,
but when the adjournment bell rang at 10:04 P.M. Friday, not one dollar of
reductions had actually been approved.

At one late-night session this week, Senator Pete V. Domenici, the New Mexico
Republican who heads the Budget Committee, accused his colleagues of ''copping
out'' on the deficit problem and added, ''We need the significant support of the
President to do anything, and if you're asking me whether the President will
change his mind, I don't think so.''



From Reagan, Praise and Blame

Even though the economic recovery seems to be holding, the lawmakers left town
with voices of doom echoing in their ears. One was that of Representative Leon
E. Panetta, Democrat of California. He told the House Friday, ''The budget
process, the deficit, and the economy are in deep trouble.''

President Reagan, who came into office promising to balance the Federal budget,
has repeatedly blamed Congress for rising deficits, and he did so today in his
weekly radio broadcast, although he also had praise for the year's legislative
accomplishments.

Many members of Congress in both parties say one major reason for the deficit is
President Reagan's adamant insistence on higher military spending and lower
taxes. They agree with Senator Domenici that Congress will not act to close that
gap until Mr. Reagan takes the lead and provides political cover for the
unpopular decisions that will be required.

''This is President Reagan's deficit,'' Senator John C. Danforth, a Missouri
Republican, told the Senate this week, ''but from the Administration we have
heard nothing but silence.''

The lawmakers did display considerable restraint in adopting appropriation
bills. All 10 that went to the White House stayed within spending targets set by
the budget last spring, and so while President Reagan threatened to veto any
bills that went too far, he never got the chance.

The War Powers Resolution In foreign affairs, Congress's most notable
achievement was probably passage of legislation declaring that the War Powers
Resolution applies to Lebanon and limiting deployment of the Marines there to 18
months. President Reagan expressed doubts about the constitutionality of the
act, but he signed the bill, becoming the first President in the 10-year history
of the act to effectively acknowledge its validity.

The year was marked by frequent tension between Congress and the White House on
issues ranging from the MX missile to the secret war in Nicaragua to nuclear
arms negotiations. As James M. Cannon, chief of staff for Howard H. Baker Jr. of
Tennessee, the majority leader, put it, ''One of the things we do in this city
is constantly define and redefine the relation of the Congress to the President
on foreign policy.''

Mr. Reagan won most of the battles, mainly because there is a lingering
presumption in Congress that the President is ultimately responsible for foreign
policy. But the lawmakers expressed determination to keep a careful eye on the
Administration's policies abroad, particularly where they might lead to armed
conflict.

'Watch, Watch, Watch'

''This comes from the indelible etch of Vietnam,'' asserted Senator Alan K.
Simpson, a Wyoming Republican. ''We've got to watch, watch, watch.''

In the first two years of the Reagan Administration, Republicans used the
support of conservative Democrats in the House and the political popularity of
the President to dominate the agenda on Capitol Hill. But as the economy failed
to revive, last November's election swept in a net increase of 26 House
Democrats and sent shock waves through Republican ranks.

''The tone for this Congress was set by the 1982 elections,'' said an aide to
the Senate Republican leadership. ''We had several members scared for their
political life, and Speaker O'Neill was dealing from a much stronger hand.''

The Baker-O'Neill Cooperation

This new power balance started having an impact in the post-election session of
the last Congress, when Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., the leading Democrat in
Congress, and Senator Baker, the chief Republican, worked together to pass an
increase in the gasoline tax and provide funds for new public works projects.

When the lawmakers returned to Washington last January to begin the 98th
Congress, concern was still high about the sluggish economy and persistent
unemployment. Mr. Baker and Mr. O'Neill again cooperated to push through a $4.6
billion package of job- creation programs and emergency aid for victims of the
recession.

The two leaders also recognized that no changes could be made in the politically
sensitive Social Security program unless the two parties called a truce on the
issue. A bipartisan commission appointed by President Reagan proposed a package
of changes that would increase payroll taxes and gradually raise the retirement
age, and the deal breezed through Congress.

Compromise on Military Spending

This spirit of accommodation continued through the drafting of the annual
budget, when House Democrats and Senate Republicans brushed aside Administration
proposals and compromised on a plan that increased military spending by 5
percent, half the rise the White House wanted, and allotted $21.5 billion for
domestic spending above Mr. Reagan's request.

Bipartisan cooperation began to erode, however, when the economy sputtered to
life and Republicans started to regain confidence in the President's economic
program. Moreover, as the year went on, partisan interests began to diverge
sharply. By the end of the session, Senator Simpson was saying that partisanship
had reached an ''appalling and stifling level'' in the corridors of the capitol.

In essence, the Democrats repeated their charges that the Reagan program was
unfair to average American voters and pushed a string of measures through the
House to demonstrate the point, including help for homeowners with mortgages and
aid for jobless workers who had lost their health benefits.

The Republicans were generally gambling that the economy would continue to stay
healthy through the election, and that they could sucessfully brand the
Democrats ''big spenders.'' Accordingly, all additional Democratic proposals to
aid the unemployed were buried in the Senate.

In a similar face-off, the House passed legislation to limit the third year of
the tax cut that was due to take effect last July. But Mr. Reagan opposed any
change in his tax-reduction program, and the Senate killed the measure.

The domestic legislative struggle lapsed into a standoff. By the end of the
session, Republicans were saying that a major accomplishment was preventing the
Democrats from adding to social spending programs. ''Maybe one of the better
things we did was not to do very much,'' said one Republican staff aide.

Democrats Claim a Reversal

And the Democrats were arguing that they had reversed the trend of the previous
two years and blocked the Republicans from making further cuts in domestic
programs. ''That was the main thing we did this year,'' Mr. O'Neill said.

But Congress was able to agree on a number of significant measures toward the
end of the year that transcended partisanship. By large margins, the lawmakers
approved a bill for a Federal holiday in honor of the birthday of the Rev. Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., and a bill that extended the life of the Civil Rights
Commission and shielded it from attempts by the Reagan Administration to
undercut its independence.

Congress also voted to extend unemployment benefits for 18 months and loosen the
criteria to make workers in more states eligible for maximum help. Thanks to
some legislative legerdemain by House Democrats, Republicans were forced to
accept a housing authorization, the first in almost three years, that created a
small program to build rental units for poor tenants.

I.M.F. Support and Debt Limit

Mr. Reagan had to use his leverage to swing conservative Republicans into line
behind an increase of $8.4 billion in the American contribution to the
International Monetary Fund and an increase in the national debt ceiling to
$1.49 billion. This would allow the Treasury to continue borrowing money through
April.

Congress approved two programs to reward farmers for limiting production. One
distributes Government- owned commodities as payment in kind to farmers who
curtail surplus crops. Another bill, cleared Friday night, would pay dairy
farmers for the first time for reducing their milk production.

But the list of unpassed bills was probably even longer in this session. The
Senate passed a comprehensive alteration of the immigration laws, but action was
blocked in the House by the objections of Hispanic members. The House rejected
the proposed Federal equal rights amendment to the Constitution and the Senate
buried a proposal to provide tax credits for parents who send their children to
private schools.

Foreign Cars and Phone Use

The House passed a bill that would require foreign car makers to use more
American parts and labor in vehicles sold here, but the Senate took no action
and shows little interest in the bill. The Democrats also pushed through the
House a bill to bar new fees for phone users, and that bill should receive
prompt Senate attention in January.

After promises last year to conservative Republicans, the Senate debated a
proposed amendment to the Constitution that would overturn Supreme Court
decisions legalizing abortions, but it was defeated. Congress did approve a rule
that would ban Federal workers from using their health benefits to finance
abortions.

Among proposals that never came to a floor vote were a package of revisions to
make various criminal laws tougher on defendants; revisions of the Clean Air and
Clean Water Acts, and deregulation of natural gas, which was pulled from the
Senate floor on Friday.


Congressional Highlights

National Security

WAR POWERS: Congress invoked War Powers Resolution for first time

since enactment in 1973, authorizing Administration to keep Marines in

Lebanon for up to 18 months. President signed bill. Also provided $150

million in economic support funds and $100 million in military loans. Signed.

House and Senate also invoked the resolution with respect to Grenada.

NICARAGUA: Congress approved $24 million in covert aid to rebels,

enough to finance operations through March. Thereafter, C.I.A. will have to

go to Congress for additional funds.

EL SALVADOR: Congress made additional funds contingent on progress

on land reform and improvements in criminal justice system. Insisted U.S.

military advisers by kept at 55. Approved additional $55 million for fiscal

1983, half of President Reagan's request, bringing total to $81.3. Agreed to

$64.8 million for fiscal 1984. Signed by President.

MILITARY SPENDING: Congress approved $249 billion bill for fiscal

year 1984, rejecting nerve gas weapons but approving funds for 21 MX missiles,

B-1 long-range bombers and testing of antisatellite weapons.

NUCLEAR FREEZE: Resolution calling for mutual and verifiable freeze

on testing, production and deployment of nuclear weapons by U.S. and

Soviet Union was approved by House, shelved by Senate.

CARIBBEAN: Congress approved Caribbean Basin Initiative, providing

trade and tax benefits to poor Caribbean nations. Signed.  Fiscal

BUDGET: Congress approved budget of $850-$859 billion, with deficit of

$169.9-$179.3 billion, depending on how much of reserve fund was used. It

failed to approve $28 billion deficit-reduction package, equally divided

between new taxes and spending cuts.

SPENDING: Congress approved temporary spending bill to provide funds

for 4 of 13 spending bills not yet signed into law: Agriculture, Defense,

foreign aid and Treasury-Postal Service.

TAXES: Congress declined to vote a tax package proposed by some

leaders as needed to reduce deficit. This included $14 billion tax portion of

reconciliation package and proposed four-year $74.3 billion measure. It

repealed the 10 percent withholding on interest and dividends scheduled to

take effect July 1.

DEBT LIMIT: Congress increased debt limit from $1,389 billion to $1,450 billion,
enough to operate the Government through February.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND: Approved $8.4 million for

underdeveloped nations to enable them to pay back loans made by large

U.S. banks.  Domestic

ABORTION: Congress expanded a ban on using Federal funds for

abortions to prohibit such use by Federal employees' health plans.

SOCIAL SECURITY: Revision of Social Security System was approved,

requiring new Federal employees and employees of nonprofit organizations

to join the system, new payroll tax increases, a tax on benefits paid to more

affluent retired people and a rise in the retirement age by two years, to 67,

by the year 2027.

HOUSING: Approved $15.6 billion bill to revamp Federal housing and

community development programs and to establish new housing for low-and

moderate-income persons.

JOBS: Approved $4.6 billion jobs bill, intended to create 300,000-

400,000 temporary jobs. Signed.

UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS: Approved $4.7 billion for 18-month

extension of unemployment benefits. Signed.

HOLIDAY: Established national holiday in honor of the Rev. Dr. Martin

Luther King Jr. Signed.

AGRICULTURE: Approved program to give farmers

Government-owned commodities in return for curtailed production of

surplus crops. Signed. Agreed to reduce milk production by paying farmers

for not producing milk. Froze tobacco price supports.

MEDICARE: Approved sweeping change in the way Medicare pays for

hospital care: Hospitals that could treat patients for less than Government

price could keep the difference; those whose costs exceeded the price

could not get additional funds. Signed.

EQUAL RIGHTS AMENDMENT: House defeated the proposed

amendment. No Senate action.

TUITION TAX CREDITS: Senate shelved bill that would have provided

parents with tax credit of up to $300 for each child attending private

schools.

CLINCH RIVER BREEDER REACTOR: Killed when Senate voted against funds also
rejected by House.

ETHICS: House censured Representative Daniel B. Crane, Republican of

Illinois, and Gerry E. Studds, Democrat of Massachusetts, for sexual

misconduct.

CLEAN AIR ACT: No Congressional action.

CLEAN WATER ACT: No Congressional action.

DOMESTIC CONTENT BILL: Bill to require 70 percent of foreign cars

sold here to be manufactured here was approved by the House; no Senate

action.

IMMIGRATION REVISION BILL: Approved by the Senate but blocked

by Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. from reaching the House floor.

NATURAL GAS DEREGULATION: Action postponed until next year.

TELEPHONE BILL: Approved by the House, but failed to reach the

Senate floor. The bill would bar the Federal Communications Commission

from imposing new charges on local phone users for access to long-

distance service.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: table of congressional highlights: fiscal, domestic, security

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Margaret Barrett Becomes a Bride

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 76, Column 4; Society Desk

LENGTH: 201 words


Margaret Lynn Barrett, daughter of Mrs. Abe Gold of New York and the late Ralph
Hirshberg, was married yesterday to James F. Noonan, son of the late Mr. and
Mrs. John T. Noonan of Brooklyn. Rabbi Ronald Sobel performed the ceremony at
the National Arts Club in New York.

Bran Barrett, the bride's 7-year-old son by a previous marriage, which ended in
divorce, was ring bearer, and Beverly Harris was maid of honor. John T. Noonan
served as best man for his brother.

The bride, a partner in the New York interior design firm of Barrett & Katz,
graduated from Arizona State University and did graduate work at the Parsons
School of Design. Her father was a New York insurance broker and agent and a
life master bridge player. Her stepfather is president and owner of A. Gold
Fabrics Inc., a New York tie fabric designer and manufacturer, and her mother,
Honey Gold, is an officer and board member of the National Council of Jewish
Women.

Mr. Noonan, an account executive with the public-relations firm Scanlon & Menken
Ltd. in New York, serves on the executive committee of the New York Vietnam
Veterans Memorial Commission. He graduated from Brooklyn College. His previous
marriage ended in divorce.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

PRESS NOTES;
DEBATE RISES ABOUT CURBS ON GRENADA

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 35, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 879 words


The debate about restriction of news coverage of combat in Grenada has brought
into the open military suspicions about the press and its patriotism.

American reporters in the past went almost anywhere American combat men went,
sometimes fighting and dying with them. ''Maybe it was an age of greater
innocence,'' said Jeremiah O'Leary, a White House reporter for The Washington
Times, recalling reporters marching with the troops in the bitter cold of Korea
and filing dispatches over military field phones.

In Vietnam, much of the press believed the Government was consistently lying and
many in the military thought the press was being unpatriotic or worse. ''We had
people in Vietnam who thought they were on the side watching the United States
fight the North Vietnamese,'' said Winant Sidle, who directed the military
information office in Saigon.

He is the director of public relations for the Martin Marietta Company and heads
a Pentagon panel to review the Grenada press controls and suggest guidelines.

The head of the task force for the Grenada invasion, Adm. Joseph Metcalf 3d,
said he was a friend of the press while threatening to fire on any press boat
that tried to get to the Caribbean island. Reporters who got ashore said
officers tried to manipulate information in small ways but were not like the
Defense Department aide who spoke derisively of the need for ''tender love and
care and feeding of the press.''

There have been stories in recent years about the peacetime military whose
officers think the press goes out of its way to report corruption and waste or
discover a ''Strangelove'' yearning for binary nerve gases and high-technology
bombs.

The press has been perfecting its own technologies with equipment that allows
television broadcasts from the scene of action. This weighs on the minds of
officers who say in retrospect that the scenes of violent death and suffering on
the evening news programs sapped the national will to wage war in Southeast
Asia.

The military says it was concerned that broadcast journalists might reveal the
operation prematurely. The chief Defense Department spokesman, Michael I. Burch,
said the networks were so eager to outdo one another that they would broadcast
live battlefield reports even if they jeopardized soldier's lives. ''I don't
know how to deal with the commercial side of this,'' he said.

Journalists responded that the worry was both dishonorable and ill-founded, that
they had not previously put soldiers' lives at risk. They said broadcasting
required a lot of equipment that could not be taken to the front without
military cooperation.

Many people in print journalism are sick of films of combat that often erase
other impressions of what troops are doing, or apparently heartless interviews
with the families of marines missing in the bombing of the Beirut barracks. Some
reporters in St. George's were appalled by television technicians who arrived
wearing T-shirts emblazoned ''El Salvador '82.''

Problems for News Service

Rupert Murdoch's purchase of The Chicago Sun-Times may force some changes for a
subsidiary included in the deal, the Independent News Service.

It is a small newcomer, supplementing The Associated Press and United Press
International. Originally the Field News Service, distributing articles from The
Sun-Times and the Newhouse newspapers, I.N.S. was expanded a year ago to include
reports from The Boston Globe, The Dallas Morning News and The Baltimore Sun. It
now has about 130 clients, behind the supplemental services of The New York
Times, The Los Angeles Times- Washington Post or the Knight-Ridder chain.

The Chicago sale makes The Globe do business with Independent while competing
with The Boston Herald, which Mr. Murdoch bought last year. It could create
problems in Baltimore, where Mr. Murdoch is believed interested in buying The
News-American.

A Victory for Mother Jones

The Internal Revenue Service has decided not to tax the magazine Mother Jones.
Officials of the magazine and by other tax-exempt publications had feared the
service's initial decision against Mother Jones might set an expensive
precedent.

Mother Jones is a seven-year-old muckraking San Francisco monthly named for Mary
Harris Jones, a labor organizer who died in 1930. It sells about 200,000 copies
a month. Its articles have offended so many potential advertisers that it loses
$400,000 a year. The deficit is made up by its owner, the Foundation for
National Progress.

In August 1982, the San Francisco I.R.S. office said the magazine was
''unrelated'' to the foundation's educational purposes and should pay income
taxes. The ruling jeopardized the magazine's entitlement to reduced postal
rates.

Magazine officials suggested the move was made to harass a publication that has
been sharply critical of the Reagan Administration. They asked the I.R.S.'s
western regional appeals office to reconsider. This month the office agreed that
the magazine was not commercial and sufficiently furthered the foundation's
educational goals to qualify for continued exemption.

''They've finally accepted what we have said all along - that the magazine is
published not to make a profit but to make a point,'' said Mother Jones's
publisher, Robin Wolander.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 4, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
An item in the Press Notes column Nov. 20 misidentified the news service
operated by The Chicago Sun- Times and misstated its relationship to other
newspapers. The Independent Press Service has 143 clients in the United States
and 10 in Canada, to whom it distributes articles from The Sun-Times, the
Newhouse News Service, The Boston Globe, the Sunpapers in Baltimore and The
Dallas Morning News. The Sunpapers joined the service in 1979 and The Globe in
1980.

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ISRAEL SEES NO QUICK CURE FOR LEBANON-- OR ANY OTHER ILLS

BYLINE: By Terence Smith

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1183 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


Israel paused last week to remember its first Prime Minister, David Ben Gurion,
and more heroic days. ''Now

that was a leader,'' said a citizen at a ceremony in Jerusalem marking the 10th
anniversary of Ben Gurion's death.  Another former Prime Minister was notably
missing from the observances, Menachem Begin, who breathed fire into Israeli
politics for seven years until he resigned two months ago and went into total
seclusion. Mr. Begin's deep depression seemed to mirror the country's mood as it
faced a set of particularly grim predicaments under leaders who did not seem to
measure up to past ones.  Israeli troops are bogged down in Lebanon. Although
they have withdrawn to the southern third of the country, their casualties
continue and Israeli policymakers acknowledge they are not sure how to get out.
Syria poses a threat of renewed war, not so much in the near term, but over the
next year or two as Damascus continues to build its Soviet- supplied army to an
estimated 520,000 men.  The economy is in chaos, with inflation approaching 200
percent for the year. The shekel decreases in value daily and last week the
Government began printing 1,000-shekel notes that are worth only a little more
than $10. ''Imagine a cash economy built on $10 bills!'' complained one
exasperated Jerusalem shopkeeper.  In the occupied West Bank and Gaza strip,
Palestinians staged violent demonstrations to vent their frustration over the
fighting between P.L.O. factions in Tripoli. Israeli soldiers fired into the
crowds, killing two Arabs and wounding at least seven during the week. The
violence reminded Israelis once again of the ugly aspects of occupation.  One
Bright Spot

The Government of Yitzhak Shamir continued discussions with Shimon Peres, the
leader of the opposition Labor Party, about forming a national unity government.
Economists believe only such a government would have the political strength to
impose the measures necessary to curb inflation. Party infighting, however,
seems likely to block such a move. The talks so far have been fruitless.
Perhaps the one bright spot for Israel at this time is the improved atmosphere
between Jerusalem and Washington. The acrimony that followed Israel's invasion
of Lebanon last year has been replaced by talk of parallel interests and
''strategic cooperation.'' ''We're seeing eye-to-eye with Washington on many
things these days,'' Dan Meridor, the Cabinet Secretary, observed.

High on the list of shared perceptions is the view that the Syrians, backed by
the Soviet Union, have become the main obstacle to a peaceful accommodation in
Lebanon. Both the United States and Israel have set aside their other
differences about the West Bank - at least for the moment - to concentrate on
possible coordinated action against common adversaries in Lebanon.

To capitalize on the improved mood, President Chaim Herzog will be in Washington
this week, leading a parade of top Israeli officials due to visit the White
House over the next 10 days. Mr. Shamir and Defense Minister Moshe Arens are
scheduled to see President Reagan on Nov. 29 for the first top-level discussion
between the two countries in more than a year.

The principal interest that the United States and Israel share these days is
their desire to get their respective forces out of Lebanon, particularly after
the devastating bombing attacks of recent days. Israel's problem is especially
acute. Having invested more than 500 lives, a lot of money and considerable
international good will in the Lebanese adventure, Israel finds itself stuck in
the southern reaches of that strife-torn country.

The debate over the merits of the operation, which tore at the Israeli soul a
year ago, has been replaced by a more practical argument about how and under
what terms to get out. Only the most extreme right-wingers entertain the notion
of annexation or indefinite occupation. Such thoughts were certainly absent when
Mr. Shamir visited Israeli troops in Lebanon recently. ''I feel like an occupier
in a foreign country,'' a soldier said. ''My hope is that more and more soldiers
will refuse to serve in Lebanon and that they will put pressure on the
Government to pull out entirely.'' Mr. Shamir denied that Israel wanted to be in
Lebanon to rule the people. ''We are here to insure the safety of Israel,'' he
said, ''and once we have accomplished that we'll leave.'' When that would be, he
did not say.

Lost Hopes

Just a year ago, some Israelis harbored extravagant hopes about the Lebanese
invasion. If it worked as they wished, it would lead to a shattered Palestine
Liberation Organization, a Syrian retreat, a pro-Israeli Christian- dominated
Government in Beirut and, best of all, a formal peace treaty between Israel and
a second Arab country after Egypt.

Those dreams have gone aglimmering in the intervening months and now the
Government is groping for a way to withdraw with its minimum objective intact:
security for the towns and villages of northern Israel against renewed terrorism
from the Palestinians.

Israeli officials speak of two possible scenarios under which that might be
achieved, but readily admit neither will be easy. Under the first, the Lebanese
Government would gradually build up the Lebanese Army and assert its control
over the warring factions within the country. This is basically the Reagan
strategy for extracting the American Marines, but few Israeli officials seem to
believe it will happen.  The second scenario calls for Israel to reach an
understanding with the different factions in southern Lebanon, especially the
Shiite organizations, to provide the necessary security against reinfiltration
of the area by Palestinian units. Since the Shiites resented the Palestinian
presence in their midst before the invasion, theoretically they might be willing
to work with the Israelis toward that end now. Then Israel could reduce its
forces to a token few thousand men. No one here, however, expects that could be
achieved in the near future. The most optimistic projections suggest it will
take at least a year. Or perhaps it will never happen.

Israel did not encourage such cooperation when its jet fighters struck at Shiite
training camps in the eastern Bekaa last week. Pro-Iranian groups, such as the
Shiites, are suspected of the truck-bombings of American, French and Israeli
installations.

There is, of course, a third choice. ''We could just declare victory and get
out,'' observes Amos Elon, the Israeli author and journalist, echoing the
solution that the late Senator George Aiken proposed for the United States
involvement in Vietnam.

''But,'' Mr. Elon added, ''given the psychology of this country, it will never
happen. I'm afraid we are stuck there for a long, long time.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Israeli soldier near the Awali river; photo of mourners at
Jerusalem funeral for Israeli soldier

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONGRESS, GONE BUT NOT DONE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 474 words


Congress has wound up a bad year. The session now adjourned faced one overriding
issue: the oppressive budget deficits in future years. Lacking a President's
leadership, the legislators toyed with a few remedies and then chose default.

The now half-done 98th is the first Congress in 50 years that can be fairly
described as clearly split between the parties. The 97th, too, had a Republican
Senate and nominally Democratic House, but President Reagan nonetheless held
sway in the House through a coalition of Republicans and conservative ''boll
weevil'' Democrats. That coalition became a minority when enough more Democrats
won last November to take firm control. The size of the Republican majority in
the Senate didn't change, but its attitude did. Jarred by the 1982 Democratic
gains, Senate Republicans were more inclined to challenge their President
openly.

Still, the year's only really consequential legislation was the reform of Social
Security. Even that was the product of 1982's labor, a ratification of the
reduction in benefits proposed by a bipartisan commission that resulted from a
compact between the White House and Democratic leaders. And barely 10 months
later, it was apparent that much greater curtailments of middle-class benefits
would be needed to tame massive budget deficits.

Indeed, the politics of the deficit has produced only paralysis. Both chambers
resolved boldly last spring to make a bigger dent in the problem than even the
President proposed. They spoke of both tax increases and stiff restraints on
spending. But they failed to deliver. The President's refusal to consider
serious defense spending cuts and taxes left the legislators in a lonely corner.
So the session concluded in a ridiculous scramble over raising the debt ceiling,
and the debt continues to soar.  Congress's duty and desire to monitor foreign
policy resulted in a few modest advances. After bravely delaying the MX missile
for two years, the legislators finally succumbed in return for arms control
concessions that are still theoretical. Attempts to influence aid to El Salvador
and curb the secret war against Nicaragua were inconclusive. The Administration
was financed on its present course but left with doubt that Congress would ever
let it escalate the military interventions.  Like Presidents Ford and Carter,
Mr. Reagan tried to dodge the War Powers Resolution, which since Vietnam has
required Congress's consent for the involvement of troops in foreign combat. The
bombing of the Marine barracks in Beirut forced the President to concede the
principle in return for 18 months of involvement in Lebanon.  The members now
disperse to impress the electorate with this feeble record. They had better try
hard; next year's session, in an election year, is bound to be even less
productive.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

KENNEDY AND OUR VANISHED DREAMS

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section 6; Page 73, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 2339 words


Tom Wicker, an associate editor and political columnist for The Times, covered
the White House for The Times during the Kennedy Administration.



 OT LONG AFTER President John F.  Kennedy's murder, I wrote that he seemed
''certain to take his place in American lore as one of those sure-sell heroes
out of whose face or words or monuments a souvenir dealer can turn a steady
buck. There he soon will stand, perhaps in our lifetime - cold stone or
heartless bronze, immortal as Jefferson, revered as Lincoln, bloodless as
Washington . . . .''

I had covered Kennedy for more than two years, as The New York Times's White
House correspondent, and I had been on the press bus when the shots rang out
during the final motorcade in Dallas. Americans, in the days that followed, were
falling over themselves to name streets, buildings, airports, even the space
base at Cape Canaveral, in his honor; and the emotional impact of the
assassination no doubt affected my own judgment in much the same way.

Still, my estimate turned out to be a little more than half-right. Twenty years
later, John Kennedy is assuredly an asset to souvenir dealers, magazine
publishers, pop historians and the kind of Democrats still willing to talk about
something other than high-tech industry and the budget deficit. In Washington,
the cold-stone Kennedy Center dwarfs both the Lincoln and Jefferson Memorials,
if not quite the Washington Monument.

But immortal? Revered? Bloodless? Two decades after he was shot to death that
sunlit afternoon in Dallas, enough doubts have been raised about the
achievements of the Kennedy Administration to shadow his place in history.  Gamy
disclosures about his personal life have jarred the reverence in which a
President who suffered his fate might otherwise have been held.  On the other
hand, there's nothing ''bloodless'' about the John Kennedy who comes down to us
today, a figure larger in memory and desire than he was in life, the young hero
of a golden myth: the lost leader of a dream turned dust. Perhaps no other
President of modern times, not the revered Eisenhower or the doughty Truman, has
taken such a lasting grip on the American imagination, where the idea of John
Fitzgerald Kennedy is powerfully alive.

Americans too young to remember Nov. 22, 1963, the many who opposed him in his
time, those not charmed by the Camelot legend - even these, I believe, are
affected, not always consciously, by Kennedy's persisting spell. In his life and
death and myth, they too are profoundly touched, and by something more American
Kennedy Jump Page 124





 and far more typical than the story of an Irish immigrant's descendant who made
it to the White House.

He was, to begin with, the first star President. During his Administration,
television - by now the national nervous system - was beginning fully to infuse
American life; so television could give Americans the kind of familiarity with
Kennedy possible with no President before him. They saw him virtually every day
or night - at work, at play, with his family, with world leaders, in crisis,
relaxed, in black tie or polo shirt, reflective, impassioned, in triumph and
defeat; and what they saw was not the traditional notion of a ''pol'' or even of
a President.

Americans of the time had viewed Dwight Eisenhower as a remote father figure, a
commanding general, under whose protection they could relax and make money; they
saw John Kennedy, Eisenhower's successor in more ways than one, as someone they
might well wish or even aspire to be: a successful young American, handsome,
witty, tough, intelligent, capable and - not least - rich and powerful.

A major reason for that view was that Kennedy had the confidence to allow his
Presidential news conferences to be televised live; and he had the wit, the
looks, and that indefinable something called ''cool'' that let him take fullest
advantage of this new medium of communication with the American people.

To this day, no other President has surpassed his mastery of it. Ronald Reagan
may make smoother speeches, but he is hesitant and unconvincing before the
press, where J.F.K. was forceful, decisive, knowledgeable, the very image of a
dynamic young executive effortlessly on top of things. Image it was, of course,
but powerfully effective; nothing contributed more to the inflated notion of his
''leadership'' that remains a central part of the Kennedy myth.

This television image, not false but enhanced, seems to live on in the American
consciousness, rather as the memory of a dead brother or sister lingers in a
family; or as if the impressions television makes on one generation are passed
along genetically to its heirs. (An ironic notion: Kennedy worried during his
White House days that he would be ''overexposed'' on the home screen and bore
the public, a fear that caused him to hold most of his news conferences in the
afternoon rather than in prime time.)

Given the public's identification and familiarity with Kennedy, and its sense of
closeness even in the distance of his unimaginable powers and responsibilities,
the manner of his death - the enviable young leader murdered at the apogee of
fame - probably would have assured a continuing fascination with what was in his
time, and what might have been. And since none but the most fanatical can be
entirely sure who killed him or why, the recurrent debate over new evidence, new
theories, new versions of old theories, has served to keep the Kennedy story
prominently in our consciousness.

It was not, moreover, just a familiar young executive or a historical character
like Garfield or McKinley who rode to his death in the Dallas motorcade. By
1963, only the oldest Americans could remember the last Presidential murder, 62
years earlier; and by then, before Watergate and Vietnam, the President of the
United States - his finger on the button, his reach apparently unlimited - had
come to

Page 148





 be considered without peer the most powerful man in the world.

It was, therefore, a staggering realization that in our time, not the distant
past, such a transcendent figure, as man and President, could be struck down
like any mortal, like ''one of us.'' If the rich and gifted young Leader of the
Free World was vulnerable, who and what were not? Later, the violent deaths of
Martin Luther King Jr. and Robert Kennedy only emphasized the question.

Worse, John Kennedy's assassination proved to be the first in a succession of
shocks that progressively undermined American certainties and left the nation
rudderless and confused. In that sense, his death marked an apogee for his
country, too.

Following l963, the blows fell relentlessly - the failure of the nation's power
in Vietnam, the uprising of its black citizens in the long hot summers of the
1960's, the smirching of the Government's integrity in Watergate, the loss of a
proud American symbol in Panama, the rise of the Soviet Union to nuclear parity,
the impotence of a President to redeem the hostages from Iran, even the
humiliating realization that Japanese autos outsold and outperformed Detroit's.

Few nations - let alone one so given to national pride - have suffered so many
grievous shocks to their self-esteem in so short a time. And few Americans can
have remained untouched. I, for example, as a patriotic World War II and Korean
War veteran, rigidly conditioned to be an ''objective reporter,'' found the war
in Vietnam deeply unsettling, even disorienting; it not only challenged my
unexamined assumptions about American purposes and behavior in the world, it led
me forcefully to question many of the precepts and disciplines that left my own
craft so vulnerable to manipulation and misinformation. My conceptions of both
were permanently changed; and my experience was far from unique.

The assassination of John F. Kennedy, though only loosely connected to the
remainder of this long, disheartening succession of events, came first. Little
wonder, then, that we look back to him and his time with yearning for what was,
or that some of us still ask the vain question whether things might not somehow
have been altogether different had he lived and served a second term.

The estimate most commonly given of J.F.K., in his life and now, is that he had
great ''capacity for growth.'' And he did. After initially hesitant leadership
on mostly political grounds, for example, he became the President who took the
civil-rights movement to the high ground of a ''moral issue'' for all Americans
- a recognition that makes him second only to Lincoln in the hearts of many
blacks.

He came into office on a tide of cold- war rhetoric and launched the nuclear
arms race with the overblown Minuteman buildup; but he nevertheless recognized
the devasting truth he saw in the Cuban missile crisis and went on to the first
major arms-control achievement, the limited test-ban treaty of l963.

His escalation of the American commitment to Vietnam was the first step into the
quagmire; nevertheless, ample evidence suggests to me that in the last months of
his life he was reconsidering the problem. The distinct but unprovable
possibility exists that, had he been re-elected, he might have pursued a
different course from the one Lyndon Johnson thought he had to follow - not
because one President was necessarily more farseeing than the other, but because
Kennedy would have been a different man in

Page 149






 different circumstances, tried already in the crucible of the missile crisis
and more sensitive, as a result, to the limits of power.

I think the experience was crucial; Kennedy had looked into the nuclear abyss in
a way no other President had experienced. He was not the same man after that;
and he had discovered, too, on one of his last political excursions - just
before the fatal trip to Dallas - the deep-set unease of the American people in
the nuclear era.

At Great Falls, Mont., he mentioned the test-ban treaty he had just concluded,
and the crowd roared its approval. At each stop on the rest of his Western
swing, Kennedy talked about the treaty, and his remarks never failed to bring
shattering applause. When the trip was over, his political advisers agreed that
he had found a new theme for his expected re-election campaign, and back in the
White House, he told his science adviser, Jerome B. Wiesner, that if he had
realized the depth of public support, he would have pressed the Soviet Union for
a comprehensive test ban, instead of a limited one.

Whatever was thought of these or other Kennedy policies, his capacity for growth
was widely recognized, and the passage of time has tended to emphasize rather
than obscure it. And this sense of a man not allowed to reach the fullness of
his potential lends the greatest poignance to his memory and his myth.

Not only can we speculate on what might have been, in the plausible belief that
Kennedy's emerging stature would have had substantial effect on the course of
events, but there is a powerful if often unrealized resonance in the knowledge
that his time was cut short, that he did not have his ultimate chance, that life
in its indifference rolled over him, too, and prevented the fulfillment of his
dreams.

It is an intensely personal recognition: Which of us does not believe at some
point that we, as much as anyone, are men and women with the capacity for
growth, for leadership, even to do great deeds? If we only press on, if we rise
to the challenge, if we just get a chance , what might not any of us accomplish?
What might we not be?

But events and the passage of time force most of us, the strong and the weak
alike, to the knowledge that we have somehow fallen short - not because we have
failed to achieve, but because the achievement is so seldom what we sought, so
often unsatisfying to our deepest needs. In that sense, it seems to me, few if
any of us, neither poet nor entrepreneur, reach the innermost potential of which
we dreamed: We are all unfulfilled.

And in John F. Kennedy's brutally shortened life, in that personification of
blasted hopes and lost potential, Americans feel, I believe, a sad and terrible
identification with their own vanished dreams and secret defeats - an
identification that has little to do with what the man did or stood for, but
derives from what happened to him, what he lost in that moment, that single
moment, when he had a right to think the sun shone most brightly upon his world.


I believe a subtle national identification may also figure in Kennedy's grip on
our collective imagination. Just as so many Americans live lives of failed
dreams, so too - for many of them at least - does their nation. Not only have a
lot of American certainties been snatched away, but the Land of the Free and the
Home of the Brave, in becoming a Superpower, has often seemed to many of us to
misuse its power, misread its goals, misplace its ideals, even mistreat its
national bounty - and in these misdirections fall considerably short of the
storied American Dream.

Whether that dream was of an Arcadian republic or of an unfettered society in
which every man would have his chance, it is surely a failed - at least, a
flawed - ideal. And I believe the fate of John Kennedy also functions as a
symbol of an American sense of a nation unfinished, unrealized, unfulfilled -
that sense of indefinable but painful loss that seems to run so deep in the soul
of Americans.

''I believe that we are lost here in America,'' Thomas Wolfe wrote a
half-century ago. In the years since Nov. 22, 1963, the symbolic power of John
Kennedy's life and death has made it no easier to share Wolfe's expansive
American faith that somehow ''we shall be found.'' Faith itself, in power or in
dreams, has been a victim of the times.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of President Kennedy at a South Dakota airport, 1962

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RITES OF PASSAGE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 182, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 90 words


--


I was disappointed that Michael Norman felt it was all right to lock his
memories back up in the attic. To the contrary, I would urge Mr. Norman and
other Vietnam veterans to tell their countrymen about the things they learned.
It cost us a lot to learn these lessons. That cost should not be squandered. I
am sure that our comrades, who paid the ultimate price, would rest better
knowing that some positive results came from their sacrifice.

JOHN P. ROWAN Vietnam Veterans of America Elmhurst, N.Y.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RITES OF PASSAGE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 182, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 193 words


Michael Norman's article ''Rites of Passage'' (About Men, Oct. 23) deeply
affected me, and, while I wept as I read it, I felt so

good

 afterward. My past mirrors Mr. Norman's almost exactly, except that I was
drafted into the Army when I was 19. Vietnam was to become for me, too, the
ultimate yardstick against which I would measure all other past and future
crises in my life. Solutions were so

final

 in Southeast Asia.

I, too, have a bag in my attic, with orders, decorations, pictures and a diary.
I went up and looked at the contents after I read the article, something I
hadn't done in years. And again, strangely, I felt good about that, as well. My
wife and I are expecting our first child in January. I, too, put the contents of
my bag in order.

It is odd that, with all the rhetoric about the Vietnam War, all the talk about
welcoming the veterans home again, and the millions of words written about that
period in our lives, this short essay said it all, and made me feel as though my
time spent in Vietnam 15 years ago actually counted for something. It made me
feel proud.

LEONARD DI SESA JR.  South Salem, N.Y.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BESTSELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 44, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 783 words


113

PET SEMATARY, by Stephen King. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The new family in town
discovers the horrors that lie in a neighboring cemetery.  2212

POLAND, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) Seven centuries of history
in fictional form.  3422

THE NAME OF THE ROSE, by Umberto Eco. (Helen & Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $15.95.) Unraveling the mystery of a murder in a 14th-century
Italian monastery.  4311

CHANGES, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) The crises that arise when a
television anchorwoman and a glamorous physician fall in love.  5516

HOLLYWOOD WIVES, by Jackie Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The struggle for
money and power in Tinsel Town.  6712

WHO KILLED THE ROBINS FAMILY?, created by Bill Adler and written by Thomas
Chastain. (Morrow, $9.95.) The publisher offers a $10,000 prize to the reader
who submits the best answer.  7 1

THE ROBOTS OF DAWN, by Isaac Asimov. (Doubleday, $15.95.) A human detective from
Earth investigates the murder of a robot on the planet Aurora.  869

THE AUERBACH WILL, by Stephen Birmingham. (Little, Brown, $16.95.) Three
generations of a German-Jewish family in New York.  989

WINTER'S TALE, by Mark Helprin. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $14.95.) Heroic
lives in Manhattan between the late 19th century and the year 2000.  10 1

THE WICKED DAY, by Mary Stewart. (Morrow, $16.95.) King Arthur, fulfillng a
prophecy made by Merlin, falls into an incestuous relationship.  111015

AUGUST, by Judith Rossner. (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95.) The five-year
relationship of two women, a teen-age patient and her analyst.  12 1

MORETTA: DRAGONLADY OF PERN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $14.95.) A
battle against ecological disaster on a faraway planet.  13910

MONIMBO, by Robert Moss and Arnaud de Borchgrave. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.)
What happens after Castro unveils a plan to stir racial tension in the United
States.  141224

RETURN OF THE JEDI, adapted by Joan D. Vinge. (Random House, $6.95.) Illustrated
storybook based on the latest ''Star Wars'' film.  15 3

THE SAGA OF BABY DIVINE, by Bette Midler. (Crown, $11.95.) The entertainer
imagines what her infancy was like in a fable lushly illustrated by Todd Schorr.




 NONFICTION 119

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck.  (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  2245

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J. Peters and Robert H.  Waterman Jr. (Harper
& Row, $19.95.) Lessons to be learned from well-run American corporations.  3412


ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $17.95.) The rescue of two
Americans from an Iranian prison.  4354

MEGATRENDS, by John Naisbitt. (Warner, $17.50.) Predictions about America in the
next decade based on an analysis of conditions today.

5510

THE BEST OF JAMES HERRIOT.  (St. Martin's Press, $19.95.) Selections from the
writings of the Yorkshire veterinarian.  666

THE MARY KAY GUIDE TO BEAUTY.  (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) An illustrated guide
for women prepared by the staff of a cosmetic firm.  7105

VIETNAM: A History, by Stanley Karnow. (Viking, $19.95.) Profusely illustrated
history of the war: tie-in with the current PBS television series.  877

THE BODY PRINCIPAL, by Victoria Principal. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Exercises
for women by a television personality.  998

THE PETER PAN SYNDROME, by Dan Kiley. (Dodd, Mead, $15.95.) A psychologist's
analysis of the plight of men who have never grown up.  10 1

NO MORE HOT FLASHES AND OTHER GOOD NEWS, by Penny W. Budoff.  (Putnam, $14.95.)
A health-care handbook for women, written by a Long Island physician.  1188

FATAL VISION, by Joe McGinniss. (Putnam, $17.95.) The case of Jeffrey MacDonald,
Ivy League graduate, respected physician and convicted killer of his wife and
daughters.  121226

CREATING WEALTH, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) Making money in
real estate.  13118

OUTRAGEOUS ACTS AND EVERYDAY REBELLIONS, by Gloria Steinem. (Holt, Rinehart &
Winston, $14.95.) Essays by a leading feminist writer.  14143

TOUGH TIMES NEVER LAST, BUT TOUGH PEOPLE DO!  by Robert H.  Schuller. (Thomas
Nelson, $12.95.) Inspiration from a Protestant preacher.  15 58

NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to buy real
estate with little or no money: a 1980 book.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AND BEAR IN MIND

SECTION: Section 7; Page 44, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 565 words


The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from about
2,000 bookstores in every region of the United States.  And Bear in Mind

Other recent books that in the opinion of the Book Review staff are of
particular literary, topical or scholarly interest:

ALAN TURING: The Enigma , by Andrew Hodges. (Simon & Schuster, $22.50.) A vivid
account of the troubled life of the eccentric English mathematician who was in
large part responsible not only for the concept of computers as we know them but
also for breaking the German cipher code during World War II - a feat now widely
recognized as a key element in the Allies' triumph over the Nazi war machine.

THE ANATOMY LESSON, by Philip Roth. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $14.95.) The
concluding novel of Roth's trilogy finds Nathan Zuckerman, the once-triumphant
novelist, middle- aged, out of ideas, emotionally exhausted and living in a
state of chronic pain.

THE ENTHUSIAST: A Life of Thornton Wilder, by Gilbert A. Harrison. (Ticknor &
Fields, $19.95.) If Thornton Wilder was a writer who wanted to be known as
Everyone's Uncle, his diligent biographer supplies a good deal of evidence that
the author of ''Our Town'' wasn't the affable Babbitt he made himself out to be.


IN THE LAND OF ISRAEL, by Amos Oz. (A Helen and Kurt Wolff Book/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $12.95.) The novelist, turning reporter, traveled throughout his
country last fall, interviewing and listening to people - mostly Jews but some
Arabs - with passionate and conflicting views of what sort of place Israel
should be.

MEDITATIONS IN GREEN, by Stephen Wright. (Charles Scribner's Sons, $14.95.) A
soldier escapes the pain and horror of the Vietnam War through heroin and 10
years later in a hectic, violent American city becomes addicted again, in a
brilliant, scarifying first novel by a writer who served in Vietnam.

MY LAST SIGH, by Luis Bunuel. (Alfred A. Knopf, $15.95.) Possessing the same
startling but delectable perversity and deep humor as Bunuel's best movies, this
posthumous autobiography may be quite simply the loveliest testament ever left
by a film director.

MYSTERIES OF MOTION, by Hortense Calisher. (Doubleday & Co., $17.95.) With Earth
being destroyed by its own wastes, 100 citizens board a space shuttle bound for
the first public habitat in space, in an unusual work that is at once a
defiantly risky species of science fiction and a thoroughly realistic
psychological novel.

PARALLEL LIVES: Five Victorian Marriages, by Phyllis Rose. (Alfred A. Knopf,
$16.95.) The marriages (mostly unhappy) of five famous literary figures - John
Ruskin, Thomas Carlyle, John Stuart Mill, Charles Dickens and George Eliot, the
last free of legality - told so compellingly they spring to life all over again.


SHAME, by Salman Rushdie. (Alfred A. Knopf, $13.95.) Mr. Rushdie, who writes
with enormous gusto, calls his second novel ''a sort of modern fairy tale.'' But
the link between certain bizarre happenings in the fairy tale and political
events in a nation that is ''not quite Pakistan'' is inescapable.

VARNISHED BRASS: The Decade After Serpico, by Barbara Gelb. (Doubleday & Co.,
$16.95.) A rare look at the secretive upper echelons of the New York Police
Department by a writer who was accorded extraordinary access to the machinery of
command decision.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IF YOU'RE THINKING OF LIVING IN: UPPER WEST SIDE

BYLINE: By MAURICE CARROLL

SECTION: Section 8; Page 9, Column 1; Real Estate Desk

LENGTH: 1553 words


WHEN urban renewal began on Manhattan's Upper West Side, Austin Haldenstein, the
real-estate broker, recalled the other day, 11 brownstone houses were put up for
sale. ''We couldn't move them for $25,000 or $35,000,'' he said.

But that was 20 years or so ago, and he was talking about current brownstone
prices in the neighborhood. ''Now let's take the middle range,'' he said, ''say,
$500,000 to $600,000.''

To its surprise - and not much to its liking - the Upper West Side has become,
as they say, an ''in'' place. It has always been an individualistic place, but
today, in a world replete with stories of communities that try to keep out
racial minorities or the poor, they are girding in the heart of the Upper West
Side to resist the rich.

Some might say that since the poor have pretty well moved out, the people who
are there have a good thing going and don't want to share it. Some might say
that the West Side is middle-class in attitude and fears dilution. In any case,
the point is that they are wary.

''Another population is rolling its way northward,'' Ethel Sheffer, chairman of
Community Board 7, warned at a neighborhood planning session one recent evening.
''It is an affluent, luxury population, nonfamily.''

There is almost no standard rental market in the heartland of the West Side.
''The market is shifting from regular rentals to condominiums,'' said Addy
Fattal, rental director at J. I. Sopher & Company. People buy condominiums for
investment, he said, then rent them out at whatever prices the market will bear.
''Figure a studio for $800 or so,'' he said, ''a one-bedroom apartment for
$1,000 to $1,200, two-bedrooms starting at $1,600.''

Even at those prices, the market is tight. A recent renter said that besides a
one-month finder's fee, she was asked by one rental agent for $4,500 ''key
money'' and by another for sexual favors. ''I found another agent,'' she said.

Co-ops do become available but they, too, are costly. Elliot D. Sclar of
Columbia University's Division of Urban Planning, co-author of a historical
study of the neighborhood, says prices have been rising about 6 percent a month
since 1979.

A floor-through co-op in a brownstone on a ''good block,'' Mr. Haldenstein said,
would cost $200,000 to $225,000. In bigger buildings, co-op boards generally
require buyers to pay half in cash. His average purchaser is a young
professional couple with income of at least $150,000.

To rent a two-bedroom apartment in a brownstone could cost $1,400 a month, he
says. Rents in big buildings are higher.

The only way to get in, apparently, is to be well-connected - to know someone
who is getting out - or to be rich enough to buy in.

Strictly speaking, the West Side's traditional boundaries include everything
west of Central Park. But there are still slums at the north and the potential
disruption created by the $1 billion, 10,000-apartment Lincoln West project,
planned along the river between 59th and 72d Streets. The West Side, in all its
undiluted West-Sidedness, is concentrated between 72d and 96th Streets, from
Central Park to Riverside Park. In between are:


- Rows of side-street brownstones, their homey facades fronting in many cases
for warrens of tiny studio and one- bedroom apartments. Developers already eye
hungrily the few remaining dilapidated blocks, mostly side streets just west of
Broadway. And the forerunners of gentrification - antiques stores and chic
take-out food shops - are supplanting bodegas along Amsterdam Avenue.


- On the avenues, comfortable 1920's- era apartment houses filled with sunken
living rooms, Art Deco lobbies, sprawling layouts that could not be duplicated
today and proliferating rumors of plans to go co-op. Co-oping is expected to
double to 20 percent of the total area housing in the next two years, according
to Dr. Sclar's study.


- Public buildings that are not numerous but are very nice. Most noticeable is
the turreted Museum of Natural History on Central Park West at 81st Street.

''The West Side is a neighborhood that always seems to embarrass the
fashionable,'' said Richard Shafer, co-curator of the Columbia study with Dr.
Sclar.

Much of it was a shanty town until the Ninth Avenue elevated line moved north in
1878 and brought the first wave of development. The IRT moved north under
Broadway, the Independent line under Central Park West, and by the 1930's the
neighborhood looked very much as it looked until glitz began to grip Columbus
Avenue. One big exception is the urban-renewal area in which high- rises
replaced houses on 20 blocks between 87th and 97th Streets, Amsterdam Avenue and
Central Park West.

To the uncommitted, the West Side's avocation of advocacy - from opposition to
the Vietnam War to boycotting nonunion grapes - could be pretentious and pesky.
But the corollary of the relentless activism is that the West Side is organized
to defend its turf.

''This is a neighborhood,'' Kent Barwick, president of the Municipal Art
Society, said admiringly, ''that can take a significant - if not a dominant -
role in determining its own future.''

The determination to do so was clear at the community forum that Mrs. Sheffer
addressed, sponsored by the Municipal Art Society in the auditorium of
Congregation Rodeph Shalom, 7 West 83d Street, as the participants deplored the
cuteness that is afflicting Columbus Avenue.

A walk north from the American Broadcasting Company television studio at 67th
Street is like drowning in whipped cream until, at 86th Street, a lunchroom and
a check-cashing office side by side bring a sudden sobering reminder of what it
was like in ancient times, about five years ago so.

Participants at the forum also determined to rewrite the zoning regulations so
that, in effect, the only sort of new buildings permitted in the neighborhood
would be essentially identical to the buildings already there.

''I can tell you, whatever is built will have to be built on top of something
else,'' says Doris Rosenbloom, district manager for Community Board 7. ''There
isn't a single inch left. Now we're a fashionable place to live.''

TWO precincts cover the area - the

20th, from 59th to 86th Street, and

the 24th, from 86th Street to Cathedral Parkway. There were 10,011 reported
felonies in the 20th in 1982, a 7.7 percent decrease from the previous year, and
8,420 felonies in the 24th, down 5.3 percent.

Slightly more than 15 percent of the reported felonies in the 20th Precinct were
crimes of violence, compared with slightly less than 25 percent in the 24th and
a citywide rate of about 21 percent.

Jack Berberian Jr., superintendent of School District 3, covering the area west
of Central Park from 59th to 122d Street, said his district's all-day
kindergarten program had been so successful that ''we were the model for the
other 31 districts - we made the training film.''

While student performance in both mathematics and reading is slightly below
grade level in the district overall, more than 90.5 percent of the students at
Public School 87, on West 78th Street, are above grade level in math and 76
percent are better than average in reading.

''I think people have a feeling this is almost a small town,'' Mr. Haldenstein
said. ''It has defined boundaries - you can jog across the West Side.''

Even at its most unreconstructed, the West Side is a cheery place. St. Gregory's
Roman Catholic Church is across 90th Street from a housing project whose blaring
radio music can drown out the hymns. The flower-filled community garden next
door is to be cut back for one of the final urban renewal buildings. The street,
the route to Central Park for horses from the Claremont Stables on 89th, is
rarely - if ever - swept.

On Easter Sundays, Father John Lennon, the ebullient, grinning pastor, hands out
balloons to all the children. He takes a big red balloon himself, leads them
into the street and orders:

''Now, shout after me, 'Alleluia'.''

They shout: ''Alleluia!''

''No. Louder.''

They shout louder.

''No no. Louder .''

''ALLELUIA!''

Then they all loose their balloons, and the dancing, prancing blaze rises rise
past the red brick walls of the project and bounce and soar into the sky above
the West Side.


It is called Site 30. Christmas trees are sold there every year and it exudes
holiday cheer. But as the last uncommitted tract in the urban- renewal area that
has agitated the West Side for time out of mind, the half-block parcel on the
west side of Columbus Avenue between 90th and 91st Streets is still a center of
community argument.

With housing for the elderly and disabled open on the east side of Columbus
between 87th and 88th Streets, an apartment house scheduled to replace
two-thirds of the community garden on the west side between 89th and 90th and
plans accepted by Community Board 7 for every other vacant lot, only Site 30
remains to fuel the debate over how much of the renewal area should be devoted
to the subsidized poor.

Originally, it was to be used for housing for the poor. Now the City Department
of Housing Preservation and Development wants 80 units for the poor and elderly
and 185 market-rental units.

''We're in the process of talking,'' said Doris Rosenbloom, the community
board's district manager. ''So far, there is no board position.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Upper West Side

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW JERSEY JOURNAL

BYLINE: By Alfonso A. Narvaez

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 3, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1597 words


IN THE last three years,

 William P. Ford's

life has changed drastically. Instead of just

being a successful Wall Street lawyer, with a

home in suburban Essex County, hobbies and the usual summer vacation trips, he
has spent almost all his free time traveling around the country and warning
anyone who will listen of the dangers of the United States's involvement in
Central America.

Mr. Ford is the brother of

Ita Ford , one of four Roman Catholic churchwomen - three nuns and a lay
missioner - who disappeared on Dec. 2, 1980, while on their way from the airport
in San Salvador.

Two of the women,

Sisters Ita Ford and

Maura Clarke, had just returned from a religious retreat and regional meeting of
Maryknoll nuns in Nicaragua. The two others,

Sister Dorothy Kazel of the Ursuline Sisters and

Jean Donovan , a 27-year-old lay missioner, were members of a team sent to El
Salvador by the Diocese of Cleveland.

Following the discovery of the women's bodies in a shallow grave and after
months of protests by their families and friends, five members of the Salvadoran
National Guard were arrested in April 1981. Despite a confession by one, a trial
has yet to take place. Mr Ford said he believed this was because higher-level
government officials were involved and a public trial could divulge their
identities.

''There is so much blood on everyone's hands that no one can trestify against
anyone else,'' he said.

The murder has had a tremendous impact on the families of the victims, who have
attempted to awaken the American public to what is happening in Central America.

''Since my sister's death,'' Mr. Ford said, ''I have been from Maine to
California, speaking out against our Government's policy in Central America and
trying to warn my fellow citizens that what our Government is doing there is
counterproductive and downright stupid.''

The 47-year-old lawyer said that Washington had spent close to $1 billion in
military and economic aid to prop up a military regime in El Salvador that had
fostered or condoned the killing of thousands of civilians.

''The United States Government has shown virtually no willingness, has shown no
inclination to press for an investigation into the deaths of the churchwomen,''
he said. ''Even with the outcry and the pressure, our Government gives less than
a damn about them. It is so obsessed with the East- West confrontation that they
are willing to tolerate the murder of American citizens in El Salvador.''

Mr. Ford said that he was particularly disturbed by Administration attempts to
defame the women by saying they were political activists or had been killed as
their van tried to run a roadblock. He said that his sister worked for the
Archdiocese of San Salvador and denied that she had been a political activist.

''She was working with refugees, bringing people to a refugee camp and seeing to
it that they had something to eat,'' he said. ''The charges are silly and would
be laughable but for the fact that they were being made by officials of the
United States Government. It can only be that the work they were doing was seen
as a threat by the forces in El Salvador and, consequently, was seen as a threat
by the United States, which was eager to whitewash its client.''

Mr. Ford said that efforts by the families of the victims to have those who
committed the crime, as well as those who ordered it, brought to justice had
been frustrated by resistance from Government officials to disclose information
about the killings.

''We don't have any faith in our Government's interest to find out who are
involved, who paid for it, who ordered it,'' Mr. Ford said. ''The United States
Government has done nothing but try to protect the interests of its client
state, El Salvador.''

He said that a trial would be but a ''small step'' in trying to bring justice to
the countless thousands of civilians killed in that country.

According to Mr. Ford, the military forces in El Salvador contributed to the
death of

Archbishop Oscar Romero , who was gunned down as he celebrated mass, and to the
deaths of 30,000 to 40,000 others.

The third anniversary of the deaths of the four women will be commemorated at 8
P.M. Dec. 8 at the First Congregational Church, 40 South Fullerton Avenue,
Montclair.


The first of several public hearings on a proposed 50-cent increase in tolls on
the six river crossings operated by the Port Authority of New York and New
Jersey will be held from 2 to 8 P.M. Nov. 29 at 1 World Trade Center. The second
will take place from 3 to 9 P.M. Dec. 1 at the Sheridan Heights Hotel in
Hasbrouck Heights.

Under the proposal announced a few weeks ago, round-trip tolls for passenger
cars, now $1.50, will go to $2, and truck rates will go to $1.50 per axle from
the present $1. The price of commuter books, good for 20 trips, will remain at
$20.

The crossings involved are the George Washington, Goethals and Bayonne Bridges,
the Outerbridge Crossing and the Lincoln and Holland Tunnels.

The decision to implement a toll increase comes as the Port Authority is
battling opposition to the PATH fare increases imposed in June.

A Superior Court judge in Jersey City has reserved decision in a suit brought by
Hudson County officials on behalf of some private citizens challenging the
recent 20-cent increase in PATH fares. The increase raised to 50 cents the fare
for the line's approximately 200,000 daily riders. An additional 25-cent
increase is scheduled for next June 3.

In court papers, Hudson County officials charged that the authority had imposed
the increase illegally because the decision was made at a closed-door, private
meeting of the commissioners and prior to public hearings. The authority
countered by arguing that, as a bi-state agency, it was not subject to New
Jersey's Open Public Meetings Law and that it had held public hearings, although
not legally required to do so.

A decision is expected soon.


The state's Division of Motor Vehicles will require any motorist filing for
renewal of his driver's license next year to have his photograph taken so that
it can be attached to the new license.

The new program, authorized by the Legislature several years ago, will begin
Jan. 2. It will provide appropriate means of identification for a variety of
purposes, including proof of age in bars and taverns or for check-cashing
purposes.

Once the plan is in place, a motorist will not be able to renew his licenses by
mail, but must appear in person at any one of 29 computerized motor- vehicle
agencies to have his picture taken and his license issued. Although there are 50
agencies in the state, only 29 are computerized and photographs will not be
taken at the others.

After the program is fully operational, motorists will have to renew their
licenses only once every four years, with the license costing $17.50. Licenses
are now good for two years and cost $8.

About 160,000 motorists a month are expected to have their photographs taken.


For seven weeks beginning Dec. 5, the Rutgers- Newark Robeson Center Gallery,
350 High Street, will be the scene of a photography exhibition depicting the
decay and promise of the urban scene.

Entitled ''Ruins and Revivals: The Architecture of Urban Devastation,'' the
exhibition is a visual display of abandonment and decay in cities in more than a
dozen states. It is the effort of

Camilo J. Vergara , a research associate at the Center for Social Science at
Columbia University, and

Kenneth T. Jackson , a professor of history there.

The color photographs, made between 1978 and 1983, depict changes in individual
buildings, such as the decline of four homes along Park Avenue in the Bronx and
an ark that is being built from demolition rubble in a lot in Newark's Central
Ward.

A special feature of the exhibition, which is free and open to the public, will
be a symposium on Dec. 7 that will include a dialogue between

Carl Stokes , a former Mayor of Cleveland, and

Gen. William C. Westmoreland , who commanded American troops in Vietnam, on the
topic ''Defense Spending vs. Spending for Social Programs.''


For six years,

Richard A. Gugel Sr.  of Clifton has watched his son fight a holding action
against lymphoma cancer and has tried to rally support for victims of similar
diseases. His son, who is 23 years old, is currently hospitalized in New York
City, where he is undergoing treatment for a variety of ailments connected with
his illness.

The older Mr. Gugel also has been battling, but with officials of Clifton's
Department of Public Works. They ended Richard Jr.'s employment with the city
for inability to perform his job as a laborer and because a form requesting an
extension of an unpaid leave of absence was not filed in time.

Following a disciplinary hearing before the state's Department of Civil Service,
the action of city officials was upheld and the removal was effective as of last
April 23.

On the day the extension request was to have been made, Mr. Gugel said, his son
was in the hosital fighting for his life and everyone forgot about the form. He
is appealing the ruling to the courts in an effort to have medical insurance
benefits reinstated.

Meanwhile,

Richard Jr.  has undergone more than six operations and faces still more, as
well as additional chemotherapy treatments.

As part of the battle, Mr. Gugel and his wife have begun the Lymphoma Cancer
Society of America in an effort to help their son and other victims of the
disease.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of William Ford

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BATTLE FATIGUE

BYLINE: By Jerome Charyn

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1032 words




 Jerome Charyn, who teaches at Princeton University, is the author of
''Pinocchio's Nose.'' TIGER THE LURP DOG By Kenn Miller.  214 pp. Boston:
Atlantic/Little, Brown & Co. $14.95. BLACK COCONUTS, BROWN MAGIC By Joseph
Theroux.  227 pp. New York: The Dial Press/Doubleday & Co. $13.95.

WHAT should we do about that cumbersome creature, the war novel? How many times
can we read about buddies, platoons, initiations into battle, girlfriends lost
to that college boy who stayed at home? The war novel seems to come with spare,
interchangeable parts. Despite their raw power, such World War II novels as
''From Here to Eternity'' and ''The Naked and the Dead'' finally succumb to a
debris of detail, that desire to get it all down, to record each particular
hell.

And what about ''Catch-22,'' or war as the great burlesque? Initially, the book
is silly with endless, tortured jokes, but once Yossarian is up in his B-25, the
joking seems to stop. The writing is muscular and lean, and that particular
piece of the war, a bomber waiting to bomb, becomes a startling image of war
itself as a kind of grim ballet between American and German machines.

But during World War II, the good were good, and the bad were very bad. We don't
have such a neat iconography for Vietnam. The heroes and villains seem
indistinguishable. And without a satisfying target to hurl our anger at, we've
moved from moral comment to hallucination, as if we could turn Vietnam into some
deadly magical place that didn't really exist at all. Hallucination, however,
has not solved the riddle of Vietnam.

And so with ''Tiger the Lurp Dog,'' we're back to the traditional war novel -
buddies, platoons, girlfriends in Duluth - hoping the old approach will provide
us with some secret understanding of love, death, war and the novel. Kenn
Miller's first book makes a noble try. It offers a glimpse of the war from the
point of view of one particular Lurp (Long-Range Reconnaissance Patrol) team and
its canine mascot, Tiger. ''Lazy and self-indulgent, yet alert and shifty,''
Tiger is a ''true recon dog.'' He does nothing but eat young chickens and crawl
through barbed wire. Tiger's ''main man'' is Mopar, a Lurp with a girlfriend
named Sybill Street. Mopar is only a kid, and he dreams of surviving until he's
21. ''Just let me live to be old enough to buy a beer in the supermarket and
I'll be satisfied.''

Mopar is a lifer, like his buddy, Marvel Kim, a ''pineapple gook from Hawaii.''
When he loses Sybill Street, he realizes that if ''the Army wanted me to have a
girlfriend, they would've issued me one out of supply.'' We're watching children
at war. Mopar and Marvel Kim step into the jungle as if they were involved in
some form of strategic play. They're foragers, like their Lurp dog, scrounging
through Vietnam. It's a dog's world in more ways than we can imagine.

Mr. Miller gives us an authentic sense of Lurps at war, where darkness is
''broken only by the weird glow of rotting vegetation, scattered like shattered
radium watch dials on the jungle floor.'' The team's reconnaissance leader,
Sergeant Wolverine, calls in the artillery to ''sling a little shrapnel around''
and begins to feel ''like Jehovah Himself, sitting on the bluff, calling down
fear, death, and destruction on the poor dudes in the valley.''

But Mopar and Marvel and Wolverine and Tiger himself are never individualized;
they're Lurps and little more. And like most war novels, the psychic terrain
becomes a bit too familiar. Nothing really holds us to Mopar and Tiger. Like
dolls tossed into a mine field, they explode and disappear.

*

''Black Coconuts, Brown Magic,'' a first novel by Joseph Theroux, is a more
curious book, a Vietnam War novel set in the fallen paradise of Samoa. Silas
Wicklowe, once a medic in Vietnam, is now a doctor on a three-month assignment
at the Lyndon Baines Johnson Tropical Medical Center in Pago Pago. Wicklowe
carries a double burden. Born in American Samoa, the son of a naval officer, he
has returned to paradise to uncover the mysteries surrounding his dead mother
and father. He's also running from his former wife. His war experience has made
him impotent, thrown him into a kind of psychic fatigue. He suffers from what
the Samoans call ''spirit sickness.'' He screams in the night and walks around
with dead eyes. He has the Vietnam blues.

Joseph Theroux (younger brother of the writers Paul and Alexander Theroux) isn't
burdened with the familiar tune of war buddies and top sergeants. Wicklowe is
all we ever get of Vietnam. He's never typified or made to stand for something
other than his own scratchy self. In the war, ''He worked to staunch blood,
perform tracheotomies where a mouth had been blown away, restuff bursting
intestines, tell a boy whose body was exploded that it was okay; the boy had
called, 'Mum! ' ''

His coming apart isn't mystifying or morose. His breakdown has the maddening
logic of the war.  ''There had been a short private from the Midwest. After a
firefight Wicklowe had worked on him and they had taken him away. A week later
he was back, bandaged but fit. The same day he was wounded and Wicklowe treated
him again. Two weeks later he was back again. Sent as a point man, he was picked
off that night. When Wicklowe saw his body, he became hysterical. The others
sought to restrain him, but he flailed out at them. They had knocked him out and
sent him back to camp.''

BUT the book starts to disintegrate with the arrival in Pago Pago of Wicklowe's
former wife, Betty. Betty is so unsympathetic she only serves to muddle our
sense of Wicklowe. The best characters are the Samoan women Vai and Ellie, who
re-invent the English language in a marvelous, funny way. But they're not
involved with Wicklowe enough to carry the book. The other men and women,
hospital administrators, doctors and a lecherous writer, are stock figures out
of some civilian platoon.

Still, ''Black Coconuts, Brown Magic'' is a sympathetic and disturbing portrait
of the ''spirit sickness'' the war has visited upon us. Wicklowe's nightmares
are one of the legacies of Vietnam.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 21, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

LIFE IN KOREAN DMZ: THE BOREDOM HAS AN EDGE

BYLINE: By CLYDE HABERMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1251 words

DATELINE: PANMUNJOM, Korea, Nov. 19


Somehow, winter's first dusting of snow this week softened the landscape and
made it less bleak. Not much less, though.

At its best, the Korean demilitarized zone has little to offer, unless one has
an insatiable appetite for craggy terrain and minefields and concertina barbed
wire stretching across more miles than the eye can take in.

It can be boring.

Most of the time, the American and South Korean soldiers on one side of the
two-and-a-half-mile-wide DMZ do little more than peer through long-range lenses
at the North Koreans on the other side. They get to do this in summers that are
airless and in winters that have no pity.

It can be scary, too.

60 Americans Have Died

All around are echoes and warnings of death. Some 60 Americans have been killed
in ambushes and accidents around here since the truce ending the Korean War was
signed in this village 30 years ago. Ten times that many North and South Koreans
have died.

No serious trouble involving Americans has arisen in the last few years. But
every soldier knows that this could be the day when life goes wrong.  They have
all seen photographs of the last major incident, in 1976, when two officers were
killed by ax-wielding North Koreans at Panmunjom's ''Bridge of No Return.'' The
bridge, where prisoners were exchanged at the end of the war, is the only
official land link between the two Koreas.

North Koreans seem to have a compulsion about infiltrating the south that is no
less strong than in 1953. Just last June, three of them were spotted south of
the heavily armed buffer zone and were killed by South Korean patrols.

Along the 151-mile length of ''the Z,'' as the soldiers call the zone, are 1,200
Americans, 10,000 South Koreans and one can only guess how many North Koreans.
Few are as entertaining as Singin' Sam.

That is what the Americans have dubbed the North Korean soldier who on many
nights visits them at their northernmost point, Guard Post Ouellette. He comes
close to the barbed wire, shouts obscenities and threats in English, then sings
to them in Korean. Sam's voice would make a frog wince, they say.

An Edge to Tedium

Right now, along the line that the soldiers walk between tedium and tension,
tedium may have the edge.

President Reagan drove up last weekend, looked around from the other American
guard post, Collier, and pronounced himself proud of those stationed here. Then
he left.

The Army being the Army, the soldiers had spent a good part of the previous two
months getting ready for the Presidential visit, installing shiny barbed wire
and filling fresh sandbags for their bunkers. After all that activity, a certain
letdown set in as soon as Mr. Reagan's helicopter flew off.

Some say they are nonetheless grateful to the President for calling public
attention to their lonely assignment. But others are grumbling a bit, including
some of the 90 soldiers based right near Panmunjom.

All of them volunteered to work, with little time off, in what is known as the
Joint Security Area. Technically, they are assigned to the United Nations
Command, which is dominated by the United States and South Korea. They are the
only Americans who spend their entire year's tour in South Korea inside the DMZ,
and no one else has as much steady contact - such as it is - with the North
Koreans, who also take up posts in Panmunjom.

They Were Locked in Barracks

While Mr. Reagan climbed up to the Collier guard post, the Americans in the
United Nations Command several hundred yards away were kept locked in their
barracks. They did not like it.

''Maybe they thought we were going to shoot him or something,'' one enlisted man
said. ''All I know is that we have a higher security clearance than the infantry
guys he gave his speech to.''

Discordance is the exception, however. Those who actually work within the DMZ
are few and seem to enjoy their special status, even if it is not matched with
special pay. ''Not many soldiers can say they stand patrol and watch North
Koreans every day,'' said Specialist 4 William Johnson of Allentown, Pa.

Similar thoughts strike infantry and artillery soldiers who patrol the southern
ridge of ''the Z'' but never enter it and stay in the vicinity only weeks at a
stretch. Staff Sgt. Norman Curry of Indianapolis is finishing up a month of duty
with a howitzer unit just south of the buffer zone. ''The way we rotate,'' he
said, ''we get to come up here once or twice a year - twice if we're lucky.'' He
was serious.

To get to Panmunjom means agreeing to a year with few opportunities for quick
escapes to a big city like Seoul and resigning oneself to second-run movies or a
game of PacMan at the enlisted men's club. Still, Pvt. James Dobel, a
19-year-old from Dayton, Ohio, figured he had settled on ''an exciting thing to
do.''

12 Months for 'Turtle'

Then again, Private Dobel is a ''turtle,'' having arrived three weeks ago. He is
a ''turtle'' because the in-processing and out-processing desks are only a few
feet apart, yet it will take him 12 months to cross that distance.

Nowhere is life more odd than in Panmunjom itself, where the various parties to
the Korean truce meet now and then, mostly to glare at each other. Except for a
sunken garden that the Americans built and that the North Koreans felt compelled
to match with one of their own, there is little but dull military buildings.

Every weekday at noon, North Koreans and members of the United Nations Command
meet to exchange reports on perfunctory matters for five minutes or so. Friendly
exchanges are said to be nonexistent. Both sides discourage even minor human
contact.

In the center of Panmunjom is a pagoda-style observation post that visitors may
ascend, but American soldiers caution them to keep hands down. Pointed fingers,
it seems, have been enough for North Korea to bring charges of threatening
gestures in violation of the 1953 armistice.

When such allegations are made, the multinational Military Armistice Commission
convenes - a formal body whose work is conducted in an atmosphere even less
pleasant than in the routine daily sessions. Three weeks ago, the commission
held its 422d meeting in the last 30 years, but the only accomplishment was one
more round of mutual North-South denunciations.

With nothing of substance accomplished, each side is reduced to elbowing for
minor advantage. Take the flag episode.

One day several years ago, the North Koreans came to a commission meeting with a
bigger flag than before. So the United Nations Command people went out and got
themselves a still bigger flag. North Korea returned with yet a larger flag, and
the United Nations Command responded in kind. Finally, the flags were so big
they could not fit inside the building.

A truce was called. Now both sides have small flags that can stand on the
negotiating table. The North Korean flag is longer, but the United Nations flag
is wider.

All this is a source of minor bewilderment for the Americans at Panmunjom, who
cannot feel the deep-rooted hatred and distrust created by the Korean War. None
were living then. Most were still in grade school when the Americans left
Vietnam a decade ago.

It is not the memories of old wars but the possibility of new ones that concerns
them, they say. Specialist Johnson, 23 years old, says he never thinks much
about his age or lack of detailed knowledge about past fighting.

''I know why I'm here,'' he said, ''if that's what you mean.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of American soldiers in South Korea

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 21, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

HISTORIANS' POLL RANKS KENNEDY HIGH, BUT AUTHORS CONTINUE TO ARGUE CASE

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2462 words


A poll of 1,000 historians ranks John F. Kennedy 13th among the 39 men who have
been American Presidents, between James K. Polk and James Madison. Despite that
academic exercise, 20 years after his death, Kennedy's place in history remains
unsettled and controversial.

The tug-of-war over Kennedy's reputation began even before his election.
Doubters on left and right saw more style than substance in the rich young man.
More bullish brokers saw high potential and steady growth.

Since Kennedy's death, the issue has occupied mainly academics, whose
scholarship often betrays a political biases. The terms of the argument have not
varied much over the years, but the fervor has increased and diminished with the
current of events.

In an interview, Herbert S. Parmet, the latest Kennedy biographer, laid the high
emotions of the late 1960's and early 1970's to the disillusion of the New Left
with the liberal legacy. His book, published a few months ago, occupies a middle
ground between Kennedy celebrants and detractors.

He Hopes People Long for Him

Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., who served in the Kennedy White House and has become
a keeper of the flame, expressed the view that ''the kind of thing Kennedy stood
for is being missed today, that people are looking back on it with a kind of
longing.'' But he granted, in an interview, that the current attention was just
the way historians and journalists marked the anniversary of a President's
death.

The treatment of Kennedy has ranged from near-idolatry to near- defamation.
Close associates, including Theodore C. Sorensen, who was Kennedy's special
counsel; Pierre Salinger, his press secretary, and, most imposingly, Mr.
Schlesinger himself, a special assistant, attempted to conquer posterity with
what now appear to have been pre-emptive strikes. Mr. Schlesinger completed his
book, ''A Thousand Days: John F. Kennedy in the White House,'' less than 500
days after the assassination.

Although he cautioned readers ''this work is not a comprehensive history of the
Kennedy Presidency,'' the author's credentials as professor of history at
Harvard, fellow at the Institute for Advanced Studies in Princeton and winner of
the Pulitzer Prize for ''The Age of Jackson'' made it certain that his
''personal memoir'' would stand as the target at which later historians would
take aim.

In all assessments, whether in the 1960's or 1980's, once the historian gets
past the man's style, the main focus is on a handful of events: the Bay of Pigs
and the Cuban missile crisis; the tension over Berlin and the beginning
involvement in Vietnam; the civil rights upsurge in the South. All can be found
in Mr. Schlesinger's work, which combines admiration for Kennedy's mind and
character with defensiveness about some of his actions.

Invasion Is Most Debated No action has been more debated than the invasion of
Cuba in the spring of 1961, planned by the Central Intelligence Agency and
carried to its lamentable conclusion by Cuban emigres. Mr. Schlesinger called it
Kennnedy's ''Cuban inheritance,'' thus shunting responsibility onto the
Eisenhower Administration; he attributed his President's decision to go ahead to
his having been ''in office only 77 days.''

Mr. Schlesinger's prose rose when he came to the 1962 Cuban missile crisis,
which ended with the Soviet leader backing down from confrontation with the
United States and removing Soviet missiles from Cuba. By then, he wrote, the
President was firmly in charge and ''saw more penetratingly into the mists and
terrors of the future than anyone else.''

Mr. Schlesinger conceded that the Adminstration did suffer a ''great failure in
foreign policy,'' the build-up of American troops in Vietnam to more than 16,000
in the thousand days. Here too, however, he found a reason: the President ''had
never given it his full attention'' and had relied too heavily on his Secretary
of Defense, Robert S. McNamara. Mr. Schlesinger took comfort from Kennedy's
expressed intention to withdraw from Vietnam after the 1964 election as a
portent of what might have been.

Message From Halberstam

Revisionists hold that Mr. Schlesinger was indulging in wishful interpretation.
Some find a different message in ''The Best and the Brightest,'' David
Halberstam's highly critical book about the men who carried the United States
into Vietnam. Mr. Halberstam, like Mr. Schlesinger, placed much of the blame on
Mr. McNamara, but he did not absolve the President, saying:

''Although he seriously questioned the wisdom of a combat commitment, and at the
end had grave doubts about the viabililty of the counterinsurgency program,
whether we should be there at all, he had never shown those doubts in public. In
this most crucial area the record was largely one of timidity.''

Others have gone further. It was not uncommon a decade after his death for young
scholars in the New Left mode to portray Kennedy as a prototypical cold warrior.

Mr. Schlesinger gave much higher marks to Kennedy for his stand in 1961 against
Soviet efforts to drive the Allied powers out of Berlin. Here, according to the
friendly historian, the President ''applied power and diplomacy in a combination
and sequence which enabled him to guard the vital interests of the West and hold
off the holocaust.'' He also commended Kennedy's initiatives to reach agreement
with the Soviet Union on nuclear testing and other steps toward reducing world
tension.

At home, Mr. Schlesinger praised the Administration for its domestic
accomplishments, especially in drawing up, after a slow start, ''the best civil
rights bill in American history.''

It Was Attacked From Start

In brief, this is the case for the defense, as it continues to be made by what
critics call the ''the liberal establishment.'' It has been attacked since the
day ''A Thousand Days'' appeared.

Mr. Schlesinger attributes the reaction against Kennedy to periodic fluctuations
in the reputations of Presidents. Reputations, particularly of the acknowledged
greats and near-greats, including Jefferson, Jackson, Lincoln, Wilson and the
two Roosevelts, have been periodically manhandled in accord with changing
national moods, unchangeable ideological positions and new information.

The historical fortunes of Presidents Truman and Eisenhower have risen and
fallen like stocks in a volatile market. In his book ''Modern Times,'' published
early this year, Paul Johnson heaps praise on Warren G. Harding, who came out at
the very bottom of the poll that ranked Kennedy 13th. The poll was taken by
Prof. Robert K. Murray of Pennsylvania State University, who questioned 1,000
holders of the doctoral degree in history.

In his poll, Lincoln was rated first and Franklin Roosevelt second, followed by
Washington and Jefferson in the category of ''great.''

The ''near-greats'' were Theodore Roosevelt, Wilson, Jackson and Truman. In the
''above average'' category were John Adams, Lyndon Johnson, Eisenhower, Polk,
Kennedy, Madison, Monroe, John Quincy Adams and Cleveland.

Wills's Is a 'Meditation'

The most recent attempt to scrape away at the Kennedy Presidency is Garry
Wills's ''The Kennedy Imprisonment,'' published last year. As the subtitle, ''A
Meditation on Power,'' hinted, this was not meant as straight history; it is a
psychohistory of the Kennedy clan with a generous helping of surmise. It brings
together the main counts in the anti-Kennedy indictment.

Mr. Wills, the Henry R. Luce Professor of American Culture and Public Policy at
Northwestern University and the author of several other provocative
interpretations of American history, was not the first to criticize the Kennedy
Administration from a position on the left.

Although many liberals seem to have been won over in an afterglow, Mr. Wills's
sharply drawn portrait continues to represent the view of a significant number
of American intellectuals. It can be found, for example, in an article in the
October Harper's magazine by Christopher Lasch, professor of history at the
University of Rochester. He wrote that Kennedy's ''unfulfilled promise'' (Mr.
Schlesinger's phrase) was little more than ''a promise of imperial grandeur and
cosmopolitan 'style.' ''




PICK UP

 ADD KENNEDY


A passage in ''The Kennedy Imprisonment'' appears to be a dig at Mr. Schlesinger
and his rendering of the Administration he served. Mr. Wills writes: ''Kennedy
did not liberate the intellectuals who praised him, he subverted them.'' In Mr.
Wills's opinion, Kennedy brought intellectuals into the White House ''to help
him arrange reality, to make style become substance, to define power as the
contriving of appearances.''

Schlesinger Retaliates

Professor Schlesinger repays the courtesy in the current issue of The New
Republic by classifying Professor Wills among ''the National Enquirer school of
biographers who collect unsubstantiated and unattributed rumors, treat them as
if they were indisputable facts and use them as the basis for a highly
speculative character analysis.''

In yet another thrust at the chroniclers before him, Mr. Wills observed:
''Accounts of the Bay of Pigs read like one of those 'bad news, good news'
jokes. The bad news is that the disaster was complete. The good news is that
President Kennedy learned so much from the experience.''

The allusion is to Theodore C. Sorenson's lines in his book, ''Kennedy,'' to the
effect that the Bay of Pigs, ''the worst disaster of that disaster-filled
period,'' had ''taught him invaluable lessons for the future.'' Kennedy emerges
from Mr. Wills's analysis as a compulsive risk-taker, in private as well as in
public. The Bay of Pigs is thus seen as ''a James Bond exploit, the very
definition of the New Frontier.''

Far from hailing the Cuban missile crisis as a triumph, Mr. Wills called it
''reckless.'' He credited Fidel Castro's explanation that the Soviet missiles
were in Cuba for ''defensive purposes,'' to discourage American plots against
the Cuban Government. And he charged that the ''success'' of the Cuban adventure
set the course for catastrophe: ''The lessons of power, the men of power, the
examples of power he left behind gave us the war in Vietnam.''

Metternich's View Surmised

Mr. Wills's interpretation receives a C-minus from Graham Allison, dean of the
John F. Kennedy School at Harvard, who did a study of the missile crisis in
1971. Mr. Allison regards its handling as ''one of the most effective and subtle
instances of crisis management by a President.'' ''Metternich would have loved
it,'' he wrote.

On the home front, Mr. Wills argued that the Kennedy Adminstration's attempt to
call off the Freedom Rides and to stop the 1962 march to Washington reflected
''the President's insensitivity to black problems.'' His book ended with a
comparison between the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and John F. Kennedy, to
the latter's disadvantage.

The Kennedy Administration has been flayed from the right as well as the left.
''J.F.K.: The Man and the Myth,'' a book by Victor Lasky published before the
assassination, was an anthology of the right's objections to the President whose
reputation, its author charged, was being prettified by liberal media-managers
and myth- makers. Mr. Lasky labeled Mr. Schlesinger the ''White House
apologist-historian-in-residence.''

While some on the left would later condemn Kennedy as a prototypical cold
warrior, here he was portrayed as insufficiently aggressive. Mr. Lasky faulted
Kennedy not for going forward with the Bay of Pigs but for refusing to provide
the needed air cover. His survey of the first two years of the Kennedy
Presidency found ''continuing setbacks all over the world'' and an inability to
deal with ''the relentless nature of world Communism.''

Latest Author Unhappy With Both

The latest history of the Kennedy term comes from Mr. Parmet, who teaches at
Queensborough Community College and the Graduate School of the City University
of New York. He says he undertook the work out of dissatisfaction with both
''the court historians and the disillusioned revisionists.'' In the second
volume of his biography, ''J.F.K.: The Presidency of John F. Kennedy,''
published this year, Mr. Parmet is neither so defensive as Mr. Schlesinger nor
so unsparing as Mr. Wills, much less Mr. Lasky, and probably comes closer than
any of them to expressing a historians' consensus.

On civil rights, he agrees with Mr. Wills that Kennedy was temperamentally not
in tune with the movement: ''The desperation was not felt, and the moral fervor
of a Martin Luther King Jr. left him cold.''

He discerns an element of machismo in Kennedy's conduct of foreign affairs but
does not presume to answer the question whether Kennedy's response to Soviet
pressure in Berlin, the military call-up and buildup along with exhortations to
construct civilian shelters, doing ''just about everything short of ordering
full mobilization,'' was ''unjustifiably provocative.'' He leaves open the
possibility that it might have been needed to get the Russians to back down.

Mr. Parmet comes closer to Mr. Wills in his analysis of the Bay of Pigs. He,
too, views the confrontation with Nikita S. Khrushchev of the Soviet Union as
growing out of Kennedy's obsession with Fidel Castro and an ''extravagant
emphasis on vigor, toughness.'' In his detailed account of the missile crisis,
however, he moves toward Mr. Schlesinger as he recalls that Kennedy resisted the
urgings of the Pentagon to destroy the missile bases at the same time that he
was sending private assurances of peaceful intent to the Russians through his
favorite emissary, his brother Robert.

And what about Vietnam? Mr. Parmet responds: ''What J.F.K. would have done about
American involvement in South Vietnam can never be known for certain. It is
probable that not even he was sure.''

What Would Have Been

Would greatness, that combination of the man, his times and the tastes of the
historians who confer it, have been achieved if the President had lived another
thousand days?

James David Barber, the author of ''The Presidential Character: Predicting
Performance in the White House,'' has a hunch that Kennedy might have made it.
''He was a learning President and was developing morally,'' says Mr. Barber, who
teaches political science at Duke. His own studies have persuaded him that in
contrast with certain Presidents like Wilson, Hoover, Johnson and Nixon, who
suffered from ''a strong bent for digging their own graves,'' Kennedy was more
like Truman and Franklin Roosevelt in possessing ''a saving sense of
proportion'' that could have held him back from excesses such as Vietnam.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of John Kennedy; photo of Arthur Schlesinger Jr.; photo of
Herbert Parmet; photo of Garry Wills

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 21, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

The Game Stopped

BYLINE: George Vecsey

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1082 words


WE were playing touch football when the President was shot. The fiancee of one
of the players came running through the park, calling: ''The President's been
shot in Dallas. They've closed the Stock Exchange.''

We knew enough to pick up our extra sweatshirts that had served as yard markers
and quietly to go our separate ways to whatever security our homes would offer
us. The news on our car radios told us what we did not want to hear.

We were mostly in our 20's, a collection of young journalists and baseball
players whose vagabond hours allowed us to play touch football at midday all
through the fall. We had short haircuts and nicknames like Killer, Joe D, Big
Ben, Rapid Robert, Jake, Little Alvin and Richie Swordfish.

As I look at our old photographs, I am struck by the optimism in our faces. It
seemed like a very good time to be in our 20's, and starting our adult lives. I
think John F. Kennedy had something to do with that.

Since the day we picked up our sweatshirts and trudged off the field, I have
often thought of the double irony of playing touch football in Kennedy Park,
named after early settlers of Hempstead, L.I., not for those Kennedys. Today the
name Kennedy is on New York's major airport and public schools all over the
country. Eight days ago in Frankfurt, my wife told me that the broad boulevard
on which we were driving was named Kennedystrasse.

Just playing touch football at the moment the shots rang out was irony enough.
Looking at the old publicity pictures of him now, in the 20th-anniversary glut
of memories, I am struck by how awkward and poorly conditioned John F. Kennedy
looks holding a football. Of course, for years there have been suggestions that
he suffered from Addison's disease, and he was in no shape to play football with
his more robust relatives and friends.

History has come to round out the picture of John F. Kennedy, but on that
morning, we would have agreed that we were playing the same game the President
played in his family compound at Hyannisport, Mass. We were young and so was the
President of the United States. That meant a lot to me.


Many people today will consider Franklin Delano Roosevelt or Harry S. Truman or
Dwight D. Eisenhower as their President. Others may have the same feeling about
one of those who came later. For me, John F. Kennedy will always be my
President.

In 1960 five very important things happened in my life: I was hired by a
newspaper, I was graduated from college, I turned 21, I was married, and John F.
Kennedy was elected President. For me at least, the narrow victory of the
Senator from Massachusetts was a comet blazing across the sky, signaling that
the 60's were going to be good years, different years.

The words now seem full of dust from the history books, but in those days people
talked excitedly about ''vigor'' and ''charisma.'' John F. Kennedy was an
attractive young President before the Beatles and the Rolling Stones, before
ballplayers used hair dryers and appeared in underwear ads. In 1960 he was all
the glamour we had, he and his wife who spoke French and looked terrific in an
evening gown.

The touch-football pictures were partly hyped; the photographs with John-John
playing under his desk must have been staged. But after the musty 50's, after
Ike, after a President who could not articulate outrage about segregation or
Senator Joseph R. McCarthy, after a President who played a marginal athletic
activity like golf, some of us were good and ready for a new decade.

Then the Kennedys hit the stage like a tumbling act in the circus, full of
blaring horns and rolling drums, and with lots of photographs of John F. Kennedy
about to throw a sideline pattern to Bobby or Ted.

Once in the summer of 1959, at a beach in Southampton, L.I., I found myself
waist deep in the surf a few yards from John F. Kennedy. Politically, it was no
thrill; we were Stevenson Democrats in my family. But a Presidential hopeful who
had young- looking friends, who went to the beach on a Sunday, seemed pretty
good to me.

The Kennedys became associated in my mind with sports and crowds and youth and
good times. One afternoon in 1961, in an amusement park in upstate New York, my
wife was almost knocked down by Robert F. Kennedy, who was making a fast visit
with his wife, Ethel, and some of their children. He stopped and excused himself
before rushing on. In October 1963, covering a football game in Annapolis, Md.,
I was almost mowed down by Robert Kennedy, who was leaving early through the
press box. The Kennedys moved fast.

Starting adult life the same year the youngest President was elected set up a
visceral sense of identification: the Kennedys lost a child; my wife went
through a difficult but successful first delivery. I could only wonder why the
dice had been rolled that way.

In this anniversary month, many historians now criticize John F. Kennedy's
actions toward Cuba and Vietnam; I will never be convinced he would not have
been smart enough to find sensible options toward both countries. But his time,
Malcolm X's time, Robert Kennedy's time, Martin Luther King Jr.'s time, and
Allard Lowenstein's time all ended too soon.


In the days after the shooting in Dallas, football twice added to my sense of
loss and revulsion. The National Football League went ahead with its games two
days later, while the President was lying in state, a gesture of disrespect I
have never been able to forget. And a week later, on a train heading for the
Army-Navy game in Philadelphia, I heard some whisky-slick officers and their
wives talking too loudly about how they had never been able to stand the
Kennedys in the first place.

In the years since Nov. 22, 1963, many of us who came of age in the early 60's
found no elected public figures to admire. Some of us admired the feminists and
Bob Dylan's songs and Lech Walesa and Bishop Romero of El Salvador, and we could
not help but notice that a Black Muslim boxer named Muhammad Ali did more to get
us out of Vietnam than any President did.

I mourn the loss of a President who seemed so intelligent and courageous and
witty and youthful at the time. I admit that I keep up with bits of news about
John F. Kennedy's children, and I root for Jacqueline Onassis in her battle for
privacy. And I cannot watch young people throwing a football in a park without
thinking of that day when the fiancee of one of the players came running across
the grass to tell us something that would end our game.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of John F. Kennedy in football uniform at age 10

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 22, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AN END TO DEBUNKING

BYLINE: By Adam Walinsky ;
Adam Walinsky, now a New York lawyer, was legislative assistant to Senator
Robert F. Kennedy.

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 630 words


It is 20 years, and the wheel has spun again. For a decade, the retrospectives
have had John F. Kennedy as little more than a callow youth, deficient in
judgment, bereft of real vision or courage, his triumphs guttering like a
candle. One half-expected that the eternal flame at Arlington would be shut off
to conserve energy.

The fact of the cynicism has

been clear, its causes less obvious. Of course, the Kennedys made errors, some
grievous; but there is little to suggest that even their worst errors were the
cause of the debunking. They were wrong in Vietnam; but few of those who have
gnawed at them for getting us into that war in 1961 did much very serious to get
us out of it after 1968. The Kennedys arguably were slow to join the cause of
the blacks; but that too has been a silent cause for many years. And, at least
up to the Test Ban Treaty, it can be said that they were outdated cold warriors,
imperialists even; but today's liberals seem torn between renewed recognition of
the Soviet danger and feeble flappings about President Reagan's clumsy lurches
to counter it.

No, the real reason we have debunked the Kennedys is not that we quarrel with
their positions, which we were proud to share and applaud at the time. We have
debunked John and Robert F. Kennedy for more than a decade because what they
stood for has been more than we were prepared to be, and therefore their memory
has been more than we were prepared to face. They reminded us of too much. They
did fight for civil rights, and yesterday's liberals now fear and resent blacks
just as did any of the Southern sheriffs we once thought were evil incarnate.
The Kennedys did try to help starving people around the world, and our obsession
is that others are impoverishing us. They called us all to the service of the
nation, and we have rested content in the knowledge that with a volunteer army
it would be someone else's sons who would do the dying. They asked for
compassion, and we have been selfish; they had wit, and we have been reduced to
sniggers; they exemplified courage, and our leaders are content that we should
be cowards. Where now are the challenges, the hymns to the bracing salt air and
the scent of danger, the sharp reminders of the sacrifice and sufferings of
others? It is our own inconveniences we have protested; we have only asked to be
left alone.

Yet surely there is more than the accumulating nostalgia of a generation to tell
us that we may be getting ready to face our past - and our future - again. An
overwhelming number of Americans select John Kennedy as the President most
fitted to cope with today's problems. The evidence is also in the remarkably
sensible and sophisticated reactions to all manner of questions on opinion
polls; in the persistent voluntary efforts to solve community problems and ease
local hardships; in a slowly renewing awareness of the rest of the world; in the
large majority of young people who say that all public assistance to their
college education should carry with it an obligation to give a period of service
to the nation. It is in an electorate that is learning again to demand from its
politicians that they should not merely make speeches but act.

If I am right that we are done with the debunking, it is only just in time. Of
course, the debunking has been sad: No one can be proud to mock his own youth,
his own dreams of justice and excellence however flawed. But more than this, it
has been frightening. To turn away from John and Robert Kennedy, at the last, is
to turn away not from their mistakes but from what they challenged us to be.
That was the best that was in us, and that is what we cannot afford to bury
along with the memory of those who sought, for that brief moment, to bring it
forth.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 22, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

JUDGE VOIDS INSTITUTIONAL CARE FOR DEFENDANT AFTER FINDING HE FAKED WAR TRAUMA

BYLINE: By JOSEPH P. FRIED

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 496 words


A 33-year-old man charged with 16 robberies convinced at least three
psychiatrists, the prosecution and a Brooklyn judge that he was a victim of
mental illness stemming from combat experiences in the Vietnam War.

The prosecution and judge thus agreed to accept his plea that he was not
responsible for committing the robberies, ''by reason of mental disease,'' and
he faced indefinite confinement in a mental institution rather than up to 25
years in prison.

But the defendant's story of war-induced ''post-traumatic stress disorder,'' and
his graphic accounts of the combat horrors that led to this illness, were a
fiction, according to court documents disclosed in recent days. They say that in
the entire time the defendant was supposed to have been in Vietnam, from 1972 to
1974, he was, in fact, an accounting clerk at an Air Force base in Texas.



Insanity Plea Annulled

As a result, his insanity plea was recently annulled in State Supreme Court in
Brooklyn, and he now faces trial on criminal charges.

''He did a very good acting job,'' said Dr. Stanley H. Brodsky, one of the
psychiatrists who affirmed that the defendant, Samuel Lockett, suffered from the
combat-caused stress disorder. ''I assume usually that when someone gives me a
list of his symptoms he is not fabricating them.''

But in an interview yesterday, the doctor also said he had found that Mr.
Lockett did not have the disorder to the degree that it made him not responsible
for the robberies.

''In short, I found he did not have an insanity defense,'' said the doctor, who
had been engaged by the office of District Attorney Elizabeth Holtzman to
examine the defendant.

Nonetheless, according to the judge in the case, Michael Juviler, Miss
Holtzman's office ''concluded that they could not disprove the defense of lack
of responsibility beyond a reasonable doubt.''



Delay in Getting Records

The judge accepted the insanity plea last April.

But in June, he noted, Miss Holtzman's office moved to annul the plea on the
ground that, after it had been entered, the office received Mr. Lockett's
records from the Air Force and they showed ''he had never left Randolph Air
Force Base in Texas.'' The judge granted the annulment in September.

He said that Miss Holtzman's office had reported subpoenaing Mr. Lockett's
military records before consenting to the insanity plea but that they had not
been provided immediately by the military because certain procedures had not
been followed.

''In hindsight, we should have stuck to our guns and waited until we obtained
the records,'' said Ned Steele, a spokesman for Miss Holtzman. ''No one dreamed
he was making it up.''

Mr. Steele said Mr. Lockett, who is appealing the annulment of his insanity
plea, still insists he served in Vietnam. The defendant has been in custody,
alternating between jail and a psychiatric facility, since his arrest in January
1981 after a string of robberies involving stores in Brooklyn.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 22, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BYLINE: By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 935 words


THE DEATH OF CHE GUEVARA. By Jay Cantor. 578 pages. Knopf. $17.95.

IT is a bold and ambitious project that Jay Cantor has undertaken in his unusual
first novel, ''The Death of Che Guevara'' - to reconstruct the career of the
Argentine revolutionary out of historical documents, the overwhelming majority
of which the author has invented. But as early as page 5 of the nearly 600-page
story, the narrator - or, more precisely, the intelligence that presides over
the construction of the narration - calls our attention to one of the book's
more fundamental problems.

In an introductory section simply titled ''Dates,'' in which there are recorded
certain major developments that have occurred between 1927 and 1966 in the
worldwide struggle between Communism and capitalism, the narrator cites 1939,
''The Soviets sign a ten-year nonaggression pact with Germany,'' and then adds,
with what one takes to be a touch of irony, ''(No longer able to locate the hero
in this movie, one twists uncomfortably in one's seat).''

Well, that was a little premature for this reader, who wasn't quite yet getting
restless for lack of a hero. But it wasn't more than a couple of hundred pages
later that I began to experience the fatal symptoms, not so much for lack of a
hero as for anyone or anything to be truly interested in. Certainly it wasn't
any of the spear carriers who surround the monumental figure of Ernesto (Che)
Guevara - not even Fidel Castro or the revolutionary theorist Regis Debray, both
of whom are presented in a somewhat morally ambiguous light, or Guevara's
parents, who, while extremely interesting, are swept off stage rather early in
the going.


As for Che Guevara himself, the author of this novel, being an obviously
sophisticated student of history, has taken great care to lay the psychological
foundation for his hero's fanatic revolutionary character. He portrays him as a
hysterical asthmatic (perhaps the result, if asthma can ever be said to have
psychological roots, of an early traumatizing desertion by his mother), as well
as the victim of violent Oedipal feelings that have been aggravated by his
mother's seductiveness and his father's competitiveness.

There is lots of Freud. The young Guevara perverts his ideas this way: ''Freud
may help us to see what parts of ourselves need changing. Then we must find the
material conditions that must be changed to change ourselves. So Freud becomes
Marxism. And then Gramsci's right: the revolutionary must be his own
psychoanalyst. It is a matter of freeing the will to act.'' Then there is the
somewhat dramatically heavy-handed moment when, in finally abandoning his code
of Gandhian nonviolence and preparing to shoot down an American mercenary during
the Guatemalan revolution of 1954, Guevara fantasizes that he is murdering his
father. But whatever the appeal of Guevara's ideas and objectives, very early in
this novel he has become psychologically an automaton.

Some readers, of course, may find considerable appeal in this portrait of the
man who was, after all, the charismatic revolutionary figure of the 1960's, and
may follow with sympathy his endless and frustrating struggle to persuade the
poor and ignorant of Bolivia that they represent an international revolutionary
vanguard whose interests are reflected by Vietnam's so-called struggle against
imperialism. There are even touches of comedy in some of the scenes where
Guevara tests the blade of his ideology against the stones of ancient Inca
superstitions.

But the appeal of Mr. Cantor's Guevara is finally a matter of taste and
temperament. In a concluding section, also called ''Dates,'' Regis Debray
analyzes revolutionary conflict as follows: ''It is not individuals who are
placed face to face in these battles, but class interests and ideas; but those
who fall in them, those who die, are persons, are men. We cannot avoid this
contradiction, escape from this pain.'' Some readers of ''The Death of Che
Guevara'' will be more susceptible to the pain than others.


An even more fundamental problem with this novel may lie in Mr. Cantor's
strategy of constructing his narrative largely out of documents - journal and
diary entries, letters, interviews, songs, poems and notes for a biography of
Guevara by his closest companion and one of the few survivors of the disastrous
Bolivian campaign. When such documents are normally compiled in a thick volume,
one tends to overlook their repetitiousness and rough-hewn shape on the grounds
of their authenticity. One accepts the invitation they implicitly extend to do
one's own hewing and shaping. The wonder is that history can offer up raw
material that the reader himself can make into art.

But since the documents that form ''The Death of Che Guevara'' have mostly been
invented, they represent the end product of artistic activity, and, therefore,
instead of inviting us to select and create, they force us to accept them in a
comparatively passive state of mind. To put it more bluntly, they impel the mind
to wander. One of the places it wanders is to the irresistible conclusion that
Mr. Cantor has been infected by such novelists as James Joyce and Herman
Melville.

''I'm not interested in whales,'' says Che Guevara in one of the novel's less
subtle scenes, when his companion invites him to read ''Moby Dick'' and Mr.
Cantor thereby begins the bludgeoning of his readers with comparisons of Guevara
to Captain Ahab, as well as to Satan, Jonah and other familiar literary figures.
But Mr. Cantor is fatally drawn to leviathans, and in the belly of his beast the
going gets pretty tedious.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 23, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

TEXT OF MEMORIAL TRIBUTE TO JOHN KENNEDY IN THE CAPITAL BY HIS BROTHER

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1628 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 22


Following is the text of a tribute delivered today by Senator Edward M. Kennedy
at a memorial mass at Holy Trinity Roman Catholic Church here on the 20th
anniversary of the assassination of his brother, President Kennedy:

President Reagan, first of all I want to thank you for your gracious presence
here. Both you and Mrs. Reagan have been very kind to our family on this and
other occasions.

Archbishop Hickey and friends:

From this church on a cold winter morning nearly a quarter century ago, John
Kennedy went forth to his inauguration as President of the United States. Now,
we, his family and his friends, return here on the 20th anniversary of his death
to remember him - not in sadness but in joy - and to share that joy with a
nation and a world that shared our love for him.

He came to the Presidency by the narrowest of margins but when he was taken from
us our planet was more united in grief than it ever was in the grandest design.

Moscow wept with Boston and with Dallas.

In the years that followed, the feeling for him has not dimmed but deepened and
today, far from this church in lands where hardly anyone speaks his language
they still hear his call.

His presence continues to be so powerful because ideals can be shown far more
vividly in one life than in all the lofty theories. He has been made a legend
but we remember him as a man.

We treasure him most as a son and a brother, husband, father, uncle, friend. He
took issues seriously but never himself too seriously. Indeed, his family would
not let him. After his election, when we were all at dinner one night, Dad
looked at him and then turned to Mother and said with a smile, ''He may be
President, but he still comes home and swipes my socks.''

Qualities of Leadership

The qualities that made us love him were the same human qualities that attracted
so many millions who never met him at all. He knew historians would write of him
but his truest history is written in the hearts of people everywhere. They
forgave him his shortcomings because he gave us a sense of what human beings,
despite their imperfections, can aspire to do.

He challenged us to do better, but he also understood that none of us, including
himself, would ever do as well as we should.

In his leadership there was the same fine mix of elements as in his life.

Walking on the beach at home he said to me when I was very young, ''On a clear
day, you can see all the way to Ireland.''

In later years, the sweep of his vision reached from the soaring distances of
outer space to the narrowest and darkest corners of existence. And someday, when
human beings look back from the stars towards a glistening blue earth suspended
in the sky, they will know that it was John Kennedy who first set them on their
way.

And he had courage which permitted him to bear often sharp pain almost every day
and which made him respond to the pain of others. He rejected the cold
affliction of indifference and the comfortable erosion of concern.

He never summoned us to selfishness but he asked what we could do for our
country and each other.

He could be cautious when he should. Yet in the great cause of civil rights his
courage overcame him and he led us closer to the day when we shall overcome.

Compassion was at the center of his soul but he never wore it on his sleeve.

I remember from my childhood how in the most natural way he cherished and cared
for our retarded sister, Rosemary, and took her sailing with all of the rest of
us.

Concern for Humanity

And the genuine concern he showed inside our family he also felt for what he
called the family of man.

He reawakened Americans to the reality that the strength of our nation lies not
only in the firepower of our arms but in the powerful appeal of our most decent
values.

He stood firm in Berlin and the Cuban missile crisis and he also advanced the
cause of human rights. He put America on the side of history and of hope.

In campesinos on the remotest plantations, families in the huts and the villages
of half the globe who had known only despair for generations saw America as
their friend and John Kennedy as their brother.

He replaced an age-old alliance with oppression with a new Alliance for
Progress, and in 46 countries he is remembered for sending in the Peace Corps.
The world looked to him because the causes he had at heart illuminated what is
best about America.

Most of all, he had that independence of mind which our parents by their
strength instilled in all of us. He resisted assumptions, especially his own. He
was ready to rethink ideas, including his own.

In 1960, he campaigned on the missile gap. In office, he came to recognize the
terrible gap between our weapons and our will to control them, the stark choice
we faced between existence and extinction.

In his last months, he brought us the test ban treaty and the beginning of an
end to the cold war. And so we knew the first springtime of a long nuclear
winter.

There were missteps and mistakes. But for him, saving lives in the national
interest was more important than saving face. He took responsibility for the Bay
of Pigs, and how much I wish he had been there to reconsider our role in
Vietnam.

Could Admit His Mistakes

It is never an easy thing for the powerful to admit a mistake, but he showed us
that it is perhaps the essence of greatness in Presidents that they can.

Some say he grew in office. I believe he achieved a rare and noble height and at
the summit of his ''city on the hill'' was America the tolerant. He had
adversaries, but never enemies; and his likely opponent in 1964, Barry
Goldwater, was also his good friend.

His power was tempered with poetry, his activism with a deeper truth of art. He
was tough on the pompous and the irrational, no matter what their place or rank.
He was gentle with children, his own and others. During the most serious
discussions in the Oval Office, he was never too busy to take a call from
Caroline or to pause for a moment and play hide-and-seek with John.

His flashing wit indelibly marks our love for him with laughter.

After my Senate victory in 1962, he spoke at a rally with me in Boston and said,
''My brother is tired of getting ahead on the basis of a famous family name, so
he's changing his name from Teddy Kennedy to Teddy Roosevelt.''

And after he persuaded Robert Kennedy to become Attorney General, he said he had
a simple request: ''Just one thing, Bobby. Please comb your hair.''

What a wonderful combination they were. The two of them were one in purpose and
vitality in their capacity to dream dreams and renew our vision.

Robert Kennedy had a valiant part then and he has it on this day. To the end, he
lived out the meaning of our brother's unfinished life. Among their greatest
legacies are the people they brought into public endeavor - the happy few. The
band of brothers on the New Frontier, fighting for glorious things, has become a
multitude who are still in the arena, at the center of the struggle.

Summing Up the Man

All of us in this church may not gather all together again, but to those who
share the commitments, the compassion and the high hopes of John Kennedy, there
will never be a last assembly.

How then shall we sum up this man, who had every gift but the length of years?

He was an heir to wealth who felt the anguish of the poor.  He was an orator of
excellence who spoke for the voiceless.

He was a son of Harvard who reached out to the sons and daughters of Appalachia.

He was a man of special grace who had a special care for the retarded and
handicapped.

He was a hero of war who fought hardest for peace.

He said and proved in word and deed that one man can make a difference, which is
why his thousand days will be remembered for a thousand years and more.

As Jackie wrote after that brave and bitter weekend his high noon kept all the
freshness of the morning and he died then never knowing disillusionment.

And he himself wrote after our brother Joe was gone, ''Through it all he had a
deep and abiding faith. He was never far from God and death to him was less a
setting forth than a returning.''

John Kennedy had faith strong enough for any fate.

He made America young again and the world seemed new again.

So it is that on this anniversary, the span of time since Nov. 22, 1963, does
not seem like a matter of decades but of days.

And over his memory and his meaning death has no dominion.

What he did and believed in will endure, and in the end it will prevail.

The Loss and the Inspiration

Inevitably we cannot forget the pain of his loss. On bright summer afternoons at
Cape Cod or in this waning season of the year, how often we still think of him
in all his vigor and say to ourselves, ''We miss you Jack and always will.''

But in the darkness we see the stars and how clearly we see him now. We have
known other great men and women in our time in other countries and our own. Yet
there was a spark in him so special that even his brief years and his early
passing could not put it out.

He made us proud to be Americans and the glow of his life will always light the
world.

For him on this day 20 years ago, the journey came to an end. But for us here
and others everywhere, there are promises to keep and miles to go before we
sleep.

Now his appeal summons us anew, not merely to remember him but to rededicate
ourselves. The unfinished quality of his life symbolizes the unfinished agenda
of America.

As the torch is passed to each succeeding generation, I believe that those who
seek peace and justice, those who join the forward march of the human pilgrimage
on earth will say of John Fitzgerald Kennedy, ''He has never left us, and he
never will.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Rose Kennedy with her children

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 23, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Arnold Brackman, 60, Dead; Reporter and Author on Asia

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 127 words


Arnold C. Brackman, an award-winning author who wrote extensively on Southeast
Asia, died Monday in Danbury (Conn.) Hospital. He was 60 years old and lived in
Brookfield Center, Conn.

Although Mr. Brackman turned his attentions to writing about archeology late in
his life, he established his reputation as a reporter and an author covering
Japan, Indonesia, Vietnam, Cambodia and other Asian countries.

He was born in New York City on March 6, 1923, and received a degree in
journalism from New York University. His first major job was as an Asian
correspondent for United Press. He later worked for The Christian Science
Monitor and The Week in Review in The New York Times.

He is survived by his wife, Agnes; a daughter, Cathay, and a sister, Sondra.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 24, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BEYOND THE A.C.L.U., GREENER GRASS

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1119 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Seven years ago, when he startled his colleagues by leaving his post as head of
the American Civil Liberties Union in Washington, Charles Morgan Jr. said he had
little idea where he would land.

''I do not resign to take another job, to practice privately, to teach or to
work in a campaign,'' he wrote. ''I have no plans, no private law practice, no
prospective high- paying clients which make lawyers attractive to a law firm, no
private wealth, not much savings, lots of expenses and a son in college.''

Mr. Morgan's resignation, a result of personality and policy differences with
the organization's leadership in New York, was only the latest in a lifetime of
surprises. It was Mr. Morgan, after all, who as a young lawyer in Birmingham,
Ala. sacrificed his political ambitions and growing legal career by denouncing
racial prejudice and the established order in the early 1960's.

One day after a bomb killed four black children in a Birmingham church, Mr.
Morgan spoke to the Young Men's Business Club in town. ''Who did it? Who threw
that bomb?'' he asked the audience. ''The answer should be 'We all did it.' ''

Smoking Ordinance Defeated

Still, nothing Mr. Morgan had done could have prepared his associates for his
post-A.C.L.U. career, as head of a 13-member Washington law firm, many of whose
clients are pillars of established society.

Mr. Morgan was retained by the American Tobacco Institute, for which he helped
defeat an ordinance in Newport News, Va. requiring ''no smoking'' zones in
public places. Then, he defended both Sears, Roebuck & Company and the
University of North Carolina in discrimination cases brought by the Federal
Government.

On behalf of the New York Power Authority he is fighting efforts to close the
Indian Point 3 nuclear power generator. And, as counsel for the Atlanta firm of
King & Spalding, he recently argued before the Supreme Court that private law
firms were not covered by Federal laws on race and sex discrimination.

Indignant, Mr. Morgan's old confr eres have become his fiercest detractors,
ticking off his clients like items on a bill of indictment.

Mr. Morgan, who is 53 years old, concedes that he is now representing the kind
of ''big mule'' he has long railed against. He also admits that after a lifetime
of starving for principle, he is doing ''very well'' financially. Still, he
insists that the critics are accounting for a phenomenon that never took place.
Chuck Morgan hasn't changed, he says. The times have.

'No Burning Cause'

''All of these people say there's plenty to do,'' said Mr. Morgan. ''What is it?
I don't see it.''

''The people are quiescent and the issues are obscured,'' he continued. ''There
is no burning cause out there that goes unrepresented, or that I am particularly
concerned about. Am I supposed to speak out against malaise?''

Some of Mr. Morgan's detractors say his change of course is a Southerner's
revenge against the largely urbanized Northerners who run the civil liberties
movement and with whom he clashed when another Southerner, Jimmy Carter, ran for
President. Others attribute it to iconoclasm, ego, opportunism, or to an
outright change of personality. Still others say Mr. Morgan simply wanted to
make more money than the approximately $30,000 he drew at the A.C.L.U.

''One has to assume that money is a substantial part of the move,'' said Alvin
J. Bronstein, director of the civil liberties union's national prison project.

After his speech in Birmingham, Mr. Morgan became a hero to many liberals. In
Birmingham, however, there were death threats, and after a few months, he felt
he had to leave for his own safety.

Advocate of Impeachment

He eventually landed at the A.C.L.U.'s Atlanta office, where he spent eight
years seeking to desegregate juries, enfranchise blacks and, in his words,
''bring the Constitution to life in the deep South.'' His crowning achievement
was Reynolds v. Sims, the reapportionment case in which the Supreme Court upheld
the principle of one man, one vote.

In 1972, he was named head of the A.C.L.U.'s Washington office, and here, too,
his practice took on the coloration of the times. His clients included Col.
Howard Levy, the Army dermatologist who refused to train Green Berets for
Vietnam, and Muhammed Ali, who was fighting the draft. Later, he represented
people who were wiretapped by the Nixon Administration and he became an early
advocate of impeaching the President.

Four years later, however, he abruptly left the organization, charging that his
superiors were attempting to muzzle him for making political statements, more
specifically, his assertion that Northern liberals were refusing to support Mr.
Carter for President.

Mr. Morgan says charges that he has selected his clientele specifically to
''tweak'' the civil libertarian community are a ''madness there is no clinical
term to describe.'' His clients, he says, have come to him; his task, he
contends, is to represent rather than judge them.

At same time, Mr. Morgan insists he is more than a ''hired gun.'' There is, he
says, a theme to his law practice, one reflecting a belief that ''a person
should be free of structures, institutions, Government, clients, employers.''

The Urge to 'Take Over'

Mr. Morgan is fond of saying that where he came from, the word government meant
George Wallace and Eugene ''Bull'' Connor rather than any well-intentioned,
benevolent institution. But the distinction, he says, doesn't really matter.
Whether it's the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission or the Federal Bureau
of Investigation, he argues, Government is rarely civil libertarian. Instead, it
has an irresistable urge ''to take over every damn fool thing in the world'' and
step on the rights of citizens or corporations.

''There was no question in my mind but that Sears, for most of its history, had
done more for black Americans than the Federal Government,'' he said. ''And
there's no question that Sears today, with its affirmative action programs, far
surpasses all the liberal organizations that I know anything about.''

His old colleagues, he argued, are ''ideologues frozen in time,'' with fixed
notions of right and wrong that have little applicability now. Equally
anachronistic in an era of judicial conservatism, he said, are their attitudes
toward lawyers and the courts and the roles they can properly play.

It is ''stark raving absurd,'' he contended, to believe that lawyers have a
higher duty than to represent their clients. ''The lawyers role is not to save
society,'' he said. ''It is the society's job. If liberty is dead among the
people, no lawyer in the world can do anything about it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Charles Morgan

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 25, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Economic Scene;
The Outlook In Other Lands

BYLINE: Leonard Silk

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 923 words


THANKSGIVING is a time for stock-taking, even in the sphere of macroeconomics.
With the United States economy recovering and unemployment coming down, we have
much to be thankful for. But what about the rest of the world? The picture is
highly uneven.

To the north, Canada is in an upswing - a kind of tail, whether Canadians like
it or not, to the United States economy. But Canada, hit harder by the world
slump than we were, has further to go before its recovery is complete.
Unemployment is close to 12 percent, whereas it has fallen below 9 percent in
the United States.

To the south, in Latin America, the economic picture remains worrisome. Living
standards throughout the region, especially for the poor, are worsening as real
economic growth stagnates and population rapidly expands. The international debt
problem bars countries from using fiscal and monetary policies to revive growth.


Indeed, in response to the demands of commercial banks and the International
Monetary Fund, Brazil, Mexico, Argentina, Venezuela and other countries will
continue to face the necessity of carrying out austerity programs. As they
struggle with the problems of cutting budgets, raising taxes, slowing monetary
growth and curtailing imports, they are likely to be saddled with continuing
recessions or very slow recoveries in the coming year.

Brazil, the biggest economy south of the border and the biggest debtor, is
likely to stay in its slump well into 1984. But the revival of world demand
should help it start growing again before next year is over. Brazil looks like a
reasonably good bet to get out of its horrendous debt problem.

Mexico, which was the biggest debtor a year ago, has now made substantial
progress in easing its foreign debt problem. The country looks poised for
growth, with the domestic economy starting to revive. But the global oil glut
and slack demand for Mexico's minerals will work against a strong revival of the
economy as a whole.

Argentina, with a new Government under Raul Alfonsin and his Radical Civic Union
taking over on Dec. 10, will be trying to avoid default on its foreign debts
while seeking to get the I.M.F. and other creditors to ease austerity conditions
for more loans. The Argentines will argue that further depression of living
standards would only lead to political upheaval. Indeed, that is the general
anxiety throughout Latin America.

In Japan and other countries of the Pacific basin, the economic outlook is
brighter. The Japanese economy, after weathering the world recession without an
actual decline in its own real gross national product, is likely to move ahead
in the coming years at a good clip, with real growth running between 4 and 5
percent a year.

Barring political disasters, so will South Korea and Taiwan. Indonesia will lag
because of weak world demand for its oil. The Philippines, wracked by internal
political dissent, is also likely to lag, both because of the shakiness of the
Marcos administration and the hesitancy of foreign lenders to increase their
exposure there.

Australia and New Zealand, after the stiff recession of the last few years,
should be on the upswing as global demand revives for their agricultural
exports. Their governments are also likely to pursue more expansive fiscal and
monetary policies. But inflation there also may revive.

The countries of Western Europe remain cautious, and their economies are likely
to grow more slowly next year than those of the United States, Canada and Japan.
West Germany and Britain are likely to be at the head of the European growth
parade but with their real G.N.P. increasing at no better than a 2 percent rate.
The Socialist Government of France under President Francois Mitterrand, having
first aimed for faster growth and now struggling to bring down inflation and
rescue the franc, still has to pursue austerity policies. France can expect
continuing recession in 1984.

In the Middle East, the dominant economic worry is how long the oversupply of
oil will last. The dominant political worry is that war might end that glut and
wreck everything else.

The developing countries of Africa and South Asia are desperately hoping that
the industrial nations, led by the United States, will revive and pull their
economies up. In some countries, world deflation has been more upsetting than
inflation. South Africa is worried about continued downward pressure on the
price of gold, resulting partly from the decline of inflationary expectations
and partly from the strength of the dollar. The South Africans are afraid that,
without stronger economic growth, their racial conflicts will worsen.


Virtually all the countries, industrial and developing, join in criticizing the
United States for its big budget deficits and high interest rates, which they
blame for their own high rates and sluggish economies. Yet virtually all are
counting on the United States to play the role of lead locomotive to pull the
world out of the economic mire.

The Communist nations, as a group, are still stuck in the mud. What looks like
the end of the Andropov regime in the Soviet Union still finds that country
without a remedy for its economic inefficiency and stagnation. Poland and the
rest of Eastern Europe, along with China, Vietnam and the other Communist
countries, are also struggling for a way to cure their economic ills.

At this juncture, the world's economic problems, so terrifying a year ago, now
look far less ominous than its military problems. Give thanks for medium-size
blessings.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 25, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SPORTS OF THE TIMES;
KAREEM'S LIFE AND A FOOTBALL NOVEL

BYLINE: By George Vecsey

SECTION: Section D; Page 9, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 957 words


It would be hard to find a greater

contrast than the basketball world

of Kareem Abdul-Jabbar and the football vision of Peter Gent in a pair of books
published in the past few days. Reading them back to back brings on instant
culture shock.

Abdul-Jabbar's book is an autobiography, ''Giant Steps,'' with sensitive help
from the co-author, Peter Knobler, and is published by Bantam. It describes
Abdul-Jabbar's discovery of blackness, basketball, America, Islam and,
ultimately, himself. The book, like the man's urban, Northern sport, is often
personal and creative.

Gent's novel, ''The Franchise,'' published by Villard Books, is an apocalyptic
vision of professional football, set in a city resembling Dallas. The book, like
the sport, is often distant and fearful.

Both main characters seek control of their lives in a chaotic world, full of
injuries and drugs and violence. Abdul-Jabbar fills out his two decades in
basketball with sharp insights about Harlem, parochial schools, his parents and
Wilt Chamberlain.

Gent, who spent five seasons as a Dallas Cowboy receiver and later wrote the
novel ''North Dallas Forty,'' has crammed this latest novel with exaggerations
of every scandal and tragedy to hit professional football in the last decade:
the suicide of a former player, the mysterious death of an owner, allegations of
ticket scalping, union upheaval, rampant use of cocaine and steroids, and the
ongoing battle for control of television dollars.

But while much of real pro football is merely banal and venal, Gent's vision of
Dallas football is conspiratorial and exaggerated: a bagman commissioner, a
union leader flung out of an airplane, a beautiful carhop who becomes a club
owner, a crooked quarterback, mob infiltration, a crusading sportswriter
tortured to death, a crazed Vietnam veteran, dead and injured children galore.

''Football is not a metaphor for life; it is life,'' Pete Gent said during a
visit to New York this week.

Unfortunately his vision of life is not likely to make much sense to anybody who
does not follow the gloomy world of pro football. There is little
characterization, and everybody talks alike. The movie script is already under
way.

One need know nothing about basketball to enjoy ''Giant Steps,'' the odyssey
from Lew Alcindor of Manhattan to a Muslim basketball star named Kareem
Abdul-Jabbar who lives in a mansion in Bel Air, Calif.

Because of his 7-foot-2-inch height, his exotic name, his isolation from the
press in high school and college and his often impassive public face,
Abdul-Jabbar has remained something of a mystery man until now. He paints a
subtle picture of his father, a stern transit officer from the Caribbean who
came alive only through his music, and his mother, a Roman Catholic convert
devoted to her only child. He admits he still feels pain over their decision to
send him off from their integrated Manhattan neighborhood to an all-black
boarding school in Philadelphia for the fourth grade.

He brings up the searing moment when his high school coach, Jack Donohue, tries
to motivate him in a locker-room lecture by telling him he is playing ''just
like a nigger.''

So tall and so gifted, Lew Alcindor could have easily stayed within the
basketball pipeline, never developing an inner life. But even as the most
heavily recruited high school player in the country, he was seeking out friends
and experiences away from the court.

Some parts of ''Giant Steps'' have echoes of ''The Autobiography of Malcolm X.''
Abdul-Jabbar admits that his growing cynicism about whites led him to the
fringes of anti- Semitism until a charismatic Muslim leader, Hamaas
Abdul-Khaalis, exorcised prejudice from him.

He fondly recalls street life in Harlem in the 1960's. (''Now it looks like
Bremen or one of those bombed-out cities,'' he observed last week on a brief
visit to New York.) His book describes a summer with the Harlem Youth Action
Project, when he would write for a newspaper in the morning and spend the
afternoon learning black history at the Schomburg Center for Research in Black
Culture.

One day he came out of the subway and found Harlem rioting over the shooting of
a black youth by a police officer. ''Torn between my newfound journalist's news
sense and the unsettling scent of blood, I watched from the subway steps,'' he
writes. ''I had ducked bullets behind a lamppost, but this went beyond a
skirmish; this was out of control. I found myself running, grunting - I didn't
stop till I was at 137th Street and Broadway. Anger wasn't new to me, nor was
power, but I was burning without release. No amount of running would give these
people control of that street - I knew that - and that made me angry.''

In another section, he recalls being graciously accepted into Wilt Chamberlain's
inner clique as a teen-ager, and how he developed a crush on one of
Chamberlain's female friends but was too shy to do much about it. In fact,
Abdul-Jabbar admits, he was ''almost always'' too introverted to be a ladies'
man.

He dabbled in drugs during college, a small part of the book that has been
overpublicized in recent weeks. He said this week that ''I had to put it in, to
be honest, but I would tell young people now that you don't need to take drugs
to enjoy life.''

Asked if young people might follow his actions rather than his advice,
Abdul-Jabbar said, ''You don't have to try suicide to know it's not good for
you.''

The passages on his conversion to Islam, on the failure of his marriage and on
the mass murder of fellow Muslims in his home in Washington are well done. In
the final segment he pursues Cheryl Pistono, who prods him to feel and speak for
himself. The result is a book about a man and a life worth knowing.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Kareem-Abdul Jabbar

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 27, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV VIEW;
SOME MADE-FOR-TV FILMS ARE MORE THAN FLUFF

BYLINE: By John J. O'Connor

SECTION: Section 2; Page 31, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 893 words


The TV movie is here to stay, but, as one of the newer kids on the entertainment
block, it will have to take its knocks, especially from those who toil in the
presumably loftier levels of ''film.'' As just about everybody knows, TV movies
are made on relatively low budgets and, in terms of rehearsal and shooting time,
almost on the run. There is usually little time for subtlety or artistic
imprint. In fact, that's how most of the early Hollywood films were made, the
same films that are now viewed as classics in tiny theaters, museums and on
public television. But no matter. The TV movie, notorious for its preoccupations
with inspirational fluff and the disease of the week, has become today's easiest
target of ridicule.

Occasionally, though, I suspect the form may be taking what could be called a
bum rap. Some TV movies can be surprisingly accomplished. And I don't mean just
major sociological events such as ''Roots'' or ''The Day After.'' There are more
modest yet nicely impressive examples. Tonight, for instance, on CBS at 9, Mike
Farrell, formerly of ''M*A*S*H,'' stars in ''Memorial Day,'' a generally
affecting drama about a Vietnam veteran coming to terms with his grisly war
experiences. Quietly but forcefully, the film dredges up painful memories to
make the point that ''the whole damn thing was so damn stupid.'' Simpleminded
inspiration is clearly low on its list of priorities.

Sometimes, oddly enough, the TV movie's limited budget can be an asset. A rather
startling example of what too much money might do can be found in the current
theatrical release film ''Star 80,'' directed by Bob Fosse. It tells the true
story of Dorothy Stratten, a Canadian woman who had some fleeting fame as a
Playboy magazine pinup and a bit-part actress before being shot to death by her
psychopathic husband. As it happens, the same story was dramatized two years ago
in a TV movie entitled ''Death of a Centerfold,'' a fact noted by very few film
critics. As it also happens, in this reviewer's opinion, the TV movie was far
more emotionally accurate and powerful than the new film.

The Fosse film, using a budget that is clearly astronomical, ends up being as
slick and glossy as the Playboy image that it is presumably patronizing. This is
less the story of Dorothy Stratten, played attractively in various stages of
undress by Mariel Hemingway, than of Paul Snider, done to a bravura turn by the
gifted Eric Roberts. It is Snider, the pimping hustler, the impresario of male
and female strip shows, who becomes the mesmerizing focus of the film. On a
recent afternoon in a Manhattan theater, he was the only character to elicit an
audible, and not entirely disapproving, reaction from an otherwise rather
lethargic audience.


The TV movie, on the other hand, written by Donald Stewart and directed by
Gabrielle Beaumont, stuck closely to the basic facts, which added up to a
basically seedy story about sad people. Jamie Lee Curtis, the queen of horror
films, played Dorothy as a kind of pathetic object, and Bruce Weitz, Belker on
''Hill Street Blues,'' created a memorably sleazy Snider. There were no eye-
catching embellishments, the kind of indulgent nonsense that makes sure even the
final blood-splattered scene in the Fosse film will be arranged attractively in
the manner of a decorative poster. In short, the TV movie was more honest, less
superficially fashionable.

This evening's ''Memorial Day'' is not quite in that category. Michael Bortman's
script is a trifle too calculating, too symmetrical. Mr. Farrell portrays Matt
Walker, a lawyer devoted to his firm, his family and his friends. He seems the
proper steady sort. Then he is drawn into a surprise reunion with three of his
former buddies in Vietnam. One (Robert Walden) is particularly on edge, dredging
up a singularly unpleasant memory of their war days. When Matt gets a telephone
call from the distressed veteran, he is in a conference at work and cannot
respond immediately. Later, going to his home, he finds that his friend has
committed suicide. A note asks Matt to contact his estranged young son in Texas.
At the same time, Matt's job has embroiled him in a case defending a
construction contractor who is obviously guilty of approving faulty work. Matt
is willing to go along and serve as the dispassionate lawyer, a profession that
seems so ''dependable'' to him after the chaos of Vietnam. His best friend and
colleague (Edward Herrmann) is upset by Matt's compromising behavior. The story
unfolds to its not terribly surprising conclusion, coming to a dramatic crisis
at a Memorial Day barbecue. Matt, who has always avoided the subject of Vietnam,
suddenly begins telling of his experiences, much to the irritation of some of
his guests. It's a difficult scene that, under the direction of Joseph Sargent,
both Mr. Farrell and Shelley Fabares, playing his wife, handle with understated
deftness.

For some apparently calculating reason, the producers have tacked on a final and
completely extraneous scene of Matt and his wife in bed. That is the kind of
passing irritant that can be found in too many TV movies. But, overall,
''Memorial Day'' succeeds on its own carefully limited turf. It is precisely the
kind of project that eventually might give the TV-movie form a reputation more
in line with its actual achievements.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 27, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FROM THE KREMLIN, THE VIEW IS BLEAK ON MANY FRONTS

BYLINE: By Serge Schmemann

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1228 words


MOSCOW TWO of the most important messages in Yuri V. Andropov's statement last
week on the missile standoff with the United States emerged between the lines.
One was that whatever measures or threats the Soviet leader made, the Kremlin
had suffered a serious political setback. The second message was contained in
the fact that the statement was read by someone else, prolonging uncertainty
about the standing of a man who has not been seen in public for three months.

Moscow had expended great energy over two years in wooing, cajoling, threatening
and bluffing the Europeans not to accept new American medium-range missiles. The
Russians staked their campaign on a vision of Europe grown disillusioned with
the United States and panicked by the notion of more megatons of destruction,
and on an image of Russia too mindful of its tragic past ever to contemplate a
threat to anybody else.

In the end the effort failed. The unfortunate timing of the Soviet attack on the
Korean jetliner and the mishandling of its aftermath broke whatever momentum
Moscow may have developed. Even before the West German Bundestag voted last week
to accept new Pershing 2 missiles, the Russians had realized that despite allied
objections to the American operation against Grenada and the rush of last-minute
threats and offers, nothing had undermined NATO's determination to counter the
Soviet SS-20 missiles.

Moreover, at a critical juncture in Moscow's fortunes, the paramount leader's
situation remained concealed in a haze of rumors and questions about his health,
his ability to carry on and even his political standing. Mr. Andropov has been
out of sight now longer than any of his recent predecessors. In a country
conditioned and constructed to have power emanate from a single center his
absence was keenly felt.

For the Russians the aftermath of the breakdown of negotiations was also
difficult. There was, among other problems, the task of explaining things to the
public. In the prolonged debate over the missiles, the Kremlin made public more
details of the opposing arsenals than their passion for secrecy had ever allowed
before. Russians were repeatedly told that the Pershing 2's would pose a
qualitatively new threat to their land. Now that the missiles were about to go
in, the leadership began to reassure the public that holocaust was not imminent.

A full-page article by Defense Minister Dmitry F. Ustinov last week, for
example, explained that the military had all it needed to meet any new threat.
Mr. Andropov also seemed to try to be reassuring by saying the added threat was
to Europe, not to the Soviet Union.

Moscow also faced a problem of future relations with Western Europe. The long
and bitter campaign over the missiles did leave Europeans far less united than
in the past on issues of defense and nuclear arms, and the Russians were certain
to make the most of the divisions in the future. But in the aftermath of the
Bundestag vote and the Soviet walkout in Geneva, it was clear that Moscow had
lost a major round in the East-West struggle.

Furthermore, the Russians had repeatedly warned the West Germans of a setback in
relations. But the fact remains that the Soviet Union needs to trade with the
West Germans while its East German satellite seeks huge credits from Bonn.

All in all, the men in the Kremlin seemed to find foreign policy as frustrating
an exercise as the Reagan Administration had. In the year since Mr. Andropov
came to power, he has concentrated on domestic problems, and from all
indications has been content to stick with foreign policies fashioned by his
predecessor. It may be that the price of the support he received from Marshal
Ustinov and Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko in the transition was to leave
military and foreign affairs in their hands. It is also possible that his
infirmity has not left him time to put his own stamp on foreign policy. In any
event, Mr. Andropov has not been credited with any major initiative in
international affairs.

In the Middle East, Mr. Andropov inherited an alignment of forces that left
Moscow largely dependent on Syria for any influence over the course of events.
But the rebellion in the Palestine Liberation Organization demonstrated the
limits of the Soviet-Syrian relationship. Defying repeated Soviet appeals to
halt the fight and preserve Palestinian unity, Syria backed the effort to defeat
chairman Yasir Arafat. Moscow, for all its past protestations of support for Mr.
Arafat, appeared prepared to let him fall rather than risk its costly stake in
Damascus.

In Iran, Moscow learned that one superpower's loss is not necessarily the
other's gain. The Islamic fundamentalists matched their humiliation of the
American ''satans'' by decapitating the Communist Party and ousting Soviet
diplomats.

It was a lesson Moscow learned anew after the American intervention in Grenada.
A few weeks after condemning the United States for that operation, the United
Nations handed the Russians their worst defeat over Afghanistan so far, a 116-20
vote for ''immediate withdrawal of foreign troops.'' The Afghan fighters,
meanwhile, seemed capable of carrying on against Soviet troops indefinitely
while Grenada posed serious questions about Moscow's ability to sustain clients
in the Western Hemisphere.

Resistance in the West

Elsewhere, the view from the Kremlin seemed hardly more consoling. The third
world clients whose embrace seemed so promising at first - Angola, Vietnam,
Cambodia, Nicaragua - were draining a lot of resources without matching returns.
Reconciliation talks with China crept on slowly, with neither side showing much
readiness for major concessions.

In relations with the West, Mr. Andropov's repeated calls for detente and
cooperation seemed to hit a new wave of conservatism. Beyond the missile
dispute, conservative Governments in Britain and West Germany vied with a
Socialist Government in France in rebuffing Moscow's overtures. In Japan, Prime
Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone, buttressed by the loud outcry over the Korean
airliner, turned a deaf ear to Moscow's objections and continued building his
military forces.

Overshadowing all these problems was the recognition that America was bent on
reinforcing its military machine and global reach. Soviet leaders had to face
the dismaying possibility of another four years of Ronald Reagan, who stung
Moscow to the quick when he called it an ''empire of evil.'' Confounding all
their expectations that he would follow his predecessors in pragmatically
dealing with Moscow, the President pushed through funds for the B-1 bomber, the
MX missile and other new weapons systems, sent marines to Lebanon and Grenada
and sustained a freeze on Soviet-American relations. Moscow's only real
satisfaction as far as the United States was concerned was the grain deal they
concluded in August.

Internal affairs did not offer much compensation for foreign frustrations.
Soviet leaders could draw little consolation from the marginal improvement in
economic indicators over the past year. And now, in Mr. Andropov's absence, the
Supreme Soviet session that is to pass next year's budget has yet to be
convened. In external as well as internal affairs, a broad policy reassessment
seems inevitable. The question is not only what direction this may take, but who
will be there to carry it out.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 27, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Hollywood Story With Sad Script

BYLINE: By MICHAEL JANOFSKY

SECTION: Section 5; Page 7, Column 3; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1524 words


ENCINO, Calif.

When his Thanksgiving dinner ended, Thomas Henderson had no time to enjoy the
warmth of a crackling fire or an after-dinner drink. The Careunit Hospital, a
facility in Orange, Calif., where he is undergoing treatment for chemical
dependency, had given him a pass only for seven hours to have the dinner with
Arnold Barry Gold, his attorney, and Gold's family. Not long after dessert, he
climbed into the car that would take him back to the hospital, 40 miles to the
south.

''He looks like he could play tomorrow,'' Gold, who has been Henderson's
attorney for more than a year, said later.

In many ways, Henderson looks a lot like the outside linebacker he was from 1975
through 1979, when he played for the Dallas Cowboys, made the Pro Bowl in 1978
and answered to the name Hollywood because of his flamboyant and talkative
manner. His weight, he said, had increased to 230 pounds, about 15 pounds over
his playing weight. But the difference barely showed. ''I've been working out
with weights, running a little,'' he said before he left. He was dressed
fashionably in a brown pin-striped suit, a tan shirt and tie and brown cowboy
boots. And he still had that same engaging smile and easy laugh.


But appearances do not tell the full story.

Over the past several months he has returned to a hospital for treatment of
cocaine use, a problem he confronted and thought he had conquered two years ago.
He has been arrested and charged with sexually assaulting two young women near
his home in Long Beach, Calif. He has failed to receive any medical or
retirement benefits from the National Football League, benefits that Gold says
Henderson deserves.

Gold has advised Henderson to say very little about the recent events in his
life and nothing about the case pending in Long Beach. Henderson's answers to
several questions were cut short by Gold, who terminated an interview after 15
minutes by saying, ''That's all for now.''

Henderson blamed the intensely competitive nature of professional football for
part of his problems with drugs.

''I developed a dependency upon drugs as a playing device,'' he said. ''The
trainers would always give you something that would help, but the pain never
quits. You hurt off the field; you take it home to your family. You were trained
to be dependent on something to make it feel better. There is always some
substance to help you feel better.''


Henderson's latest round of problems began several months ago, Gold said. When
Henderson still played for the Cowboys, he and several teammates had roles in a
movie about returning Vietnam veterans. Henderson had expected the film to be
released soon, which would have brought him some money. Also, the attorney had
negotiated a deal with what he called ''a major publishing company'' for the
rights to Henderson's life story. The publisher had even advanced some money,
Gold said, adding that he thought there would be an offer to make a motion
picture of Henderson's life.

''All of a sudden, things were looking good for Thomas,'' Gold said. ''He was
proud of the things he was doing; he was making a little money.''

At the same time, Gold said, Henderson, feeling successful, began using drugs
again, mostly cocaine. Then in rapid order, Gold learned that the film would not
be released and the book deal fell apart. Then on the night of Nov. 2, Henderson
was arrested not far from his apartment on Ocean Boulevard in Long Beach after
an incident involving two young women, a 17-year-old paraplegic and her
15-year-old friend.

Henderson was charged with two counts of false imprisonment two counts involving
sexual assault and one count of furnishing cocaine to minors. Each is a felony
count and each includes the allegation that he used a gun.

Henderson pleaded innocent, claiming that the women had solicited him on the
street and then tried to rob him when they got to his apartment. He was released
the next day on $16,000 bond, and a preliminary hearing has been scheduled for
Jan. 3 in Long Beach Municipal Court. At that time the court will determine if
there is sufficient evidence that a crime was committed. If the court so
decides, Henderson will be held over for arraignment and a trial date will be
set.

Several days after his arrest, he asked Gold to help him enter the drug
rehabilitation program at the Careunit Hospital. He expects to remain there
another four to five weeks.

Gold has tried for more than a year to collect various medical and retirement
benefits from the National Football League, to which he contends Henderson is
entitled as a result of a neck injury he suffered in 1980 when he played for the
San Francisco 49ers and aggravated in 1981 when he played for the Miami
Dolphins. The Cowboys had traded him to the 49ers in May 1980, and Henderson
played in one game for them before he was waived. He finished the season with
the Houston Oilers, but they released him after the season.

Around the time of his release, Henderson's involvement with drugs so
intensified that he telephoned the league, seeking help. League officials
arranged for him to check into the Camelback Mental Health Center in Scottsdale,
Ariz., where he spent the next eight weeks. Soon after he left the facility, his
drug habit apparently under control, he signed a contract with the Miami
Dolphins for the 1981 season. He progressed well until the final exhibition
game. He reinjured his neck, breaking a small bone, according to Gold, and was
advised by several doctors not to play football again.


Since his final game, Henderson said he has lived off money he was paid by the
Dolphins and ''a little money I had in my cookie jar.'' But the only legitimate
job he has had was that of a construction-site supervisor.

''I haven't really worked,'' he said.  ''I've been given certain positions,
because of my handicap and the severity of my injury. But only menial jobs, with
just enough compensation to live on.''

Although Henderson would not elaborate on the degree or nature of the drug usage
that led to his recent relapse, in a first-person story for Playboy, which
appeared in December 1981, he wrote how he had used marijuana, heroin,
psychedelic drugs and cocaine. In some instances, he said he had used them as
early as junior high school.

He also described in the story an ankle injury he suffered in a game against the
Giants the second week of the 1978 season, an injury he said that might have
contributed to his heavier involvement with drugs.

''The ankle was four times its normal size and throbbing so bad I couldn't even
put it on the floor,'' he wrote. ''The doctors wouldn't give me anything
stronger for the pain than Tylenol with codeine, so I began doing a lot of
cocaine. I mean, I was snorting maybe two grams a day for about a week. Then I
began going in to get treatments on the ankle, which were nothing but ice on it
for a few hours every day. I think that was when I really started by coke
dependency. The coke always helped me with pain. With coke, I either forgot
about it or it just kind of disappeared - headaches, toothaches, everything.''


When it was suggested to Henderson last week that other players had completed
their careers without resorting to illegal drugs, he responded by asking ''Have
they?''

But Henderson did not absolve himself of responsibility for his drug problems.
He blamed, in part, the naivete of a young man, who grew up in Austin, Tex.,
attended Langston University, a small all-black school in Langston, Okla., and
became an instant celebrity as the first-round draft choice of the Cowboys in
1975.

''I never really realized what was in the long run,'' he said last week. ''I was
always satisfied with the short term, with respect to my career. If somebody
told me I could do something in 10 years, I wanted to do it in 10 weeks or 10
days. I was never prepared for what was out there. I should have been a preppie;
I should have gone to one of the military academies; I should have been
cultured. I should have been prepared for what was in store for me.''

Henderson made a similar statement at the end of the story he wrote for Playboy.
In the final paragraphs, he wrote that cocaine is ''the most dangerous drug in
our society right now. It turns people into animals. I haven't seen anybody
who's gotten deeply into it without destroying his life.''

Gold ended the interview before Henderson could be asked to compare the events
that led him to seek medical help in 1981 with events that influenced him to
seek help earlier this month.

But he explained Henderson's life in terms of an ability to ''relate only to
failure.''

''He has had success with football, with women, with what have you,'' Gold said.
''Yet there seems to be some huge flaw in his character that everytime things
start to go good for him, subconsciously, in my analysis, he sabotages them by
doing something dumb or stupid. It is only when he hits rock bottom that he gets
to a crossroads, when he has to beg for forgiveness that he has to make the
conscious choice of what's right. I would say that's where Thomas is right
now.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Thomas Henderson

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 27, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

PAPERBACKS: NEW AND NOTEWORTHY

SECTION: Section 7; Page 39, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1044 words


'SUBTLE IS THE LORD . . . ': The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein.  By
Abraham Pais. (Oxford University Press, $12.95.) Abraham Pais, who knew Einstein
at Princeton, emphasizes the great physicist's scientific research in this 1983
American Book Award winner. ''To see how Einstein arrived at the relativity
theory or the quantum principle of light is something like knowing just why
Shakespeare drafted his sonnets,'' our reviewer, Timothy Ferris, pointed out,
noting that Mr. Pais tries hard to make technical material intelligible and that
his nontechnical chapters constitute ''a superlative general biography.''



MY OLD SWEETHEART.  By Susanna Moore. (Penguin, $5.95.) A first novel about a
woman trapped in a cycle of need and dependency, ''My Old Sweetheart'' shifts
back and forth between Lily Shields' present, when her life centers on the
happiness of her daughter, and her past, when she devoted herself to caring for
her beautiful, drug-ridden mother. Our critic, Anne Tyler, thought this a work
of considerable skill peopled with attentively and sensitively drawn characters.



THE ROTHSCHILDS: A Family Portrait.  By Frederic Morton. (Atheneum, $9.95.)
Frederic Morton's saga of Europe's richest family, the powerful and dazzling
Rothschild dynasty, begins in the late 18th century when the clan was still
confined to a German ghetto and tells what happened once the Rothschilds
financed England's war efforts, bailed out French Bourbons, helped Austria
intervene in Italy and lent millions to the Holy See. Our reviewer, William
Harlan Hale, found all this fascinating. First published in 1961, ''The
Rothschilds'' was a best seller.



FIRE IN THE BARLEY.  By Frank Parrish. (Harper/Perennial, $2.95.) The
pseudonymous author of this novel of suspense admits to having much in common
with his hero, an irrepressible Englishman named Dan Mallett who spurned a
career in banking for the rustic life of a poacher. In his first adventure,
which appeared here in hard-cover in 1977, Dan has to find out who's
masterminding a protection racket before the police pin the rap on him.



THE DIARY OF VIRGINIA WOOLF: Volume Four, 1931-1935.  Edited by Anne Olivier
Bell, assisted by Andrew McNeillie. (HBJ/Harvest, $7.95.) Like the first three
volumes of Virginia Woolf's diaries, ''number four is a book of extraordinary
vitality, wit and beauty,'' according to our reviewer, Robert Kiely, who noted
that Woolf ''felt both the reassurance and danger of becoming an established
literary figure'' during the early 30's. One striking aspect of her ''record of
these years of maturity is the fullness of her existence and the extent to which
she took pleasure in what she did'' despite bouts of self-doubt and depression.



THE LOVE OF ELSPETH BAKER.  By Myron S. Kaufmann. (Bantam, $3.95.) With a
profusion of mundane detail and passages of ebullient, long-winded religious
speculation, the author of ''Remember Me to God'' presents Elspeth Baker, a
pregnant, unmarried, Jewish student at Mount Holyoke College whose ''passage to
motherhood is assailed by every kind of false wisdom a life-denying culture can
produce,'' as Annie Gottlieb said in her review. Elspeth ''picks her way, by
healthy instinct and luck, through the million hazards of a world gone awry'' in
a vast, patient novel whose appeal stems from its proselytizing as well as its
plot.



OX-CART MAN.  By Donald Hall. Pictures by Barbara Cooney. (Penguin/Puffin,
$3.95.) In tones as dry as a Down East accent, ''Ox-Cart Man,'' winner of a
Caldecott Award, traces New England's changing seasons through one family's
changing chores. Its pictures ''knock you out,'' Harold C. K. Rice, declared. In
his review of this story for readers 4 to 7, he said the illustrator, Barbara
Cooney, ''has evoked early 19th- century primitive folk art, painting on wood.
Her figures are carefully drawn and a little stiff, her colors clear, her scenes
breathtaking in their detail of the human and natural worlds.''



THE PAST HAS ANOTHER PATTERN: Memoirs.  By George W. Ball. (Norton, $9.95.)
George W. Ball, Under Secretary of State in the Kennedy and Johnson
Administrations and an early opponent of the war in Vietnam, looks back on half
a century of American politics and foreign policy. Our reviewer, Daniel Yergin,
described these memoirs as first-rate - literate, lively, amusing and
thought-provoking - although he wished Mr. Ball had clarified his ''puzzling and
confusing'' stance on Israel and offered more information about his career in
recent years and his relations with colleagues during the Vietnam era.



TIME WILL DARKEN IT.  By William Maxwell. (Godine/Nonpareil, $9.95.) William
Maxwell's 1948 novel captures a part of the American past ''so that a good and
important and meaningful thing will not be lost in the darkening progression of
our days,'' Richard Sullivan said in his review. Set in a Midwest town not long
before World War I, ''Time Will Darken It'' revolves around Austin King and his
wife, who are expecting a child, and the Potter family from Mississippi whose
visit disrupts the Kings' lives.



GREEN THOUGHTS: A Writer in the Garden.  By Eleanor Perenyi. (Vintage, $5.95.)
From ''Annuals'' and ''Artichokes'' through ''Longevity'' and ''Magic'' to
''Wild Flowers'' and ''Woman's Place,'' the essays collected here offer
practical advice along with whimsical and sophisticated commentary from a
devoted and experienced amateur gardener. Our reviewer, Brooke Astor, who found
''Green Thoughts'' ''quite unlike any other gardening book I know,'' was
delighted by its ''nuggets of knowledge'' and its ''enchanting turns of mind and
phrase.''



LANCE HIDY'S POSTERS: Designs Personal & Public.  Text by Alan Fern. (Alphabet
Press, $11.95.) Lance Hidy, who designed ''Ansel Adams: Yosemite and the Range
of Light,'' among other books, created his first poster in 1977 and notes here
in an afterword that the medium ''has me working with words and pictures
together: my favorite approach to the heart and mind.'' Along with Mr. Hidy's
remarks and his striking artwork - see above - this elegant little volume
presents a graceful, informative essay by Alan Fern, the director of the
National Portrait Gallery.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: January 1, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
In the Paperbacks: New and Noteworthy column of Nov. 27, the name of the artist
whose illustration accompanied ''Lance Hidy's Posters: Designs Personal &
Public'' was given incorrectly. The artist was Rudolf Koch.

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 27, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS FICTION 114

SECTION: Section 7; Page 35, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1391 words


PET SEMATARY, by Stephen King. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The new family in town
discovers the horrors that lie in a neighboring cemetery.  2213

POLAND, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) Seven centuries of history
in fictional form.  3323

THE NAME OF THE ROSE, by Umberto Eco. (Helen & Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $15.95.) Unraveling the mystery of a murder in a 14th-century
Italian monastery.  4412

CHANGES, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) The crises that arise when a
television anchorwoman and a glamorous physician fall in love.  5154

THE SAGA OF BABY DIVINE, by Bette Midler. (Crown, $11.95.) The entertainer
imagines what her infancy was like in a fable lushly illustrated by Todd Schorr.
672

THE ROBOTS OF DAWN, by Isaac Asimov. (Doubleday, $15.95.) A human detective from
Earth investigates the murder of a robot on the planet Aurora.  7517

HOLLYWOOD WIVES, by Jackie Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The struggle for
money and power in Tinsel Town.  8102

THE WICKED DAY, by Mary Stewart. (Morrow, $16.95.) King Arthur, fulfillng a
prophecy made by Merlin, falls into an incestuous relationship.  9613

WHO KILLED THE ROBINS FAMILY?, created by Bill Adler and written by Thomas
Chastain. (Morrow, $9.95.) The publisher offers a $10,000 prize to the reader
who submits the best answer.  10810

THE AUERBACH WILL, by Stephen Birmingham. (Little, Brown, $16.95.) Three
generations of a German-Jewish family in New York.  11910

WINTER'S TALE, by Mark Helprin. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $14.95.) Heroic
lives in Manhattan between the late 19th century and the year 2000.  12122

MORETTA: DRAGONLADY OF PERN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $14.95.) A
battle against ecological disaster on a faraway planet.  131425

RETURN OF THE JEDI, adapted by Joan D. Vinge. (Random House, $6.95.) Illustrated
storybook based on the latest ''Star Wars'' film.  141116

AUGUST, by Judith Rossner. (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95.) The five-year
relationship of two women, a teen-age patient and her analyst.  151311

MONIMBO, by Robert Moss and Arnaud de Borchgrave. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.)
What happens after Castro unveils a plan to stir racial tension in the United
States.



 NONFICTION 1110

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck.  (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  2246

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J. Peters and Robert H.  Waterman Jr. (Harper
& Row, $19.95.) Lessons to be learned from well-run American corporations.  3455


MEGATRENDS, by John Naisbitt. (Warner, $17.50.) Predictions about America in the
next decade based on an analysis of conditions today.

4511

THE BEST OF JAMES HERRIOT.  (St. Martin's Press, $19.95.) Selections from the
writings of the Yorkshire veterinarian.  5313

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $17.95.) The rescue of two
Americans from an Iranian prison.  676

VIETNAM: A History, by Stanley Karnow. (Viking, $19.95.) Profusely illustrated
history of the war: tie-in with the current PBS television series.  767

THE MARY KAY GUIDE TO BEAUTY.  (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) An illustrated guide
for women prepared by the staff of a cosmetic firm.  888

THE BODY PRINCIPAL, by Victoria Principal. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Exercises
for women by a television personality.  9144

TOUGH TIMES NEVER LAST, BUT TOUGH PEOPLE DO! by Robert H.  Schuller. (Thomas
Nelson, $12.95.) Inspiration from a Protestant preacher.  10119

FATAL VISION, by Joe McGinniss. (Putnam, $17.95.) The case of Jeffrey MacDonald,
Ivy League graduate, respected physician and convicted killer of his wife and
daughters.  11102

NO MORE HOT FLASHES AND OTHER GOOD NEWS, by Penny W. Budoff.  (Putnam, $14.95.)
A health-care handbook for women, written by a Long Island physician.  1299

THE PETER PAN SYNDROME, by Dan Kiley. (Dodd, Mead, $15.95.) A psychologist's
analysis of the plight of men who have never grown up.  131227

CREATING WEALTH, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) Making money in
real estate.  14139

OUTRAGEOUS ACTS AND EVERYDAY REBELLIONS, by Gloria Steinem. (Holt, Rinehart &
Winston, $14.95.) Essays by a leading feminist writer.  15 1

WHILE REAGAN SLEPT, by Art Buchwald. (Putnam, $14.95.) Seven score wry
observations on the Washington scene by the syndicated columnist.  The listings
above are based on computer-processed sales figures from about 2,000 bookstores
in every region of the United States.  And Bear in Mind Other recent books that
in the opinion of the Book Review staff are of particular literary, topical or
scholarly interest:

ALAN TURING: The Enigma , by Andrew Hodges. (Simon & Schuster, $22.50.) A vivid
account of the troubled life of the eccentric English mathematician who was in
large part responsible not only for the concept of computers as we know them but
also for breaking the German cipher code during World War II - a feat now widely
recognized as a key element in the Allies' triumph over the Nazi war machine.

THE ANATOMY LESSON, by Philip Roth. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $14.95.) The
concluding novel of Roth's trilogy finds Nathan Zuckerman, the once-triumphant
novelist, middle- aged, out of ideas, emotionally exhausted and living in a
state of chronic pain.

THE ENTHUSIAST: A Life of Thornton Wilder, by Gilbert A. Harrison. (Ticknor &
Fields, $19.95.) If Thornton Wilder was a writer who wanted to be known as
Everyone's Uncle, his diligent biographer supplies a good deal of evidence that
the author of ''Our Town'' wasn't the affable Babbitt he made himself out to be.


IN THE LAND OF ISRAEL, by Amos Oz. (A Helen and Kurt Wolff Book/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $12.95.) The novelist, turning reporter, traveled throughout his
country last fall, interviewing and listening to people - mostly Jews but some
Arabs - with conflicting views of what sort of place Israel should be.

MEDITATIONS IN GREEN, by Stephen Wright. (Charles Scribner's Sons, $14.95.) A
soldier escapes the pain and horror of the Vietnam War through heroin and 10
years later in a hectic, violent American city becomes addicted again, in a
brilliant, scarifying first novel by a writer who served in Vietnam.

THE MODERN POETIC SEQUENCE: The Genius of Modern Poetry, by M. L. Rosenthal and
Sally M. Gall. (Oxford University Press, $29.95.) A survey of more than 40 works
by American, British and Irish poets that impressively consolidates a way of
reading the specifically modern in the poetry of the last century and a half.

MY LAST SIGH, by Luis Bunuel. (Alfred A. Knopf, $15.95.) Possessing the same
startling but delectable perversity and deep humor as Bunuel's best movies, this
posthumous autobiography may be quite simply the loveliest testament ever left
by a film director.

PARALLEL LIVES: Five Victorian Marriages, by Phyllis Rose. (Alfred A. Knopf,
$16.95.) The marriages (mostly unhappy) of five famous literary figures - John
Ruskin, Thomas Carlyle, John Stuart Mill, Charles Dickens and George Eliot, the
last free of legality - told so compellingly they spring to life all over again.


RUSSIA: Broken Idols, Solemn Dreams, by David K. Shipler. (Times Books, $17.95.)
An observant account by a Times correspondent of his tour of duty in Moscow
1975-79 that directs our attention to long-term trends in the Soviet system and
society.

SHAME, by Salman Rushdie. (Alfred A. Knopf, $13.95.) Mr. Rushdie, who writes
with enormous gusto, calls his second novel ''a sort of modern fairy tale.'' But
the link between certain bizarre happenings in the fairy tale and events in a
nation that is ''not quite Pakistan'' is inescapable.

VARNISHED BRASS: The Decade After Serpico, by Barbara Gelb. (G. P. Putnam's
Sons, $16.95.) A rare look at the secretive upper echelons of the New York
Police Department by a writer who was accorded extraordinary access to the
machinery of command decision.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 27, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'I CAN PLAY A PRISONER, BELIEVE ME'

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 31, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1272 words


SOME actors are cast according to type, and some are cast according to ''hype.''
While, superficially, it may seem that the selection of Billy Hayes for the
leading role in ''Bent,'' which opened Friday at the Studio Theater in
Lindenhurst, fits neatly into the latter category, it also appears to be a rare
case of casting inspired by comparable experience. The director, Roy Siegel,
hopes that, in the final tally, Mr. Hayes's talent will be the thing people will
talk about.

''Bent'' is a harrowing drama by Martin Sherman about survival in a
concentration camp. The 36-year-old Mr. Hayes of North Babylon attained what he
calls ''minicelebrity'' stature when he tried to smuggle hashish out of Istanbul
in 1970, was arrested at the airport, suffered brutal treatment in Turkish jails
and effected a highly publicized escape.

''It was a very strange transition to step off the airplane after five years in
prison and walk right into a press conference,'' he recently recalled.
''Midnight Express,'' Mr. Hayes's 1977 best seller about his grueling and
gruesome experience as a prisoner, was turned into a graphic award-winning
motion picture in 1979.

After growing up as a self-described all-American boy who played football and
wrestled at Seton Hall High School in Patchogue, where he wrote the newspaper
sports column, he became a journalism major at Marquette University in
Milwaukee. He dropped out in 1969, one semester before graduation, because he
was ''bored out of my mind'' and went to Turkey seeking adventure.

The misadventures that followed provided raw material for a book, but Mr. Hayes
admitted he would still be procrastinating, were it not for publicity about his
incarceration and escape and the resulting offers from publishers.

''I thought I was a writer,'' he said. ''But after reading the first 15 pages of
my manuscript, which was a babbling stream of consciousness, my agent, who
called it 'hysterical subjective,' told me I needed someone to organize my
thoughts and keep me in line.'' William Hoffer was then brought in as co-author.

Although Mr. Hayes felt part of his personality had been edited out of the book,
he was ''happy'' with it. A proposed sequel, which he referred to as ''From
Turkey to Hollywood,'' was halted when Mr. Hayes realized he was ''sick and
tired of being Billy Hayes and hearing about 'Midnight Express.' ''

''It was a powerful statement about injustice and courage,'' he said about the
film, ''but it wasn't about me and what I learned about myself - and I missed
the rowboat.''

In the film, he pointed out, ''Billy Hayes accidentally killed the sadistic
guard, grabbed the keys and walked out the door.'' In truth, Mr. Hayes said, he
was transferred to another prison, escaped by rowboat on Oct. 2, a date he
celebrates annually - ''amid rocks and gunfire, ran around Turkey for two
days,'' dyed his hair and shaved his mustache - and was subsequently arrested in
Greece. The guard was actually shot eight times by another prisoner.

During the book promotion tour, where reactions to his appearances ranged from
condemnation to congratulations, Mr. Hayes realized he was a ''ham.''

''I liked the publicity and the response, I could feel the energy, I knew I was
hooked and I said, 'This is the kind of contact I must have for the rest of my
life.' '' The externalization of performing, with its ''instant feedback and
affecting the people,'' became a welcome antidote to the ''introspection of
writing,'' he said.

However, he felt ''fragmented'' and needed to ''get away.'' In Los Angeles for a
brief visit, he had two life-changing experiences that caused him to remain
there for five years. He enrolled in acting class, and he met his future wife.

''I was afraid of intimacy,'' he said. ''You don't let people in when you live
in jail for five years. You develop an emotional shell. As an actor, that's
deadly.''

He said his teacher, Irving Morris, helped him ''get rid of the blocks.''

Last February, Mr. Hayes and his wife, Wendy, who works in the theatrical and
film production, came to New York to attend a friend's wedding and, once again,
a brief visit turned into a major move. They rented an apartment in Manhattan
for two years. Recently, Mrs. Hayes returned to Los Angeles to sell their home.

Having acted, under the name William Hayes, in small theaters in California, he
chose to return east for further exposure. ''I can get into a lot of doors
because people say 'Who is this weirdo?' But I want to be taken seriously as an
actor,'' he asserted.

In an acting class, he performed a scene from ''Bent,'' in which he played Max,
a character he described as a ''streetwise homosexual, constantly looking for an
angle,'' for the sake of self-preservation. In Dachau, the concentration camp
where the play's second act takes place, Max connives to win a yellow star to
designate that he is Jewish instead of wearing a pink triangle that identifies
homosexuals, the lowest rung in the camp's hierarchy.

Then he read about a casting call for the Lindenhurst production. He called Mr.
Siegel and told him, ''I know Max intimately,'' and set up an audition in Mr.
Seigel's living room in Merrick, where 20 actors showed up to read for the part.

However, Mr. Hayes had left his resume on the train. When Mr. Siegel received it
by mail, he realized who William Hayes was. A week later, Mr. Siegel called Mr.
Hayes and said, ''Now I know why you told me you connected with the character.''

Mr. Hayes has appeared in several motion pictures - as ''a mutant from outer
space'' in Roger Corman's ''Battle Beyond the Stars'' and as a prisoner in
''Under Arrest,'' a film that has been shown in schools and rehabilitation
centers. ''I can play a prisoner, believe me,'' he said. He also played a
Vietnam veteran suffering delayed stress syndrome in ''Hostage,'' an antiwar
film that has not yet been released.

For financial sustenance, Mr. Hayes has turned to soap operas, including several
episodes of ''All My Children.'' He said, ''I want to get more daytime series
work, so I can act in the theater by night. I have to think about making a
living.''

Although he still receives ''small'' royalty checks every six months, Mr. Hayes
has virtually exhausted the $400,000 to $500,000 he estimated he has received
from the sales of the ''Midnight Express'' book and the film rights over the
last eight years. ''I can't live on it anymore,'' he said, ''but I've been lucky
to be able to work hard on my acting without having to be a waiter.''

About playing Max, the role originated in London by Ian McKellen and played on
Broadway by Richard Gere in 1979, Mr. Hayes said: ''There is so much stuff I can
draw upon from my own experience. The character learns to express his emotion
and embrace his real identity.'' In the motion picture ''Midnight Express,''
homosexuality was suggested but rejected by Mr. Hayes; in the book, it was
depicted as a part of his prison life - the only love he could find.

How do Mr. Hayes's parents, William and Dorothy, who moved to Copiague when
their son Billy was 6 and who still live in North Babylon, feel about the
contrasting phases of their son's acting career?

Concerning ''All My Children,'' Mr. Hayes's father said, ''I stuck with Billy
when he had the whooping cough and all through Turkey, but please don't ask me
to watch the soaps.''

About ''Bent'' (which runs till Jan. 7), his mother commented, ''I'll bring all
my friends.'' When she was informed of the play's content and explicit language,
which has aroused considerable controversy, she added, ''Maybe we'll go and see
it first.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of cast of 'Bent'

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 27, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE MIND AND WORKS OF A GUERRILLA

BYLINE: By Michael Wood; Michael Wood, author of ''Stendhal'' and ''America in
the Movies,'' is a professor of English at the University of Exeter.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2024 words


THE DEATH OF CHE GUEVARA THOUGHT By Jay Cantor.  578 pp. New York: Alfred A.
Knopf. $17.95.

WHEN they are not signing petitions or running for office, American writers
usually stay away from politics. Increasingly in recent years they have tended
the private gardens of divorce and loneliness and crackup. There are exceptions,
and Jay Cantor's profuse and powerful first novel is a notable one. Here is a
work soaked in politics, the mind of the militant 60's translated into searching
fiction. Its subject is Ernesto (Che) Guevara, seen not as a hero or a curiosity
or a demon but as a historical riddle, his life posing a continuing question for
revolutionaries but also for anyone who believes that deep changes are necessary
for the world to become something like acceptable.

Are such changes possible, with or without violence? Doesn't oppression make
itself daily more sinuous and sophisticated? Don't revolutions rapidly throw up
their own mirror versions of the old regimes? Guevara called for ''two, three,
many Vietnams,'' but it seems only his enemies heard the dominoes falling in his
rhetoric. It is because we are so often asked to see Latin America as a bundle
of new Vietnams that we lose sight of the particular places - Mexico, Grenada,
Nicaragua, El Salvador. Guevara and the State Department collaborate,
unintentionally, on a great generalizing myth, and it could be argued that
Guevara died of his ignorance of an individual country called Bolivia.

Che Guevara was an Argentine, a doctor, a lifelong sufferer from asthma, a man
of inordinate physical courage, hard on himself and on others. One comrade in
arms in Mr. Cantor's novel calls him a man of ''boundless honesty . . . in which
we all might freeze.'' Guevara met Fidel Castro in Mexico in 1955, trained as a
guerrilla and invaded Cuba with Castro's small group in 1956. After two years in
the Sierra Maestra, where Guevara revealed remarkable military gifts, Castro's
forces took Havana, and Batista's Government fell.

In 1965, there was a famous cooling off in relations between Castro and Guevara,
and Guevara vanished from view. He reappeared in Bolivia, leading a guerrilla
team in the jungle, attacking army outposts, hoping to rouse the people and
foster United States involvement, which in turn would provoke greater popular
resistance - another Vietnam. He was captured and shot by the Bolivian army in
1967, a figure who had already entered a legend his death could only confirm. He
was the voice of pain, Mr. Cantor's narrator says. ''Che only knew one argument
really, from the inside out, in all its endless permutations - his pain; pain
itself; our need.''

''The Death of Che Guevara'' evokes but does not explain the historical figure.
It is, in the end, a book of questions. What are we to do with Guevara's violent
career, with the turbulent world he left so little altered? Give in to despair,
gloat or hide away in irony? ''Your irony corrodes only you, and not history,''
Mr. Cantor concludes. ''Let his life interrogate yours.''

Mr. Cantor has made himself thoroughly at home in the voluminous Guevara
literature - diaries, letters, memoirs, gossip, biography, the conflicting
accounts of historians - and in Guevara's Latin America, its mountains, city
streets, its silent Indians, middle- class radicals and its tally of failed bids
for serious reform. He conjures up the feel of places and times with such
persuasion that it is easy to forget that this novel is by a North American.
Argentina, 1928: The child Guevara listens to the talk of his parents, a
politicized, squabbling pair who come to haunt the book; they discuss the world
nightly over the kitchen table as their restive child walks round and round the
newspaper- strewn room, lies down on the whitewashed stone floor to doze and
listen. The details are doubtless invented, and well-known stories, like the one
about the young Ernesto's swallowing ink and chalk to prove to his schoolmates
that the substances are not poisonous, are interwoven with quite drastic
revisions of the facts. Thus this Guevara's father, like Guevara, is a doctor,
while Guevara's actual parent was, successively, a tea planter, a builder and a
government employee.

At first, Guevara is only a tourist of revolution. Bolivia and Peru, 1953:
Guevara, a self-styled follower of Gandhi, talks nonviolence with his friends,
some skeptical, some determined, some headed in other directions. He quarrels
with the minister of peasant affairs in La Paz, because the minister insists the
Indians be dusted with DDT for their lice before they can enter his office.
Disappointed in Bolivia, he rides a rickety truck across the Andes to Peru. A
year later he is in Guatemala, where another revolution is about to be betrayed.
Cuba, 1956: Guevara, now committed to revolutionary violence, is wounded in the
bungled invasion, escapes to the Sierra Maestra, quoting Baudelaire and Yeats.
Bolivia, 1967: Guevara struggles to hold his guerrilla group together, argues
with a peasant mayor who treats the ''Specter'' promised by the Communist
Manifesto as an almost tangible Andean spirit, product of a familar magic which
teaches that nothing really changes and everything returns. This view of history
poses more problems for the revolution than the local generals and the C.I.A.

''The Death of Che Guevara'' mixes fact and fantasy (Baudelaire was a favorite
of Che's, but did he borrow a taste for Yeats from Nehru, as Mr. Cantor
suggests?). It does not seek to correct history but to get inside it. The
historical Guevara was in those places at those times and did meet some of the
figures Mr. Cantor presents. Others Mr. Cantor has invented, and conversations
in the novel, even where actual persons are involved, necessarily consist of
what might have been said. What we have is not a mock biography of the man, but
the record of two fictional attempts to interpret his life; that is, to imagine
it, to see it whole, to discover what it hides and implies as well as what it
simply shows. The novelist's imagination in this sense is a mode of
understanding.

The first attempt at interpretation is largely the fictional Guevara's own, and
in his eyes he is the man waiting for Fidel, now and in the past. It is 1965
and, after a speech opposing Castro's acceptance of Soviet aid, Guevara is
isolated on the Isle of Pines with Walter Tulio, a once illiterate, now rather
literary veteran of the Cuban Revolution, as his ''comrade, bodyguard, keeper.''
Guevara has asked Castro to approve his plans to launch a guerrilla movement in
Bolivia, and while he awaits Castro's decision, he writes a long memoir. The
memoir is ostensibly an exercise in self-criticism, the Communist mea culpa, but
it reads like a portrait of the revolutionary as a young man, and Guevara
himself, in the memoir, keeps slipping into fiction.  Recreating his childhood,
for example, he fails to mention his four brothers and sisters, giving the clear
impression of himself as an only child. In his account, his father dies of an
operation which he in fact (in actual fact, and in the factual world as
presented by Mr. Cantor) survived.  The first part of the novel consists of this
memoir, Che's thoughts on writing it and conversations between himself and
Walter Tulio. The two men needle and comfort each other, their genuine affection
veined with resentments and second thoughts. It is Walter who chides Che for
editing out his siblings and for the father's false death. ''Perhaps Walter was
right,'' Che thinks. ''I had gone too far. And yet it had come to me, one
sentence following another, with the clarity of the intuitively right, like love
or a winning strategy. But how could I justify it? . . . His death was just
there , the next piece of the story.'' Walter, accusing, exclaims, ''Che! I know
what you're going to say. It felt that way. You took leave of him by your
action. Of his world.'' But what of the claims of the living father, the
unrearranged historical world?


THE second attempt at interpretation, and the second half of the novel, belongs
to Walter, who has become the keeper of Guevara's memory, a role he half
relishes, half hates. He has been with Guevara in Bolivia and is one of only
five survivors of the expedition. It is now May 1968, a time when many things
began and ended, and Walter bases his account on his own Bolivian diaries, on
those of Guevara (both real and imaginary) and of other members of the group,
interspersing his text with commentary and with occasional, flailing gestures
toward humor - farcical plays and interludes meant to tame some of this
volatile, unwieldy material. ''Today I cannot bear to think of his life,''
Walter writes. ''Today I think there wasn't one moment of pleasure in it. . . .
He couldn't hear music. And I don't think Che ever saw a color.''

But Walter can scarcely bear to think of Guevara's death either, which becomes a
recurring scene in a movie that won't finish. ''No. It doesn't matter how many
times I write THE END; it's not over.'' The title of this movie, if it had one,
would no doubt be ''The Death of Che Guevara.'' It is Walter who works out what
he calls ''the sad mathematics'' of their failure in Bolivia. Guevara's
guerrillas have inflicted losses on the Bolivian army, shaken the Government,
brought in the United States, all as they had hoped. But they have made no local
recruits at all in eight months of trying; the people are not with them.
Walter's Guevara is an inspired and infuriating leader, a one-man revolution,
and a figure rendered touching and absurd by history's abandonment of him.

The writing of both parts of the novel is fluent and intelligent, but it is not
as varied as it might be. Guevara's voice, in the memoir, is indistinguishable
from Walter's voice in his reconstruction of the Bolivian campaign; and it is a
tricky rather than a convincing touch that Walter should casually say he knows
how to mimic Guevara's style: They have in fact only one style between them. All
the diary entries about the Bolivian campaign, although ostensibly written by
several people, sound alike, and a sense of helplessness grows in the later
pages of the book as Che is trapped in the jungle, then the mountains, and Mr.
Cantor is trapped in a subject that will not deliver its secrets, only hold up
its haunting, emblematic mystery. The novel takes us into the landscape of
Guevara's politics rather than into the depths of his personality.

Mr. Cantor has a marvelous sense of the principles and passions that often lurk
behind arid-sounding concepts. He also has a voice of his own, which is plainly
heard in three sections called ''Dates'' that chronologically list the
milestones of 20th- century revolutionary history. In these sections, which
occur at the beginning, middle and end of the book, history begins to look like
mockery, with chronology itself turning into something between nightmare and
nursery rhyme.

This is not a revolutionary's book, and Guevara comes off as too strident and
self-willed to be entirely appealing. But it is a convincing plunge into the
intricacies of Latin American politics, a lucid, compassionate work that does
not forget the pain and need revolutions are supposed to address. It is a
remarkable feat of the sympathetic imagination, less a memorial than a
resurrection.

''I was invited, too, despite my precarious health, to stay up with my parents
most of the night, to listen as they discussed the newspapers with each other.
The newspaper reading was a serious business for them, was ritual, was their way
of having commerce with forces greater than they were, of connecting themselves
with a more impassioned life, with their nation, with history. I felt the
pleasure and gravity in them as each evening they cleared away the dinner
dishes, laid out their hot drinks and papers on the glass kitchen table. They
were serious, even courtly with each other in the white stone kitchen. It would
be a good time. There would be nothing said about how my mother chewed her food,
or my father's stupid investments.'' From ''The Death of Che Guevara.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 28, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BEIRUT, THE CITY OF DESPAIR

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 3913 words

DATELINE: BEIRUT, Lebanon, Nov. 27


A man committed suicide in a parking lot the other day.

No one knew who he was. No one knew where he came from. The neighbors said he
had wandered around for a while, drinking from a can of poison marked with a
skull and crossbones. Finally, he keeled over into convulsions, and his eyeballs
rolled up into his head. The neighbors just watched.

Eventually someone called the police. When the officers arrived 40 minutes
later, the body was already cold. They found a plastic bag in the man's grasp,
stuffed with thousands of Lebanese pounds. After a while the police took the bag
and left the man. Then the coroner arrived to take a picture of the corpse, but
his camera wouldn't work. Finally, someone threw a pink sheet over him, and an
ambulance took him away.

Mike the barber, whose shop is nearby, said this was the third person to kill
himself in that spot, which overlooks the sea. When asked why, he shrugged,
''They like the view.''

Suicides are fairly rare in Lebanese society, and no one will ever know for sure
why this middle-aged man in a brown suit decided to take his life in a sandy
parking lot in West Beirut. But whatever the reasons, his miserable death
somehow seemed to symbolize the new mood of despair that has enveloped Beirut in
the last few months.

For the last nine years, Beirut residents have been adapting to an environment
characterized by random violence and meaningless death. They not only learned to
live with the chaos around them, but to do so with a style and panache that gave
life in this city a unique air of absurdity. Quails' eggs were always as
available as Kalashnikov rifles.  And no matter how bad things got, people
always seemed to adjust, to bounce back and to buoy their spirits by believing
that the next summit conference, the next war, the next set of negotiations
would be the quick fix to end all their troubles.

Those days are over. The operative word in Beirut these days is ''exhaustion,''
with more and more peo ple conceding that they ''just can't take it anymore.''

Many Lebanese who swore during the last few years that they would never leave
are now joining the long lines for visas outside every Western embassy in town.
What has suddenly brought on this change? It is a combination of things: a
drastically deteriorating security environment, an economy that is being
strangled by uncertainty and de facto partition, and a mounting frustration and
impatience with the inability of the United States - the ''superpower'' - to
solve Lebanon's political crisis.

The ''oxygen'' that residents always depended on to be able to live with the
violence of their city is becoming an increasingly scarce commodity. Constant
electricity cuts due to ruined power lines promise a cold winter with some dark
nights. An 8 P.M. curfew has snuffed out one of the few escapes people had -
dining out and getting together with friends. The economy is in such bad
condition that even many of these most enterprising of businessmen can't make
money anymore.

So many roads have been cut off to traffic by barricades against car bombs that
some people have just given up driving during the day. All the traditional
escape routes from Beirut - the Shuf Mountains, south Lebanon and Tripoli - are
closed by fighting until further notice. People cannot even count on Beirut's
international airport being open.

Attacking All the Leaders

''During the day it is impossible to circulate because of the traffic, and at
night it is forbidden to circulate because of the curfew,'' said Michel Abu
Jawdi, the political columnist for the Beirut daily An Nahar. ''People have
begun attacking all of the leaders, making them responsible for their personal
situation. Soon they will start attacking Reagan and eventually God himself,
because it is inhumane to leave the Lebanese like this. It is unique in history.
It is something so inhumane it could only come from God himself.''

An American professor who has been teaching here for 25 years and is married to
a Lebanese woman was trying to explain the other day what seems to be happening
to those Lebanese who are too tired to cope any more.

''There is a test we used to do in class to see how easily living things can
adapt,'' he said. ''You put a frog in a pail of water and gradually turn up the
heat. The frog just keeps adjusting to the new temperature until it finally
boils to death because it is so used to adjusting that it doesn't think to jump
out of the pail. I feel like that frog.''

These frog-in-pail symptoms are obvious just about everywhere one turns in
Beirut lately. Professional people in particular complain that they are just
going through the motions, like zombies, unable to concentrate for very long on
their work.

''We come to the office and drink coffee and try to squeeze out a few silly
things to do, then drink some more coffee,'' said Samih Ali Ahmed, a 25-year-old
architect. ''But there is nothing to give you self-satisfaction anymore. Right
now most of the projects we were working on are frozen.''

Problems with Education

A department chairman at the American University confided that one of his
professors who just returned from an extended sabbatical came to him the day
after he got back and declared that he needed another leave of absence. He said
the university was simply going to have to change its leave policy to give
professors more frequent ''outs'' if it wants to retain its staff. It is as
though people can only take life here now in smaller and smaller doses.

''There are few people I want to see anymore,'' said Miss S., a vivacious,
middle- aged secretary. ''I don't have the energy anymore to talk with people
who don't think the way I do. The big thing now is sitting around at night and
gambling with a few old friends. We don't discuss politics. We don't discuss
prices going up. We don't discuss where our children will go to school. We don't
discuss car bombs. We just play cards and gamble and don't talk at all.''

Schools are a particular problem. At first the school year had to be delayed by
almost a month because of the September war in the Shuf Mountains. Finally, the
war was halted by a cease-fire; the parents were asked to pay tuition fees -
almost all education here is private - and the school doors were opened. Two
weeks ago the schools were closed again because the cease-fire had again broken
down and shells were crashing everywhere, including into schoolyards.

Myrna Mugrditchian, a fourth-year dental student, had just returned from a
vacation in West Germany when the school year began. ''I came back full of
enthusiasm about doing really well in my final year,'' she says. ''But as soon
as I got back, all of that ambition disappeared. All of us know unconsciously
that at any moment school will be closed, so why bother? We know we will not get
through the year. And even if I do get my diploma, can I open a clinic in this
environment?''

The Effects of Stress

When Richard Day, a pyschologist at the A.U.B., thinks about life here these
days he is reminded of Hans Selye, one of the leading researchers on the effects
of stress on humans.

Dr. Selye, explained Mr. Day, had developed what he called a general adaptation
syndrome to characterize the three stages through which any living organism
passes when confronted with a stressful situation - like that presented by
Beirut life.

The first stage is one of alarm, during which the organism mobilizes to defend
itself either by fighting or fleeing. The second stage is adaptation, during
which it learns to adjust to the situation, as Beirut residents have been doing
for nine years. But if the stress-inducing conditions continue unabated, Dr.
Selye taught, this tension will eventually lead to a third and final stage, that
of exhaustion, in which the system finally begins to break down.

''I think we are just beginning to enter the exhaustion phase,'' Mr. Day said.
''The Lebanese were always a people with verve, who took pride in defying their
environment. But you cannot keep adapting and defying forever. A feeling of
overwhelming despair has set in here.

''You can see it in the marketplace,'' he went on. ''Before, people used to love
to bargain and haggle. Now you go to buy something and you name a price and the
merchant laconically names a price and that's it. I see it in myself, too. I
wrote a friend the other day about the killing of the marines, and I said, 'I
have run out of feelings of disgust or sadness. The only one I can manage now is
anger, but I can't even hold that for very long.' ''


'Just Slowly Choking'

George Zeiny, a well-known Beirut restaurateur, impresario and patron of the
arts, is sitting in his art gallery on Bliss Street surrounded by unsold
paintings. The electricity in the studio showroom is out, and Mr. Zeiny is
groping to find the words to express how he feels. Finally he puts both hands
around his throat and says dramatically: ''I'm choking. That's it. I'm just
slowly choking.''

Like almost everyone else in Beirut, Mr. Zeiny is now suffering from car-bomb
fever, also known as the car-bomb blues. Car-bomb fever began to grip Beirut
after the explosion of the American Embassy on April 18. But lately it has
reached epidemic proportions and has turned this city into a bunker, completely
disrupting the movement of people, traffic and commerce.

Consider for a moment what has happened around the temporary United States
Embassy. American diplomats are now working out of two buildings on the Beirut
Corniche, an esplanade running along the Mediterranean Sea from Beirut port all
the way to the airport. On weekends the Corniche in the Ras Beirut neighborhood
was the only place many poor Lebanese could go to get out of the house, take a
walk and see other area residents - and it was usually packed. Street vendors
hawked coffee and fresh fruit juice every 10 yards, and many families would park
themselves on the palm-lined median strip dividing the Corniche and have a
picnic. It wasn't idyllic, but it was all they had.

Obstacle Course for Vehicles

Today, much of the Corniche is an obstacle course of car-bomb barriers, where
few care to venture. Roughly half a mile of the esplanade where it runs
alongside the temporary American Embassy has been cut off entirely to civilian
traffic, which would be like cutting off the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive for six
blocks along the United Nations.

Travelers trying to drive down the Corniche now find Lebanese Army soldiers
cradling their M-16's and turning traffic away. Anyone who might try to run the
Lebanese Army checkpoint would have to maneuver around massive concrete blocks,
steel antitank barriers, sandbag bunkers guarded by marines, steel pegs sunk
into the street, a Marine amphibious landing craft with .50- caliber machine
guns, a wrought-iron fence and razor wire that could slice a person's skin under
the slightest pressure. Not exactly a place to take the wife and kids for a
stroll.  Get Part II: ''The Lebanese find.....'' Pick up from ....''kids for a
stroll.''

The Lebanese find it frustrating to deal with the Marine sentries on this road,
because unlike the Lebanese police, they cannot be ''finessed.'' They do not
accept bribes and are outsiders who do not care if the brother of someone's
uncle is a senior Government official. They tell all comers politely but firmly
to turn their cars around.

'People Are About to Pop'

This choking off of the Corniche might have been tolerable had it not been
accompanied by similar actions by other paranoid embassies and shopkeepers all
over town. It has become virtually impossible to drive anywhere directly. Almost
every trip involves at least one zigzag between sand-filled barrels, around
15-foot-high mounds of dirt and past weapon-wielding guards. Topic No.1 in any
conversation is almost invariably a horror story about how long it took someone
to commute to work or back home.

The difficulties of driving around town are compounded by occasional shortages
of gasoline because of fighting between rival Palestinian groups near the main
Tripoli refinery.

What's more, the 8 P.M. curfew has been imposed ever since large-scale fighting
erupted in Beirut at the end of August. It might not be so bad to sit at home -
given the frustrations of driving in Beirut - except that regular electricity
blackouts often wipe out television and other evening entertainment.

''They have cut all my wings,'' Mr. Zeiny lamented. ''It is like being in a
prison. People are about to pop. The only thing left is the good weather. The
sun is bright; the colors are full. No politicians can take that away from us.''

A Double Standard

Making the curfew even worse for people living in predominantly Moslem West
Beirut is the knowledge that it is being applied much less stringently in the
Christian eastern half of the capital, which is still dominated by the
Phalangist Party and militia.

Technically, the curfew applies to the whole greater Beirut area. However, all
anyone in West Beirut has to do is listen to Phalangist radio to know that there
is something less than a curfew blanketing the other side of town.

The ''Jet Set'' disco in East Beirut, for example, advertises openly on
Phalangist radio, inviting customers to dance ''24 hours a day.'' And the Aux
Vieux Quartier restaurant tells listeners that it is taking reservations for
elegant dinners.

''It is really obscene,'' said Nabil Tabbara, an architect living in West
Beirut. ''They are advertising for sumptuous dinners in East Beirut, and I can't
even go out at night to get a falafel.''

Since the Government of President Amin Gemayel is responsible for the
inequitable manner in which the curfew is being applied, he is rapidly losing
popularity in Moslem West Beirut. In fact, the same kind of seething discontent
that blew the lid off West Beirut last August - in what was, in retrospect, a
Shiite Moslem revolt - is welling up again.

'Whims and Avarice'

The blocking of streets around Beirut is only a microcosm of what has happened
around the whole country. The main highway to Damascus has been closed for
months because of the war in the Shuf; Tripoli is now out of bounds because of
the war between the Palestinians, and south Lebanon is slowly being sealed off
by the Israelis, who are now demanding that any Lebanese who wants to drive from
south Lebanon north across Israel's Awali River defense line must first get an
exit permit from their office in Sidon. Anyone who wants to drive from Beirut
south across the river now needs an entry permit from the Israeli military
liaison office in East Beirut.

As far as businessmen are concerned, Lebanon - despite its small size - no
longer constitutes a single market. The country, according to an economic
consultant, Marwan Iskandar, is now subdivided into different regions where the
movement of imported and locally produced goods is subject to the ''whims and
avarice'' of the various regional forces in control.

''The boundaries of our worlds are just getting smaller and smaller,'' said
Laila Farhood, a specialist in family therapy at the American University
Hospital. ''It seems like we don't even talk anymore about actually enjoying
life. All we are concerned with now are the basics - water, traffic, electricity
and safety. I have a brother who lives in south Lebanon, and now we don't know
how or when we are going to be able to see him next.''

Love-Hate Attitude

It was almost midnight, and the East Beirut dinner party honoring a visiting
American columnist was coming to a close. All night the American guests had been
pummeled with the same questions: ''What are the Americans going to do for us?
How are they going to save Lebanon?'' All night the American guests responded by
saying only the Lebanese could save themselves. Suddenly, the matronly hostess,
who had said little during the evening, began to shriek with rage at her guests:
''You Americans are killing us! You have been killing us for nine years! I can't
stand it any longer. I just want to live. When are you going to stop killing
us?''

The scene was a disturbing one but highly revealing of the love-hate attitude
many Lebanese are developing toward the Marine contingent based here. On the one
hand, people say they would be lost if the marines left; but on the other hand,
they cannot understand why America - a superpower - cannot and is not solving
their age-old problems. The most unsophisticated believe that it must be due to
some kind of American conspiracy against Lebanon.

''I would die if I knew one day they would pack and leave,'' said Miss S., the
secretary. ''But we are disappointed that they could not take care even of
themselves. We all thought they would do something quickly. We are ready to
become the 51st state - but just do it already.''

The flotilla of warships that the United States Navy has stationed offshore has
become both a security blanket for the Lebanese and a source of enormous
anxiety. Residents say they feel teased by watching the number of naval vessels
and reconnaissance overflights increase, while their own predicament seems to
worsen every day.

'Nothing Has Happened'

''I simply cannot accept the fact that the Americans can't do anything,'' said
Mr. Tabbara, the architect. ''They sent the New Jersey here, and what is it
doing? Nothing. We thought it was going to be the genie to provide all our
solutions. But nothing is happening. At least in Vietnam you made a war.''

A leading West Beirut banker said that, after the 239 marines were killed last
month in the truck-bombing of their headquarters, his chauffeur said to him:
''The marines were supposed to protect the Lebanese Army. Now they need
protection themselves - it's like diapers inside diapers.''

This increasing frustration with the American presence is reflected in other
ways. For example, people complained bitterly last week about the
midnight-to-dawn flights by American F-14 Tomcats around Beirut. The planes
would swoop in low over the city with a roar that set everyone on edge by
reminding them of the Israeli air raids in the summer of 1982. Some residents
are now annoyed that the radar from American ships interferes with their
television reception or their stereos and radios - making frequent little
bleeps.

In essence the whole perception of the American presence here is in transition -
going from being viewed as saviors to being viewed as just another foreign force
that is part of the problem.

It was striking that when the American Embassy was blown up in a terrorist bomb
attack last April, people in Beirut were truly shocked and horrified. At that
time they were still leaning heavily on the Americans, and the embassy bombing
left them feeling as though a supporting pillar had been blown out from under
them.

Reaction to Killing of Marines

By contrast, the Lebanese reaction to the killing of the 239 marines Oct. 23 was
relatively subdued. Few people spoke about it like the embassy; the tennis
players at West Beirut's Rennaissance Club didn't miss a set that Sunday; and
few people seemed to have taken it personally. It was as though they had scaled
down all of their hopes for the marines and somehow expected such things to
happen to a foreign force that gets involved in their local conflicts. It had
all happened before.

The leading leftist Beirut daily, As Safir, last week started calling the Marine
and French forces ''the international militia'' - just one more foreign force
fighting on Lebanese soil.

This changing attitude toward the Americans has enormous implications for the
Lebanese. They cheered for the Syrians when they first came to Lebanon in 1976,
and then after a while they lost hope in them; they cheered - some publicly,
some privately - for the Israelis when they came in 1982, and now they have lost
hope in them; they cheered for the Americans when they arrived in September
1982, and now, if they lose hope in them, there is no one left - which is why
many Lebanese are so reluctant to part with the belief that the Americans can
somehow right all that is wrong here.

But as each day goes by, it seems more and more people are beginning to admit to
themselves that maybe there is no solution for Lebanon.

'Things Are Getting Worse'

Miss Mugrditchian has worked as a first- aid volunteer for the Red Cross during
the last few years of fighting. She is among the best and brightest of Lebanon's
younger generation, and only six months ago she was waxing eloquent about the
importance of doing public service and the meaning it brought to her life. No
more.

''Before there was a reason to stay here,'' she said. ''I felt I was helping the
country get better. It was building toward something. But now I go out on
ambulance runs to Suk al Gharb and it leaves me feeling empty. We are not seeing
any fruits from our efforts. Things aren't getting better, they are getting
worse, and they are getting worse toward nothing. I always thought I had seen
the worst in the Red Cross, but now I am not sure anymore.''

She paused for a moment and continued: ''The most frightening thing is that
there doesn't seem to be a solution. The Lebanese don't believe in the
impossible dream anymore.''

It was widely observed here that after the Geneva reconciliation talks between
the warring factional leaders almost all of the aging ''godfathers'' who
participated, instead of rushing back to Lebanon to tell their followers of all
they had accomplished, stayed in Europe on vacation. Some of them still have not
come home. It was as though even they had become exhausted with Lebanon and
needed a break.

The Lebanese could tolerate almost anything when there was hope for a way out of
their difficulties, but that hope is fading and is being replaced by an
underlying sadness or, as Mr. Abu Jawdi put it, ''a feeling that we are becoming
empty inside.''

Smothered by Armies and Conflicts

This emptiness comes from the realization that the old prewar Lebanon, with its
carefree lifestyle, vibrant economy, countryside picnics, mornings on the ski
slopes and afternoons at the beach may never return.

Sometimes it takes being out of Lebanon for a while and then coming back to see
the change. Elias Saba, a former Cabinet minister turned banker and one of his
country's most incisive political observers, was talking recently about
returning to Beirut after being on a trip to Europe for a few weeks.

''Driving back from the airport, past all of the barricades and soldiers,'' he
recalled, ''for the first time I saw this place dying. It isn't ill anymore;
it's dying. There is no life left in it.''

It is as though the old Lebanon was being smothered by a layer of armies and
conflicts so thick and complicated people just can't see it anymore.

''You know,'' said Miss S., the secretary, ''my brother-in-law took my little
niece out to see the seashore the other day where it had been blocked by illegal
houses since the civil war. She ran home and said: 'Mommy, mommy, I saw the
sea.' Can you imagine? She really didn't know the beauty of the sea here. She is
10 years old, and all she knows of our traditions is the war. She doesn't know
what it is to go up to the mountains on a warm Sunday afternoon for a picnic.

''I don't know,'' mused the secretary. ''Maybe it's better for her that way.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Beirut

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 28, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

The Editorial Notebook;
The Embarrassment of 'Yellow Rain'

BYLINE: NICHOLAS WADE

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 641 words


President Reagan and his Secretaries of State have repeatedly drawn the world's
attention to ''yellow rain,'' their physical evidence of the chemical warfare
they say has been waged in Southeast Asia under Soviet direction. Whatever the
truth about Vietnam's use of chemicals in Laos and Cambodia, the evidence grows
that the gathered ''yellow rain'' is no weapon but almost certainly the
pollen-laden excrement of bees.

The first claim of ''firm evidence'' of chemical warfare was made by Secretary
Haig in 1981. It was based on the detection of fungus-made toxins in samples of
''yellow rain'' collected in Cambodia. The State Department elaborated on that
theme for a year, producing more samples and more toxin analyses. But its
chemists showed no curiosity about why the samples were yellow, or how they
might look under a microscope.

When that elementary step was taken by a scientist in Australia's Defense
Ministry, Hugh Crone, he found the samples full of pollen grains - and the
amount of toxin far too low to qualify as a weapon. It remained for a Harvard
biologist, Matthew Meselson, to suggest last May that ''yellow rain'' could only
be bee excrement.

The State Department scoffed, but has done no test to disprove him. Mr. Crone,
however, took the idea seriously. And he detected uric acid in one ''yellow
rain'' sample - evidence that it is in fact bee feces.  Scientific Claims Should
Have Scientific Evidence

What seems to be even firmer proof has now been discovered in the scientific
literature of China. The journal Kexue Tongbao reported as long ago as 1977 that
showers of ''yellow rain'' fell in northern Jiangsu province in September 1976.
And Chinese scientists, finding mostly pollen, concluded six years ago that that
rain was bee excrement.  How did the State Department, with access to the
world's best scientific advice, overlook this obvious possibility? Plainly, it
had political reasons to hurry to judgment about Soviet perfidy. It also thought
it had evidence of ''yellow rain'' toxins in the blood of some presumed victims
of chemical attacks and much testimony about such attacks from refugees from the
battle area.  The ingested toxins, however, may also be of natural origin,
produced by funguses that contaminate both ''yellow rain'' - pollen is an ideal
growth medium - and the region's food supply.  Contradicting that conjecture are
the copious reports gathered by the State Department from refugees who say they
were attacked by chemical weapons. But unlike the massacres reported by refugees
from Pol Pot's Cambodia, the ''yellow rain'' accounts have not cross-checked
well. Two American researchers, Jacqui Chagnon and Roger Rumpf of the Southeast
Asia Resource Center in New York, recently visited the sites of alleged attacks
in Laos; though they heard yellow rain stories, the rain was not associated with
planes or warfare. Grant Evans, an Australian anthropologist who reinterviewed
some of the State Department's witnesses, concluded from their shifting stories
that gas or ''yellow rain'' attacks are a general metaphor for sicknesses common
in the region.

It may be hard to believe that the refugees simply molded their folk beliefs
into a form that Western interviewers wanted to hear. Yet without the ''smoking
gun'' of truly artificial ''yellow rain,'' the chemical warfare hypothesis
remains just a hypothesis.

Too much has been made of this hypothesis to leave it so embarrassingly
unproved. The State Department needs to go back to square one, starting with a
rigorous examination of the refugees' data. But having been too eager to leap to
conclusions, it also needs to enlist independent direction of the inquiry. Never
again should the President or Secretary of State be put in the position of
espousing extreme theories on the basis of extremely mistaken evidence.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 28, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEW BRAND OF CAMPUS ACTIVISM IS EMERGING



BYLINE:
By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 669 words


A new brand of student activism has emerged this year at colleges around the
country, with little resemblance to the marches and chanting and sit-ins of the
stormy 1960's. Ballots, not picket signs, are the main weapons in students'
political arsenals.

A check of college campuses found that recent actions by the United States in
Grenada, Lebanon and Central America set off scarcely a ripple of student
protest, at least not the variety of the anti-Vietnam rallies of the late 1960's
and early 70's that commonly attracted thousands of people.

Indeed, many colleges report no political stirrings among students.

''Powerlessness is the main ingredient in their apathy,'' said Jeff Hall, a
senior at Iowa State University in Ames, who is a member of the Ames Peace
Network. ''People care but wonder what's the point when there's nothing they can
do.''

Few Large Crowds

What demonstrations there are have been modest: A University of Minnesota rally
protesting United States involvement in Lebanon drew just 200 people; a similar
protest at the University of Iowa in October attracted 300 people, and a protest
at Columbia University against the Grenada invasion drew fewer than 100 people.

''At least every week, we have some sort of protest, but it's on a very small
scale,'' said William Strugger, editor in chief of the Rutgers University Daily
Targum in New Brunswick, N.J. ''A big protest would be 100 students.''

Even at more active campuses, today's students are different from the 60's
variety. They tend to be more pragmatic, more conservative and more at ease with
the establishment.

''I have trouble relating to people from the 60's,'' said Jonathan Kandell,
president of the Students for Peace and Disarmament at Ohio State University.
''Our rallies are different. I think we're working in the system more. We don't
mind putting on a suit to go talk with someone.''

A recently released survey of student political attitudes by the American
Council on Education found that the percentage of college freshmen who
considered themselves ''liberal'' or ''far left'' dropped from 52 percent in
1972 to 21 percent in 1982.

Rallies for Conservative Causes

Several of this year's campus demonstrations have been in support of
conservative or patriotic causes.

Students at Florida State University held a pro-Reagan rally after the Grenada
invasion, carrying signs like, ''F.S.U. Loves Reagan's Courage.'' A rally this
month at the University of Georgia was heralded by its sponsors as a way to
increase awareness of the Communist threat in Central America. And several
hundred University of Houston students protested the local public television
station's showing of a 13-part series on Vietnam, which they asserted was
pro-Communist.

''Perhaps nowadays there is a greater recognition of Soviet belligerence in the
world than there was previously,'' said Eric Widmer, dean of student life at
Brown University in Providence, R.I., where recent Grenada protests attracted
fewer than 100 students.

That is not to say that street-style protest has disappeared entirely.

A Grenada protest rally at the University of California at Berkeley drew 2,000
demonstrators, and 1,000 students at the University of Wisconsin in Madison
marched on the state capitol.

Many schools have had antinuclear or antimilitary demonstrations this year, but
most involved fewer than 100 students.

In keeping with their growing pragmatism, more students this year seem to be
directing their political passions toward voter registration.

A coalition of civil rights and student groups led by the United States Student
Association plans a national drive to register half a million students to vote
in the 1984 Presidential contest.

But already, students have been going to the polls in unprecedented numbers on
some campuses. In Ohio, for instance, about 35,000 college students registered
in time for the ballot proposals to cut state taxes and raise the beer-drinking
age to 21 from 19.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 28, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

DARTMOUTH STUDENTS SEARCH FOR A BETTER FLAG TO RALLY 'ROUND'

BYLINE: By EDWARD B. FISKE

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 941 words


The Talk

 of

Dartmouth

HANOVER, N.H. - Ever since the Indian symbol was abandoned a decade ago as
disrespectful of Native Americans, students at Dartmouth College have been
looking for a fitting replacement to rally their athletic teams to feats of
glory.  ''We've been using the Big Green, but somehow that's not very
inspiring,'' said Brad M. Hutensky, a senior from West Hartford, Conn., and
editor of The Dartmouth, the student newspaper. ''It sounds like you're cheering
on your stock portfolio.''

Dartmouth's 40,000 alumni may be glad to hear that a solution could be in sight.
A grass-roots movement has arisen this fall in behalf of the gray timber wolf,
an animal they say evokes the proper feelings of fierce independence and the
rugged outdoors that have traditionally shaped the climate of the Ivy League's
most remote institution.

The college has not lacked for possible symbols, from the Mountaineers to the
Green Knights. One group of students climbed the heating plant smokestack and
unfurled an illustrated sheet with the words ''Dartmouth Artichokes.''

The timber wolf began catching on this fall, when the men's lightweight crew
wore shirts with ''timber wolf'' on them, and the women's crew made a banner
showing a howling timber wolf. At least two other banners have been shredded by
unknown timber wolf opponents.

Match for Other Animals

Encyclopedias describe the timber wolf as savage, fearless and capable of taking
on larger animals, such as deer and, by implication, bulldogs, bruins, lions and
tigers.

Mark A. Montgomery, a 21-year-old senior from Englewood, Colo., said he liked
the ''pack'' image, while Robert L. Hughes, a 22-year-old senior from Oshkosh,
Wis., said, ''Smith and Holyoke women have always considered Dartmouth men to be
wolves.''

Thus far the college's administration has carefully avoided becoming involved in
the search for a new symbol. Ted Leland, the athletic director, who would
presumably be the one to endorse any change, indicated he could live with just
about anything the undergraduates could agree on.

Even the artichoke?

''Sure,'' he said. ''We could do it up like they do in Texas. We could make a
big model of an artichoke and roll it around the field at halftime. That would
get the alums out of their seats. You could even have a bowl of mayonnaise right
behind it.''


Canis lupus is not the only species that has been appearing in greater numbers
on the Dartmouth campus this fall. So has the venditor computorum.

Representatives of major computer manufacturers are frequently seen around the
Hanover Inn, carefully guarding large boxes containing their most advanced
personal computers, some of which have not yet been seen by the general public.

Last Monday the administration announced that beginning next September, the
college will make it possible for students to purchase a personal computer for
about $1,000. The goal is to promote increased use of computers in course work.

Dorms and other buildings are now being wired so that the computers can be
connected to the university's main computer. Still to be decided is which
computers to buy.


The political, social and academic conservatism of the current generation of
college students is well known, but it continues to manifest itself at Dartmouth
in new ways. Enrollment in Latin courses was up this year, and students seem
increasingly conscious of their appearance. ''It's easy to spot the freshman
women,'' said Christopher C. Hunt, a 20-year-old student from New York City.
''They carry handbags to parties.''

A poll by the Dartmouth newspaper showed that students here favored Ronald
Reagan over each of the Democratic Presidential candidates. Robert Sokol, a
sociologist who has analyzed surveys of student opinion over several decades,
suggested that students have much in common with their counterparts in the
1950's. ''There's that feeling of the Eisenhower days that you don't want to get
too involved in things,'' he said.

The sociologist suggested that students today, while realistic about the
economic situation, are somewhat ''less cynical'' than preceding generations. In
1952, he noted, 37 percent of students agreed with the idea that ''no one is
going to care much what happens to you, when you get right down to it.'' Last
year, he said, agreement with this proposition was down to 16 percent among men
and 9 percent among women. The college began admitting women in 1972.


Dartmouth terminated its Reserve Officer Training Corps affiliations with the
Army, Air Force and Navy during the anti-Vietnam War protests of the early
1970's. Now the college is considering a proposal to reinstitute the Navy
program.

Last week the Student Assembly surveyed nearly two-thirds of Dartmouth's 3,657
undergraduates and found they favored restoration by nearly a 2-to-1 margin, 66
percent to 34 percent. The reason most often cited for approval was the
''scholarship aid and career opportunities'' the program offers.

The debate has focused not on the question of a military presence on campus, but
on whether the content of the courses would be compatible with the goals of a
liberal arts college, including the opportunity for free inquiry and debate.

At a recent forum David Baldwin, a professor of government, argued that they are
not compatible. ''The military is inherently authoritarian,'' he said. ''If they
are not, wars are lost.'' But Kevin S. Rosen, president of the student
government, said, ''Students believe that fellow students should have the choice
and the opportunity. This isn't the 60's.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Dartmouth students

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 30, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FILIPINO COMMUNIST REBELS PRESS ATTACKS ON ARMY AND CORRUPTION

BYLINE: By ROBERT TRUMBULL

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 852 words

DATELINE: DAVAO, the Philippines


The New People's Army, the military arm of the outlawed Communist Party,
periodically attacks soldiers, policemen, suspected government informers and
rural officials whom it considers corrupt, but usually does not harm ordinary
villagers.

Residents of Claveria, 25 miles from here, recall the 80 to 100 raiders who
swooped down on their farming settlement a year ago as being polite but
determined.

''They said they wouldn't harm us, and they didn't,'' a town official said as he
described the capture of the pink stucco municipal building.

The raiders, most of them wearing uniforms resembling those of the Philippine
Army, appeared suddenly at noon on a Saturday, when everyone but the official
and his wife was at lunch. The attackers tied the couple to chairs, quickly
located the police armory, took the dozen or so rifles that were there, also a
typewriter and a calculator, and left.

''It was all over in 15 minutes,'' the official said.

Others Report Harsher Action

But other accounts of New People's Army activities, such as its frequent
ambushes of Government patrols, tell of much harsher action.

In two recent ambushes of vehicles commandeered by the military near Zamboanga
in southern Mindanao Island, the rebels killed at least 60 people, including a
number of civilians who had asked to ride along with the soldiers.

''As in Vietnam, you are never sure who is your enemy,'' Brig. Gen. Dionisio
Tan-gatue Jr., the Philippine Army's regional commander at Davao, who had served
with a Filipino unit in Vietnam, said in an interview.

Technicians engaged in rural improvement programs are among those not usually
molested by the New People's Army, according to one technician whose work takes
him to areas where the insurgents operate.

But, he said, if you ignore an order from them, ''you are a dead man.''

Punishment for Corruption

Villagers, officials and others interviewed on Mindanao related many stories of
killings by New People's Army units. They focus, one official said, on corrupt
town and village functionaries and those who mistreat women or commit other
crimes.

One villager said the insurgents would ''always send the offender a warning to
change his ways'' and then shoot him if he did not comply.

''It's rough justice,'' said Jose Diokno, a former senator and a leading
political foe of President Ferdinand E. Marcos, in an interview in Manila, ''but
in their way the N.P.A. is doing what the Government should be doing.''

''In some areas the N.P.A. are regarded as liberators,'' said Mayor Aquilino
Pimentel of Cagayan de Oro, a port on Mindanao's eastern coast. He is under
house arrest by order of President Marcos on charges of subversion growing out
of his prominence as a member of an opposition party.

Samuel Occena, a prominent Davao lawyer, said the New People's Army ''has grown
tremendously'' as a result of the repressive policies of the Marcos Government
as well as corruption and economic exploitation attributed to some of the
President's associates.

Rebels Said to Lack Arms

Farm youths are said to be joining the insurgents' ranks in increasing numbers.
However, intelligence analysts say they are convinced that the New People's
Army, whose armed strength is estimated by some at 5,000 men, is short of arms
and funds.

The same analysts tend to agree with assertions by left-wing spokesmen that the
Communist Party of the Philippines operates without any substantial foreign
support since it broke with Moscow some years ago and assistance from Peking
faded away after the Philippine Government established diplomatic relations with
China.

The rebels are believed to have regional headquarters somewhere in the
countryside north of Manila, on Samar in the Visaya Islands of the central
Philippines and on Mindanao. They reportedly exact taxes in areas under their
firm control.

The New People's Army suffers from defections, too, according to General
Tan-gatue, the army commander at Davao. He said defectors questioned by his
intelligence unit complained that top insurgent commanders enjoyed luxuries
denied to the lower ranks.

Little Acceptance of Communism

Bishop Patricio H. Alo of Davao suggested that the strength of Christianity in
the Philippines, whose 52 million people are predominantly Roman Catholic, and
long schooling in American political thought work against widespread acceptance
of Marxism in this country. Some say that the committed Communists in the
leftist-led rebel movement are a minority even in the fighting force.

However, military and other authorities agreed that the Communists had been
helped by ready-made issues leading to peasant unrest, such as exploitation of
labor by big plantation interests. On Mindanao, it is said, a handy target of
Communist propagandists is the conspicuous presence of large international
corporations, including American fruit companies that control large tracts of
land.

Captured New People's Army documents show that the concept governing the
insurgency emphasizes ''continuing struggle,'' Gen. Tan-gatue said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 30, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CUOMO HOLDS A FORUM TO PROMOTE '84 BUDGET

BYLINE: By MICHAEL ORESKES

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 602 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, Nov. 29


Governor Cuomo began preparing the people of New York today for next year's
battles over the state budget.

In doing so, he used an idea from former Gov. Nelson A. Rockefeller, a quote
from former Gov. Hugh L. Carey and a style that was quintessentially Mario M.
Cuomo.

The occasion was the first of five ''community forums'' that Mr. Cuomo planned
to hold around the state over several weeks to lay out his view of the upcoming
budget, and to begin, in advance, to deflect the political problems that the
budget carried with it this time around.

For two and a half hours today, Mr. Cuomo, seated at a long table and flanked by
three aides, took questions from residents of the Albany area who gathered at
the State Education Building across from the Capitol.

The questions, 25 altogether, ranged widely - everything from the problems of
truck traffic in Amsterdam to why Mr. Cuomo had attacked President Reagan. But
through it all Mr. Cuomo was able to hammer home his theme that anyone who
wanted more out of next year's budget should explain how to pay for it.

'You Have to Give to Get' ''There is no free lunch,'' said Mr. Cuomo, using a
quote that he says he wrote for Governor Carey a few years ago. ''You have to
give to get.''

Mr. Cuomo must submit his proposals for the 1984-85 fiscal year on Jan. 17, and
he must have many of the central points settled in time for his State of the
State message to the Legislature Jan. 4. The fiscal year starts April 1.

As the Governor outlined it, this year's budget situation is very different from
last year's. When Mr. Cuomo came to office there was a large gap between how
much the state expected to spend and how much it expected to take in.

This time, Mr. Cuomo said, there is no gap, although he also rejected
suggestions from Republicans and others that there was, in fact, a surplus.

Very Nearly Balanced

Everything, he said, is very nearly balanced.

But this, he said, is better news for the budget makers than for the people who
want the state to do more, a group that he quickly included himself in.

To emphasize his point that demands must be measured against the state's ability
to meet them, Mr. Cuomo challenged every speaker at the forum to suggest where
they would impose new taxes or what else they would cut to pay for the programs
they wanted.

Some people obliged the Governor, and found that this alone would not get them
what they wanted.

Jerard Miserandino, a retired Army sergeant who lost his right arm in Vietnam,
urged the Governor to support a partial property tax exemption for Vietnam-era
veterans, and he urged the introduction of sports betting to pay for it.

The state is considering sports betting, Mr. Cuomo replied, but there is already
a clamor to use the money for education.

A Question for a Student

Steven I. Benson, a junior at Union College in Schenectady, was ready when the
Governor sought to turn around his plea for more tuition aid to private college
students with the question: Where should the money come from?

''Being a student,'' Mr. Benson replied humbly, ''that's not in my knowledge.''

''What are you going to do when you leave school,'' Mr. Cuomo followed up.

''I'd like to enter politics,'' Mr. Benson replied.

Mr. Cuomo will hold the second forum Wednesday in Mineola, L.I. He will also go
to the state's Southern Tier, western region and Hudson Valley by the middle of
December

No forum is scheduled in New York City, but Mr. Cuomo said this could be
changed. ''We're not afraid of the city,'' he said. ''I have a home there.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Governor Cuomo and Mayor Thomas Whalen

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 1, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
CRIMINAL JUSTICE CHIEF

BYLINE: By EDWARD A. GARGAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 813 words


''Criminal justice is a little bit like arms control,'' said Kenneth Conboy,
sitting in his 14th-floor office of Police Headquarters. ''It's an area of
enormous complexity. It's an area riven with fears.'' For the 45-year-old Mr.
Conboy, who was named the city's new criminal justice coordinator by Mayor Koch
yesterday, learning how to wade through those complexities and allay that fear
will become a fulltime job Jan. 1. He succeeds John F. Keenan, who resigned in
October to take a seat on the Federal Court for the Southern District.

When Mr. Conboy is sworn in, he will be the Mayor's eyes and ears on criminal
justice matters, his negotiator with district attorneys and the state and a
mediator among the competing political forces that swirl around the
administration of justice in New York City.

Solving Problems

''I think he's got to keep track of what's going on for the Mayor,'' said Robert
M. Morgenthau, Manhattan District Attorney. ''He's got to help the Mayor develop
policy. He's got to be the Mayor's adviser on police, the courts, corrections.
He's got to be the guy who tells the Mayor do we need additional prison space,
what do we do about street crime, narcotics. He's got to solve problems.''

And problems abound. Just this week, Mr. Koch testified before the House
Subcommittee on Criminal Justice, which is holding hearings into allegations of
police brutality.

Earlier this month, under a Federal Court order, the city was forced to release
610 prisoners awaiting trial on little or no bail.

City officials expect that the number of inmates will begin to rise after the
new year, and that more prisoners may have to be released to keep the population
at the level decreed by Judge Morris E. Lasker.

Failure to Appear

Mr. Morgenthau has found that more than one-fourth of the released inmates have
failed to show up for court dates.

Nonetheless, Mr. Conboy is not discouraged. ''Sound, prudent management
techniques,'' he argued, ''are the sine qua non to improving the way justice is
dispensed. The whole question of crime and justice is at the absolute center of
municipal life.''

His first concern, Mr. Conboy said, is to oversee the completion of a system
that will provide the district attorneys in the five boroughs with computerized
access to the files of all defendents.

''The really critical issues have to do with data, collecting it, distributing
it and analyzing it,'' he said. ''In 1978, for each arrest, a police officer had
to sign his name on 55 separate pieces of paper. Now he doesn't write anything.
Everything is entered by computer operators. We are in the process of doing this
for the district attorneys.''

For nearly six years, Mr. Conboy has been the deputy commissioner of police for
legal matters and counsel, a post in which he has been responsible for
prosecuting a thousand disciplinary cases, overseeing civil lawsuits against the
department in Federal and State courts and with installing a citywide
computerized booking system.

District Attorney's Office

Before his appointment to the Police Department by Mr. Koch, Mr. Conboy held
several posts in the office of the Manhattan District Attorney. While there, he
was involved in several well-known cases, including the investigation and
prosecution of a corruption case involving 18 police officers and commanders.

Kenneth Conboy and his twin brother, Brian, were born on June 3, 1938, in
Manhattan, where they lived for several years before the family moved to
Sunnyside, Queens. Kenneth Conboy was educated at Roman Catholic primary and
secondary schools, and graduated from Fordham College and the University of
Virginia Law School. Later, he obtained a master's degree in American history
from Columbia University.

A Tour in Vietnam

During the mid-1960's, Mr. Conboy was in the Army, and served in South Vietnam.
He was discharged in 1966 with the rank of captain.

Mr. Conboy, a bachelor, will earn $82,000 a year in his new post.

In the 1970's Mr. Conboy was known as a prosecutor who regarded the incomplete
recollection of witnesses with more than a bit of skepticism.

One spring day in 1979, as he was adjusting the chain on his bicycle in Central
Park, someone smashed Mr. Conboy on the head and tried to make off with the
bicycle. The thief failed, but Mr. Conboy sustained a gash to the head.

That evening at a cocktail party in his Upper East Side apartment for the new
first deputy police commissioner, Mr. Morgenthau questioned Mr. Conboy about the
wound and the description of his assailant.

''All I could say was, 'I didn't see anything, I didn't see anything, leave me
alone,' '' said Mr. Conboy.

Then realizing how persistently he sought the same kind of information from
others, he added, ''It was a bit ironic.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Kenneth Conboy

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 2, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NAVY OFFICER IS DISMISSED FOR HOMOSEXUAL AFFAIR

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 610 words

DATELINE: NORFOLK, Dec. 1


The former commanding officer of a Navy frigate was ordered dismissed from the
Navy today and fined $100 a month for 12 months for having a homosexual affair
with a crew member.

Comdr. Gerald Michael Vanderwier, who was convicted of three counts of sodomy,
could have been sentenced to 15 years' hard labor in a Navy brig, dismissal and
forfeiture of all pay and benefits.

Commander Vanderwier, a decorated, 43-year-old Vietnam veteran, will appeal, his
attorneys said.

Capt. Maitland G. Freed, the military judge who presided over the four- day
court martial, termed the sentence lenient.

''The leniency I am showing you should not be taken by you or anybody else to
show that the court condones this conduct,'' Captain Freed told the officer.

Testimony Against Commander

John E. Rainville, a former third- class hospital corpsman, maintained that he
and Commander Vanderwier conducted an affair while on a Mediterranean cruise.
Mr. Rainville, who received an honorable discharge Nov. 25, testified that they
had sex three times in March - once in a Tunisian hotel room and twice in the
captain's stateroom aboard the frigate Edward McDonnell.

The warship, based in Mayport, Fla., was Commander Vanderwier's first command.
His tenure, which began in January 1982, was twice interrupted. After charges of
homosexual behavior were raised in the fall of 1982, Commander Vanderwier was
briefly relieved of command before the Navy exonerated and reinstated him.

But in June, after the frigate returned from a six-month cruise that took it
from the firing line off Lebanon to ports in Spain and Tunisia, Commander
Vanderwier was removed from the ship and assigned to the staff of Destroyer
Squadron 12 in Mayport.

The commander, whose four rows of service ribbons included a Bronze Star won in
Vietnam, declined to comment after the court-martial. But his wife, Patricia,
did. ''I'm very upset about the way the trial came out,'' she told reporters
outside the Navy Legal Center at the Norfolk Naval Station.

Wife Defends Commander

''We thought 100 percent of the time that the charges were going to be
dropped,'' she said. ''He is not guilty.'' Although Commander Vanderwier is four
months shy of qualifying for retirement, the court's decision bars him from
collecting the 50 percent pay to which he would otherwise be entitled. His
monthly pay is now $3,266, plus other benefits.

His attorney, Henry Coxe of Jacksonville, Fla., argued against imprisonment,
saying his client, like Hester Prynne in Nathaniel Hawthorne's ''The Scarlet
Letter,'' was forever marked by being convicted of a sex-related crime.

''The fact of the matter is that Commander Vanderwier stands before the entire
nation with that letter,'' Mr. Coxe said.  Attorneys on both sides predict that
appeals, which will start with Vice Admiral Edward Briggs, Commander of the
Atlantic Fleet Surface Forces, could take years.

''I anticipate that appropriate authorities will hold his retirement in
abeyance,'' said Comdr. H. Troy Nicks, the prosecuting attorney.

Commander Nicks speculated that Commander Vanderwier may be placed on appellate
leave after he reaches the 20-year mark. Commander Vanderwier would then remain
on active duty but would neither hold a Navy post nor collect pay.

The Navy discharged 1,167 homosexuals in the fiscal year 1983, including 12
officers. But Atlantic Fleet officials believe Commander Vanderwier is the first
ship's commanding officer convicted of having a homosexual affair with a crew
member.

His conviction, however, has nothing to do with ''the persecution of gays in the
Navy,'' said Commander Nicks.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 2, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PUBLISHING: VIETNAM REMEMBERED

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 25, Column 2; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1080 words


FRANCES FITZGERALD'S ''Fire in the Lake,'' a book critical of United States
involvement in Vietnam, was a best seller, won a National Book Award in 1973 and
a Pulitzer Prize for general nonfiction. Philip Caputo's memoir, ''A Rumor of
War,'' published in 1977, won the praise of reviewers and was also a commercial
success. And Tim O'Brien's ''Going After Cacciato,'' which was not a commercial
success, won the National Book Award for fiction in 1978.

A handful of other books about Vietnam caused a flurry of attention, often in
news columns, but many more simply faded away, unreviewed, unbought and
unmourned. Today, however, books about Vietnam are rolling off the presses in
record numbers, titles published years ago are being reissued, and bookstores,
book reviewers and book clubs are all calling attention to one of the newest
trends in publishing.



Vietnam Books a Big Event

''Vietnam was a sure loser in book publishing seven or eight years ago; now it's
a big event,'' said Robert Manning, editor in chief of the Boston Publishing
Company's 16-volume series, ''The Vietnam Experience.''

''Vietnam'' by Stanley Karnow, a history of the war, is on The New York Times
nonfiction best-seller list. And ''The 13th Valley,'' a novel by a Vietnam
veteran, John M. Del Vecchio, was recently on The Times's paperback-best-seller
list.

Vietnam books are popular now, publishers say, because enough time has elapsed
for passions about America's involvement there to have subsided. And most of the
new books avoid the polemics of the past, aiming instead at dispassionate
history or in trying to convey the authors' version of what it was like to fight
in America's least popular war. Some people in publishing even think the new
interest in Vietnam books has to do with changes in the publishing industry
itself.

''There weren't the kinds of books that there are now because the publishing
industry strongly opposed the war and took it upon itself to say there was no
market for such books,'' Bruce Lee, a senior editor at William Morrow & Company,
said. ''Some editors told me they didn't want to glorify the war and that our
soldiers were baby killers. Now there's a willingness to tell the story of the
poor grunt who got his tail shot off.''



Few Could Write Well

Pat Strachan, executive editor of Farrar, Straus & Giroux, said her house did
not publish many because: ''We had few Vietnam books submitted by people who
could write. It was important to have accounts by people who went through the
experience and could write about it.''

One of those who did, Larry Heinemann, author of the novel ''Close Quarters,''
has another novel coming in the spring about an emotionally handicapped Vietnam
veteran. Others who served in the armed forces in Vietnam and whose novels have
just been published, are Stephen Wright, whose ''Meditations in Green,'' won
Scribner's Maxwell Perkins Prize, given annually to a first work of fiction; and
Keith Miller, author of the acclaimed first novel ''Tiger the Lurp Dog.''

Vietnam novels written by authors who covered the war as journalists include
''Gardens of Stone'' by Nicholas Proffitt, a novel for which the hard- back
publisher recently turned down $105,000 for paperback rights, and ''Fragments''
by Jack Fuller - due in January - about the strained friendship of two Vietnam
veterans.

Lynda Van Devanter, co-author of the memoir ''Home Before Morning,'' was a
surgical nurse in Vietnam. Carl E. Bartecchi, author of ''Soc Trang: A
Vietnamese Odyssey,'' is a physician who served with a medical unit in the
Mekong Delta. George Esper, author of the recent ''Eyewitness History of the
Vietnam War,'' was a correspondent in Saigon.



Works in the Pipeline

Many works of nonfiction about Vietnam are still in the pipelines. Wallace
Terry, who was a journalist in the war, is the author of the forthcoming
''Bloods,'' an oral history of the war by black veterans. Frederick Downs,
author of a 1978 Vietnam memoir, ''The Killing Zone,'' will have another Vietnam
book out in the spring. And Fox Butterfield, who was a New York Times
correspondent in Vietnam, is writing an account of the war - due in 1985 -
focusing primarily on the period from the Tet offensive in 1968 to the end of
the war in 1975.

In years past, marketing directors and booksellers also worried that they would
not be able to sell Vietnam books in the big metropolitan markets. So, in
recommending that Morrow publish ''Charlie Company'' by Peter Goldman and Tony
Fuller, Mr. Lee pointed out that the potential audience for Vietnam books
included some nine million veterans who served during the Vietnam War and two
million who actually served in Vietnam. When the book did well, Mr. Lee bought
''For Self and Country,'' Rick Eilert's account of his ordeal after he was
wounded by a grenade.

The recent interest in Vietnam is also evident from the large number of
paperback reprints.

''We started out buying a title here, a title there, and suddenly we found we
had a Vietnam Library,'' Robert Wyatt, editor in chief of Ballantine Books,
said. This paperback series consists of at least a dozen works of fiction and
nonfiction, including ''Charlie Company, '' Mr. Caputo's ''Rumor of War,'' Robin
Moore's ''Green Berets''and Robert Olen Butler's ''Alleys of Eden,'' a novel
turned down by some 20 houses before it was published by Horizon Press in 1981
to rave reviews.



More in Paperback

Other major paperback houses have also published Vietnam titles recently and
plan to offer more. Avon will publish uniform editions of Vietnam novels
throughout 1984 - ''great novels that nobody ever read,'' said an Avon official
- and it recently reissued Michael Herr's nonfiction ''Dispatches,'' which it
previously reprinted in both mass market and trade paperback. The Jove War Books
series, originally nonfiction titles about World War II, has been broadened to
include Vietnam books. The Military Book Club originally offered books on World
War II. Now Vietnam titles appear to be its mainstay. The club has offered a
number of the 17 Vietnam titles published by Presidio Press.  ''They're all
still in print and selling well,'' Robert V. Kane, publisher of Presidio, in
Novato, Calif., said. Some of them, in fact, are selling better than ever, which
Mr. Kane attributes to changing American attitudes, to increased interest on the
part of libraries and to the fact that the book chains have begun ordering them.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 4, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AFGHAN REBELS ARE SAID TO REMAIN DIVIDED

BYLINE: By Drew Middleton

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 24, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 519 words


MilitaryAnalysis


A shortage of antiaircraft and antitank weapons and rivalry between pro- Western
and pro-Iranian rebel groups in Afghanistan have combined to reduce resistance
to the Soviet Union, according to intelligence analysts in Washington and
London.  This is also the view of Sibghatullah al-Mojaddedi, head of the
Organization for Islamic Unity, a pro-Western rebel group.

Mr. Mojaddedi, who left Afghanistan four weeks ago, said in an interview that
the rebels had been promised $25 million in Western arms but received only $6
million worth and still needed surface-to-air weapons, such as the American-made
Redeye, a portable antiaircraft missile, to engage Soviet helicopter gunships.
The rebel leader did not identify the arms suppliers.

Iran Backs 3 Groups

Western intelligence analysts say they believe there is no chance of turning the
Afghan insurrection into a Vietnam for the Soviet Union unless more weapons
reach the rebels. Afghan and Western sources have said that Pakistan is skimming
the cream off arms deliveries. Pakistan has denied this.

On the issue of disunity among the insurgents, Mr. Mojaddedi said that at least
three of the six rebel groups were dominated by Iran. Their problem is that
Iran, in the fourth year of a war with Iraq, cannot provide weapons.

Both American and British intelligence sources doubt that the Afghan rebels can
unite. Religious and tribal antagonisms run too deep, they said, to permit the
establishment of a command that would oversee all insurgent operations.

They believe that the Russians, with the Afghan Army's help, can police the
country with one division, about 10,000 men. The rest of the occupying force,
estimated at 110,000 to 120,000 men, is being trained in an environment
unfamiliar to a Soviet Army trained for operations in Western Europe and
northern China.

Fighting Between Rebels

In several instances, Mr. Mojaddedi said, fighting has broken out between rival
rebel groups.

One of the pro-Iranian factions, he said, is the Moslem Brotherhood, which is
said by intelligence experts to have been responsible for the assassination of
President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt.

The Soviet Union is also said to train Afghan civil servants. About 15,000 young
Afghans are now studying in the Soviet Union, a British analyst said. About
5,000 children are sent to camps in the Soviet Union every year.

Western analysts, surveying the present situation, say they wonder whether the
trend toward Soviet domination is irreversible. A few, British and American,
believe the trend might reversed by the wholesale shipment of arms. But such
arms, they say, will be of little use unless the insurgents realize they must
unite.

Meanwhile, intelligence sources on both sides of the Atlantic emphasize, Russia
continues to modernize and expand the air bases it has taken in Afghanistan. As
a result, one British source said, ''the Soviets must now be considered a
military factor in the Persian Gulf, which is only a few minutes flying time
away from their major new bases in Afghanistan.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 4, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CLEMENT J.ZABLOCKI OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS PANEL DIES

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 52, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1000 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 3


Representative Clement J. Zablocki, chairman of the House Foreign Affairs
Committee, died this morning at Capitol Hill Hospital. He was 71 years old and
had suffered a heart attack three days ago in his office.

Mr. Zablocki, a Wisconsin Democrat, headed the committee, one of the most
important in the House of Representatives, for the last seven years.

House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill said: ''The Congress suffered a tremendous loss
today with the death of Congressman Zablocki. Clement was respected and liked by
his colleagues. I consider it an honor to have been both his colleague and his
friend for more than 30 years. He was one of the architects of the War Powers
Act and was influential in guiding Congress toward a stronger role in foreign
affairs.''

Mr. Zablocki was a man shaped by the bipartisan spirit of World War II who
strained to understand and accommodate to the rebelliousness of the younger
generation of lawmakers that emerged from the Vietnam era.

Worked on Lebanon Compromise

He was a conciliator, not a firebrand, a legislator who preferred consensus to
confrontation. That style was best summed up by his last major accomplishment, a
compromise he piloted through Congress that headed off a constitutional clash
between the executive and the legislative branches over the use of American
troops in Lebanon.

Under the resolution Mr. Zablocki helped negotiate with the Reagan
Administration this fall, Congress agreed to permit a 1,600-man Marine
contingent to remain in the Beirut area for an additional 18 months, through
March 1985. In exchange, President Reagan signed the bill and tacitly
acknowledged the validity of the War Powers Resolution, even while complaining
that he doubted the law's constitutionality.

As he grew in Congressional seniority, Mr. Zablocki traveled extensively,
meeting with princes and presidents, and making policy pronouncements that
provoked headlines from Athens to Peking. But he never lost touch with his old
neighborhood on the South Side of Milwaukee, the area where he was born 71 years
ago and which he represented in Washington for almost half his life.

Like many residents of that neighborhood, Mr. Zablocki's parents were Polish
immigrants. His father worked as a laborer and ran a grocery store, and the
young man worked his way through Marquette University playing the organ and
directing choirs at local churches.

Mr. Zablocki was teaching high school in 1942 when the chance came to run for
the State Legislature, and he served two terms before winning his first
Congressional race in 1948. With 18 consecutive terms on Capitol Hill, Mr.
Zablocki was outranked in seniority by only two other House members,
Representatives Jamie L. Whitten of Mississippi and Melvin Price of Illinois.

Wry Sense of Humor

An unassuming figure who stood a head shorter than many of his colleagues, Mr.
Zablocki had two trademarks, a bushy mustache he kept carefully clipped, and a
tiny, leather-bound pipe he kept clasped in his hand. He was not a great orator,
and often stumbled through his speeches on the floor, but he maintained a wry
sense of humor that broke through when he talked about himself and his
neighbors.

''They don't mow lawns in my district,'' he boasted in a recent interview,
''they meticulously manicure them.''

The lawmaker was proud of that district, and his hard-working blue-collar
constituents, and he traced his outlook on foreign policy to those origins. ''I
think my constituents are more conservative than some of my Democratic
colleagues,'' Mr. Zablocki said in that interview. ''They're supportive of a
strong national defense, and are fiercely anti-Communist, and in that respect I
reflect their views to a T.''

The Congressman was a strong backer of the Vietnam War, for instance, and his
conservative views sometimes caused a stir abroad. In China, he was attacked as
a friend of Taiwan, and in Greece, his criticism earlier this year of the new
left-wing Government became known in the local press as the ''Zablocki affair''.


Fought With Younger Democrats

Some of his toughest battles were with the younger Democrats on the Foreign
Affairs Committee, who protested his elevation to the chairmanship of the panel
in 1977 and constantly pushed him toward more liberal views.

''There are strong differences of opinion between many Democrats and the
Administration on foreign policy,'' Representative Edward P. Boland, a
Massachusetts Democrat, noted during the last Congressional session. ''So it's
very difficult to create a bipartisan foreign policy, as Clem's trying to do.''

Partly because of the pressure from his junior colleagues, Mr. Zablocki became a
leading proponent of a resolution calling for a mutual freeze on nuclear weapons
with the Soviet Union. Earlier this year, he also led the successful fight in
the House to bar the production of new chemical weapons.

But his basic instincts were always those that came from his youth: work with
the President, end partisan disputes at the water's edge. In the debate over the
troops in Lebanon, when some lawmakers accused him of placing too much
confidence in President Reagan, Mr. Zablocki retorted, ''I must presume the
President will act in good faith.''

A Personal Credo

In a statement that could stand as his personal credo, Mr. Zablocki continued:
''Nobody wants the Marines in Lebanon. But you have to be responsible, you have
to look down the road. If you can't be resolute and determined, you have no
credibility.''

Mr. Zablocki, who was a widower, is survived by a son, Joseph Paul, and a
daughter, Jane Frances. His post as chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee
will probably be assumed by Representative Dante B. Fascell of Florida, who has
been the ranking Democrat.

An aide in Mr. Zablocki's office said that a mass for the Congressman would be
offered on Tuesday at the Blessed Sacrament Church here and that burial would be
Thursday in Milwaukee.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Representative Clement J. Zablocki

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 4, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOUSE PANEL MAY BE TOUGHER ON REAGAN UNDER NEW CHIEF

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 52, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 759 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 3


The death of Representative Clement J. Zablocki opens the way for a new
generation of lawmakers to take more important leadership positions in the House
Foreign Affairs Committee, and the panel is likely to be a more aggressive
critic of President Reagan when Congress reconvenes in January.

The man in line to succeed the Wisconsin Democrat is Representative Dante B.
Fascell of Florida, who is considered in Congress to be somewhat more liberal
than Mr. Zablocki and somewhat more likely to take a combative stance against
Administration foreign policies that he opposes. Mr. Fascell's elevation is
subject to ratification by the Democratic Party caucus, but that is a formality.

It is a sign of how the generations have changed in Congress that the 66-
year-old Mr. Fascell will now be the only Democrat on the committee who was
elected before President Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 and before American
involvement in Vietnam began to increase. Behind him on the seniority ladder,
the panel is weighted with younger members in their 30's and 40's who do not
remember World War II and the Congressional tradition of bipartisanship in
foreign policy.

Mr. Zablocki leaned heavily on Mr. Fascell and the next-ranking Democrat,
Representative Lee H. Hamilton of Indiana. Both men, for instance, were heavily
involved in negotiations with the Administration this fall that led to an
agreement under which American marines remained in Beirut.

'One President at a Time'

But Mr. Zablocki set the tone of the talks, and that tone reflected one of the
chairman's favorite maxims, ''We only have one President at a time.'' Later, Mr.
Zablocki conceded that to many liberals on his own committee, he had been ''too
easy'' on the Administration in the negotiations, but he said his main purpose
was to reach a compromise that would head off any constitutional crisis over the
issue.

Many members in Congress believe Mr. Fascell will be a tougher adversary for the
White House in any similar talks. He has a scrappier personality than Mr.
Zablocki. Also, the Almanac of American Politics wrote, ''Fascell is regarded by
some observers of the House as one of its most competent and sensitive
legislative craftsmen.''

In ratings published by The National Journal, Mr. Zablocki voted with the
liberal side 57 percent of the time on foreign policy issues in 1982 and 39
percent in 1981. Mr. Fascell's ranking was 67 percent liberal in 1982 and 72
percent the year before.

But Mr. Fascell tends to take a hard line toward one area of the world, Latin
America. His district stretches south from Miami and includes the Florida Keys,
and almost one-quarter of the population claims Hispanic heritage. Many of his
constituents were immigrants from Cuba, and his district, perhaps more than any
other, could faces a wave of immigration if leftist forces overthrow governments
in El Salvador and other Latin can countries.

Mr. Fascell has tended to support efforts by the Reagan Administration to halt
the flow of arms from Nicaragua to rebels fighting the Salvadoran Government. He
was also a strong supporter of Radio Marti, created by the last Congress to
broadcast anti-Communist messages to Latin America.

Young Liberals Move Up

One result of Mr. Zablocki's leadership style was that his subcommittee
chairmen, including younger liberals such as Representative Stephen J. Solarz of
Brooklyn, exerted considerable independence and leadership. They might have a
little less running room under Mr. Fascell.

Even so, these younger liberals have moved ahead very rapidly on the committee.
Traditionally, the House Foreign Affairs panel has been far less important than
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, which has the responsiblity to approve
treaties and Presidential appointments. As a result, many members who joined the
House panel before the Vietnam war moved on quickly to other assignments.

Since Vietnam, however, some lawmakers have seen the committee as a more
desirable assignment, because it provides a forum for members to monitor and
criticize foreign policy. One group on the panel is composed of strong
supporters of Israel.

The leader of the younger liberals is Mr. Solarz, now the fourth-ranking
Democrat on the panel, who is 43 and spent most of the 1960's as a student
activist at Brandeis and Columbia Universities. Mr. Solarz, who heads the
Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs, voted with the liberal side on 85
percent of the foreign policy votes in 1982, according to the National Journal.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 4, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RALLYING THE MARINES

BYLINE: By Drew Middleton

SECTION: Section 6; Page 140, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 2498 words


Drew Middleton is military correspondent for The New York Times.

 N OCT. 26, more than 30 former marines called Lieut.  Col. James Bathurst, all
wanting to re-enlist.  Ordinarily, the commanding officer of Marine recruiting
in northern Illinois and northwest Indiana would have expected one call. The
number of potential new recruits was up, too, almost double the normal number of
calls.

In Los Angeles, in Philadelphia, at recruiting stations all over the nation,
people - many of whom were too old or too fat or simply not Marine material -
were asking to join the corps. A truck loaded with explosives had blown up
Marine barracks in Beirut, and America was shattered by the loss of lives - 237
dead and 2 missing at final count, a disaster unparalleled since Vietnam.

What was drawing these men and women to the corps? Patriotism and a desire to
hit back certainly were motivating elements. ''There's been a surge of
appreciation for the corps since Beirut,'' says Maj. John M. Shotwell, director
of the Marine Corps public-affairs office in New York City.

There is also the distinctive role of the Marine Corps. In their pride, their
tradition and their performance, the Marines believe they stand alone, a special
breed of warrior. Recently, Gen. Paul X. Kelley, Commandant of the Marine Corps,
told me what he thinks draws recruits to the service: ''Certainly there's an
attraction of the elite force; certainly we offer young men and women the chance
to prove themselves. And at that age, they want to prove themselves.'' Trying to
sum up what being a marine means to him, he added simply: ''It's like trying to
describe your feelings for your country, your wife and your children. It's
there, but words are insufficient.''

The corps is at once a home and a profession. It is set apart from the other
fighting services, removed from the people it serves by an almost mystic belief
on the part of marines that the corps is unique, that it can do anything.

Up to a point, all of this is true. But there are many other reasons why, in a
moment of national horror, the corps's members and its alumni rallied to its
defense.

Like the great General Staff of Wilhelmine Germany, the Marine Corps will
suffer, even encourage, criticism from inside the corps. In the days following
the Beirut bombing, Marine headquarters in Washington and at Camp Lejeune, N.C.,
were barraged with letters and messages from marines all over the world. Many
wrote directly to General Kelley, asking what the hell had happened and why.
They did not expect their questions and the answers - which General Kelley made
personally, to each correspondent - to be publicized. But they did want to know,
because Marine lives had been lost, and because the corps, they thought, had
faltered or fumbled.

As the death toll rose, General Kelley appeared before Congress to explain what
had happened in Beirut, and to describe the situation faced by Col. Timothy J.
Geraghty, commander of the Marine contingent in Beirut, and his staff. Several
legislators suggested that the marines should have been better prepared, that
they should have made better security arrangements. Some called for withdrawal
of the remaining marines.

As outside criticism increased, this American military priesthood closed ranks.
Debate within the corps over the security arrangements in Beirut was naturally
vigorous, but few of the arguments leaked to the press or other services.

General Kelley received a second round of letters from former commandants and
scores of ex-marines. In the first hours after the disaster, some of these
senior officers had written strident letters of criticism. Now, however, their
tone was different, and for a simple reason: The corps was in danger of being
defamed.

On a plane out of Washington, I talked with a man in his mid-40's who said that
he had been a marine.

''I was shocked by the thing,'' he said. ''How could we, the Marines, get caught
in a thing like that? I wrote Kelley a snotty letter. Then, when all these dopes
who've never been near the business end of a gun started in on us, I changed my
mind. I figured Geraghty and Kelley had good and sufficient reason for what they
did. If I criticized them, knowing what I do about the corps, I was like any of
these hammerheaded Congressmen or you guys in the papers.''

The Marine Corps enjoys a singularly efficient - and impressive - ''old-boy
network,'' a phrase coined by the British Army. Faced with any issue that
threatens the organization, current and former members of the corps come to a
united position, almost without consultation. In this case, questions of public
blame have been put off until mid-December, when a Department of Defense
commission will report on its investigation of the matter.

A retired general, who asked for anonymity, told me: ''Look, we know something
went wrong in Beirut. But we're not going to discuss it in public until we know
all the facts. And Kelley, thank God, isn't going to throw some officer to the
wolves just because they're howling in Congress and the papers. The decisions on
what went wrong and what should be put right will be taken, and we'll correct
what was wrong.''

Yet the one issue that most military men outside the service see as paramount
may never be fully addressed. That is: Why was the Marine Corps, a force trained
and equipped for landing operations and hit- and-run raids, used in a garrison
role? The Marines Corps answer to outsiders is: ''They sent us there. We had a
job to do.''

The answer, though worthy and honorable, does not suffice. As early as January
of this year, Navy and Marine officers were privately saying that the Marines in
Lebanon were miscast, that the job was one that the Army was trained and
equipped to do. They made their assessments known to the Secretary of Defense,
who in turn presented the arguments to the State Department.

The State Department and the White House did not agree. An Army presence in
Beirut, officials argued, would give the enterprise an air of permanence and
would be interpreted by allies and enemies alike as a sign that United States
troops were in Lebanon to stay.

And so, the marines remained in Beirut. There were complaints, then as now, but
all were kept within the corps.



 THE MARINE CORPS OCcupies a special place in the American military. Created by
an act of the Continental Congress in 1775, the corps antedates both the Navy
and the Army. Marines fought in the nation's early wars, battling off of Tripoli
against the Barbary pirates and in Mexico. This century, the Marines have been
sent to several Caribbean and Central American countries. In 1912, Marines
landed in Nicaragua in support of President Adolfo D iaz, and did not leave
until 1933. They played key roles in World War II, Korea and Vietnam.

The corps is a relatively small force: 194,200 men and women in three infantry
divisions and three air wings, with a total of about 735 fixed- wing aircraft,
72 armed helicopters and 480 transport helicopters. By comparison, the Navy has
452,111 personnel and the Army 781,648.

The corps is a tightly knit family, and much is made of its esprit. In a 1950
Marine manual, a chapter on the subject states: ''Among its members, being a
marine is the thing that counts mainly; after that comes service to the regiment
or battalion.'' Members of various services within the corps - air, supply,
signals, artillery - do not wear distinctive badges. All enlisted men graduate
from boot camp at Parris Island, S.C., or San Diego, while commissioned officers
undergo similarly rigorous training at Quantico, Va. Graduates never forget the
experience; indeed, a certain type of fraternity is forged during those weeks.
In 1958, when the Marines landed in Beirut for the first time, an American
ambassador visiting a Marine assault ship asked a sergeant when he had graduated
from Parris Island. The marine said he had been in the class of 1948. ''Ah,''
the ambassador replied, ''I was a bit ahead of you, class of 1912.''

 2nd jump







The United States' ability to respond quickly to military and political
situations around the world rests largely upon the Marines. Today, there are
marines in Beirut. In October, 1,800 were sent to Grenada along with the Army's
Rangers and they secured the northeast area of the island. The action was
considered highly successful inside and outside the Marine Corps and did give a
boost to morale. If the Persian Gulf erupts in revolution or war, the marines
with the Seventh Fleet in the Western Pacific and the Marine division based in
Okinawa are ready to fly to Diego Garcia, pick up their pre-positioned supplies
and report for action. Privately, some officers worry that the corps may soon be
spread too thin.

None of this can explain the peculiar psyche of the Marines. Beneath their rigid
and extensive training, the constant exercises and the cold calculation of
casualties, lies an undefinable inner strength. The 1950 manual states: ''The
corps emphasizes the rugged outlet for men's energies and never permits its
members to forget that the example of courage is their most precious heritage.''

This same confidence encourages a supercilious attitude toward other services,
nationalities and civilians. The sophisticated American will find such an
attitude entirely out of place in a liberal democracy. The sophisticated soldier
of any service will see it as inseparable from any elite military unit's view of
the rest of humanity.

The personal satisfaction that comes to an enlisted man or officer from just
being a marine is highly important. Some 40 years ago in Iceland, a young marine
major, who subsequently died in the South Pacific, said: ''There's something
tremendously satisfying in being a member of a service you know is absolutely
first class.'' The same attitude is voiced by young marines today: ''I'm in the
Marines, quite simply, because they're the best,'' says Peter S. Paine 3d, a
junior at Princeton University who is in the corps' Platoon Leader Class, a
program that grooms prospective officers. ''When the Marines have a job to do,
they don't compromise.''

The Marine Corps now only accepts as enlistments candidates with high-school
diplomas; spaces in the college- based Platoon Leaders Class are almost full
this year. ''Since more people are staying in the Marines, there are fewer
openings,'' says Capt. Michael B. Gearren, officer- selection officer in
Princeton, N.J. This year, he expects nine of the 11 seniors in the program in
his area to accept their commissions. ''There's been a definite rise in
standards, just in the past year: To qualify for P.L.C., I'm looking at
candidates who have at least a 3.0 grade-point average, 1000 SAT's and are in
excellent physical condition. I have several such candidates and no slots for
them. Recruiting for the junior class was canceled this year because we already
had too many trained officer candidates. It's amazing, but then, this is the
Marines.''

There are, of course, problems in the corps. Marine training has been criticized
as too demanding physically and mentally on recruits. While this may have been
true in the past, today training may not even be as rigorous as that given to
the Navy's SEALS or the Army's Rangers. Besides, some marines argue, there is a
rationale for such tough training. Offers one drill instructor: ''Better the kid
should break now in training where he don't hurt nobody, than we let him in and
he breaks in combat and takes five or six marines with him. Man, it takes a lot
to make a marine. But when he's made, you got something.''

And there is criticism of certain aspects of the Marines' tactics. Some Army
officers, asking for anonymity, say the Marines have not grasped the lessons of
new military technology and are still ''fighting the last war,'' still training
for campaigns won in the Pacific in World War II. Comments one Army officer:
''All the computerized data they have - and we have, incidentally - isn't going
to be much good if there are crowds of people out there with heat-seeking
surface-to- air or surface-to-surface missiles.''

The Marines' unique position in American society owes much to the fact that,
while the corps is ''of the people,'' it is not as fully integrated into
American society as are other services.

This separation is due, in part, to the corps's functions. Unlike Army troops,
marines are seldom ashore long enough to form close ties with local communities.
And when marines are ashore, they find themselves in places like Beirut or
Grenada or Guam or Okinawa. Just as Caesar's legions never knew Rome, so the
marines, except through family ties, know little of a changing America.

Balancing this is the fact that the Marines are usually well-served by their
alumni. Many of these are powerful figures in politics and business: There are
nine ex-Marines in the Senate and 22 in the House of Representatives. Secretary
of State George P. Shultz; Secretary of Treasury Donald T. Regan; James A. Baker
3d, chief of the White House staff; Robert C. McFarlane, national security
council adviser; A. Robert Abboud, president and chief executive officer of
Occidental Petroleum Corporation, and J. Lynn Helms, administrator of the
Federal Aviation Administration and former chairman of Piper Aircraft, are all
former Marines, just to name a few. When the corps is in trouble, in Congress or
elsewhere, former marines are often quick to rally to their support. ''We have a
lot of friends up on the Hill and elsewhere,'' says Capt. Jay Farrar, an
information officer in Washington.

Many of these friends gave the corps support in the 1970's, after the Vietnam
War, when some Pentagon officials were questioning whether the country really
needed the Marines. The Marines, argued the critics, would have no place in
Europe: Lightly armed for quick deployment, they would be no match for Soviet
divisions with their sophisticated armaments. Others pointed out that the
Rangers and the airborne divisions of the Army were trained to carry out
missions formerly allocated to the Marines.

Marine officers and supporters countered the attack, reminding the Pentagon
officials that the United States is a global power, with interests stretching
well beyond Europe. The time would come when certain actions against distant
enemies would require highly experienced, mobile forces; such actions, they
claimed, could be carried out only by the Marines.  In recent years, there have
been no serious suggestions of disbanding the corps. Intervening events have
made it clear that the corps is going to be with us for a long time. Whatever
the aftermath of the tragedy in Beirut, the Marines remain skilled
professionals, unshakeable in their confidence, disdainful of their rivals, an
integral part of the American military - in their own eyes, the best.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Marine Corps recruits during boot-camp training ; photo of
Marine Corps in Nicaragua throught early 1900's; photo of Marine recruit going
through basic training

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 4, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


;
LIFE IN VIETNAM

SECTION: Section 6; Page 174, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 132 words


I found Craig Whitney's retrospective, ''A Bitter Peace: Life in Vietnam'' (Oct.
30), provocative. However, I must respectfully disagree with his observation
that ''only stones were left where American bases had stood - Camp Eagle, home
of the 101st Airborne Division; the military airfield at Phu Bai. . .'' As a
former NCO in the 101st who spent a short but incredibly intense part of my life
at Phu Bai and Camp Eagle, I know with certainty that more is left there than a
few stones - things like honor and comradeship, our former na"ivete and the
blood of ourselves and others, in the sand. For those of us who fought there,
Phu Bai and Camp Eagle remain something indelible - a place in our minds and
memories, not just places on a map.

 PAUL A. SCIPIONE Metuchen, N.J.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of women in the military

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 4, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS FICTION 115

SECTION: Section 7; Page 80, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 785 words


PET SEMATARY, by Stephen King. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The new family in town
discovers the horrors that lie in a neighboring cemetery.  2214

POLAND, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) Seven centuries of history
in fictional form.  3324

THE NAME OF THE ROSE, by Umberto Eco. (Helen & Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $15.95.) Unraveling the mystery of a murder in a 14th-century
Italian monastery.  4413

CHANGES, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) The crises that arise when a
television anchorwoman and a glamorous physician fall in love.  555

THE SAGA OF BABY DIVINE, by Bette Midler. (Crown, $11.95.) The entertainer
imagines what her infancy was like in a fable lushly illustrated by Todd Schorr.
663

THE ROBOTS OF DAWN, by Isaac Asimov. (Doubleday, $15.95.) A human detective from
Earth investigates the murder of a robot on the planet Aurora.  7718

HOLLYWOOD WIVES, by Jackie Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The struggle for
money and power in Tinsel Town.  883

THE WICKED DAY, by Mary Stewart. (Morrow, $16.95.) King Arthur, fulfillng a
prophecy made by Merlin, falls into an incestuous relationship.  91011

THE AUERBACH WILL, by Stephen Birmingham. (Little, Brown, $16.95.) Three
generations of a German-Jewish family in New York.  10914

WHO KILLED THE ROBINS FAMILY?, created by Bill Adler and written by Thomas
Chastain. (Morrow, $9.95.) The publisher offers a $10,000 prize to the reader
who submits the best answer.  11123

MORETA: DRAGONLADY OF PERN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $14.95.) A
battle against ecological disaster on a faraway planet.  121326

RETURN OF THE JEDI, adapted by Joan D. Vinge. (Random House, $6.95.) Illustrated
storybook based on the latest ''Star Wars'' film.  13 1

THE NEVERENDING STORY, by Michael Ende. (Doubleday, $15.95.) A lonely boy meets
challenges and finds his true self in a magical land.  141417

AUGUST, by Judith Rossner. (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95.) The five-year
relationship of two women, a teen-age patient and her analyst.  151111

WINTER'S TALE, by Mark Helprin. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $14.95.) Heroic
lives in Manhattan between the late 19th century and the year 2000.


NONFICTION 1111

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck.  (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  2247

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J. Peters and Robert H.  Waterman Jr. (Harper
& Row, $19.95.) Lessons to be learned from well-run American corporations.  3412


THE BEST OF JAMES HERRIOT.  (St. Martin's Press, $19.95.) Selections from the
writings of the Yorkshire veterinarian.  4514

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $17.95.) The rescue of two
Americans from an Iranian prison.  5356

MEGATRENDS, by John Naisbitt. (Warner, $17.50.) Predictions about America in the
next decade based on an analysis of conditions today.

667

VIETNAM: A History, by Stanley Karnow. (Viking, $19.95.) Profusely illustrated
history of the war: tie-in with the current PBS television series.  778

THE MARY KAY GUIDE TO BEAUTY.  (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) An illustrated guide
for women prepared by the staff of a cosmetic firm.  895

TOUGH TIMES NEVER LAST, BUT TOUGH PEOPLE DO!  by Robert H.  Schuller. (Thomas
Nelson, $12.95.) Inspiration from a Protestant preacher.  989

THE BODY PRINCIPAL, by Victoria Principal. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Exercises
for women by a television personality.  101210

THE PETER PAN SYNDROME, by Dan Kiley. (Dodd, Mead, $15.95.) A psychologist's
analysis of the plight of men who have never grown up.  11113

NO MORE HOT FLASHES AND OTHER GOOD NEWS, by Penny W. Budoff.  (Putnam, $14.95.)
A health-care handbook for women, written by a Long Island physician.  121010

FATAL VISION, by Joe McGinniss. (Putnam, $17.95.) The case of Jeffrey MacDonald,
Ivy League graduate, respected physician and convicted killer of his wife and
daughters.  13 2

A HERO FOR OUR TIMES, by Ralph G. Martin. (Macmillan, $19.95.) An anecdotal
account of the Kennedy years.  141410

OUTRAGEOUS ACTS AND EVERYDAY REBELLIONS, by Gloria Steinem. (Holt, Rinehart &
Winston, $14.95.) Essays by a leading feminist writer.  15152

WHILE REAGAN SLEPT, by Art Buchwald. (Putnam, $14.95.) Seven score wry
observations on the Washington scene by the syndicated columnist.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 4, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

And Bear in Mind

SECTION: Section 7; Page 80, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 616 words


Other recent books that in the opinion of the Book Review staff are of
particular literary, topical or scholarly interest:

ALAN TURING: The Enigma , by Andrew Hodges. (Simon & Schuster, $22.50.) A vivid
account of the troubled life of the eccentric English mathematician who was in
large part responsible not only for the concept of computers as we know them but
also for breaking the German cipher code during World War II - a feat now widely
recognized as a key element in the Allies' triumph over the Nazi war machine.

THE DEATH OF CHE GUEVARA, by Jay Cantor. (Alfred A. Knopf, $17.95.) A powerful
first novel that mixes fact and fantasy about the Latin-American revolutionary,
seeing him not as a hero or a

curiosity or a demon but as a historical riddle.

THE DISCOVERERS, by Daniel J. Boorstin. (Random House, $25.) In his latest book,
the Librarian of Congress takes his longest, widest look at ''man's search to
know his world and himself'' in science through the centuries.

FIASCO, by Jack Anderson with James Boyd. (Times Books, $17.50.) In which the
syndicated columnist and his colleague demolish the idea that worldwide supply
problems were to blame for what happened to the price of oil.

IN THE LAND OF ISRAEL, by Amos Oz. (A Helen and Kurt Wolff Book/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $12.95.) The novelist, turning reporter, traveled throughout his
country last fall, interviewing and listening to people - mostly Jews but some
Arabs - with conflicting views of what sort of place Israel should be.

LA BRAVA, by Elmore Leonard. (Arbor House, $14.95.) Unlike most thrillers, which
hold up for the first 250 pages but don't make much sense in the end, ''La
Brava'' - about a former Secret Service man probing extortion and murder in
Miami Beach - has a conclusion even more satisfying than its exposition.

MEDITATIONS IN GREEN, by Stephen Wright. (Charles Scribner's Sons, $14.95.) A
soldier escapes the pain and horror of the Vietnam War through heroin and 10
years later in a hectic, violent American city becomes addicted again, in a
brilliant, scarifying first novel by a writer who served in Vietnam.

THE MODERN POETIC SEQUENCE: The Genius of Modern Poetry, by M. L.  Rosenthal and
Sally M. Gall. (Oxford University Press, $29.95.) A survey of more than 40 works
by American, British and Irish poets that impressively consolidates a way of
reading the specifically modern in the poetry of the last century and a half.

MY LAST SIGH, by Luis Bunuel. (Alfred A. Knopf, $15.95.) Possessing the same
startling but delectable perversity and deep humor as Bunuel's best movies, this
posthumous autobiography may be quite simply the loveliest testament ever left
by a film director.

PARALLEL LIVES: Five Victorian Marriages, by Phyllis Rose. (Alfred A.  Knopf,
$16.95.) The marriages (mostly unhappy) of five famous literary figures - John
Ruskin, Thomas Carlyle, John Stuart Mill, Charles Dickens and George Eliot, the
last free of legality - told so compellingly they spring to life all over again.


RUSSIA: Broken Idols, Solemn Dreams, by David K. Shipler. (Times Books, $17.95.)
An observant account by a Times correspondent of his tour of duty in Moscow
1975-79 that directs our attention to long-term trends in the Soviet system and
society.

SHAME, by Salman Rushdie. (Alfred A. Knopf, $13.95.) Mr. Rushdie, who writes
with enormous gusto, calls his second novel ''a sort of modern fairy tale.'' But
the link between certain bizarre happenings in the fairy tale and events in a
nation that is ''not quite Pakistan'' is inescapable.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 4, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NOTABLE BOOKS OF THE YEAR

SECTION: Section 7; Page 16, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 10992 words


The following list has been selected from titles reviewed since the Christmas
Issue of December 1982. Such a list can only suggest the high points in the main
fields of reader interest. Books are arranged alphabetically under subject
headings. Quoted comments are from The Book Review.  Autobiography & Biography

AN ABYSS DEEP ENOUGH. Letters of Heinrich von Kleist, With a Selection of Essays
and Anecdotes.  Edited, translated and introduced by Phillip B. Miller. (Dutton.
$16.95.) ''On the whole, the letters are sensitively translated by Mr. Miller,
as are the essays and anecdotes, which include some of the finest pieces Kleist
(1777-1811) wrote.''

AN AFRICAN IN GREENLAND.  By Tete-Michel Kpomassie. Translated by James Kirup.
(Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $14.95.) The author, a native
of Togo in West Africa, pursued a boyhood obsession with Eskimos and eventually
traveled to Greenland to live among them and report on their modern life.

AFTER LONG SILENCE.  By Michael Straight. (Norton. $17.50.) An account of a
privileged trans-Atlantic life in which the author, a prominent fixture on the
liberal American scene and longtime editor of The New Republic, publicly reveals
his undergraduate connection with the British Communist Party.

ALAN TURING. The Enigma.  By Andrew Hodges. (Simon & Schuster. $22.50.) The
first biography of the British mathematician who broke the Nazis' wartime codes,
was a leading world theorist of computers and artificial intelligence, and
committed suicide at 41 after he was subjected to medical treatments to ''cure''
his homosexuality.

ALFRED STIEGLITZ: PHOTOGRAPHY & WRITINGS.  By Sarah Greenough and Juan Hamilton.
(Callaway/National Gallery of Art. $75.) The organizers of the traveling
exhibition of the work of the American photographer have assembled
''unquestionably the most beautiful book devoted to his work.''

ALONG THE EDGE OF THE FOREST. An Iron Curtain Journey.  By Anthony Bailey.
(Random House. $15.95.) A political travelogue by ''an accomplished travel
writer'' about a ''journey from the north of Germany, on the Baltic, down to
Bavaria, with excursions through the Iron Curtain into Berlin, Czechoslovakia
and Hungary.''

BEYOND LOVE AND LOYALTY. Letters of Thomas Wolfe and Aline Bernstein.  Edited by
Suzanne Stutman. (North Carolina. $14.95.) ''A collection of superb love letters
by two wonderfully articulate and sensitive people.'' Wolfe's letters ''form a
literary chronicle of the 1920's and 1930's in Europe and America,'' and Mrs.
Bernstein's ''offer a candid, clever commentary on the New York cultural, and
especially the dramatic, scene.''

BOOKER T. WASHINGTON. The Wizard of Tuskegee, 1901-1915.  By Louis R. Harlan.
(Oxford. $30.) This concluding volume of the life of the black educator avoids
''the pitfalls of white guilt and black rage and the temptation to judge the
past by standards of the present. (A) remarkable achievement.''

CHRONICLE OF MY MOTHER.  By Yasushi Inoue. Translated by Jean Oda Moy.
(Kodansha. $14.95.) ''One of the most respected novelists in Japan'' has written
a ''decorous and graceful'' account of his mother's ''long decline into
senility.''

CUSTOMS AND CHARACTERS. Contemporary Portaits.  By Peter Quennell. (Little,
Brown. $16.50.) A new volume of autobiographical reminiscences from one of the
last and most graceful of the British writers who came of age in the 1920's.

THE DARK SIDE OF GENIUS. The Life of Alfred Hitchcock.  By Donald Spoto.
(Little, Brown. $20.) ''For those who consider Hitchcock a dark genius, Mr.
Spoto's book is absolutely compulsory reading.'' Aspects of the director's life
are as chilling and spellbinding as his films, including a strong sense of
persecution, a streak of sadism and a profound belief in original sin.

DASHIELL HAMMETT. A Life.  By Diane Johnson. (Random House. $17.95.) A ''cool,
steady-eyed and engrossing'' biography of the mystery writer that is ''better
written and more shapely'' than any previous one but still leaves enough
mysteries unsolved to keep Hammett fans occupied with detective work of their
own.

DEAR BESS. The Letters From Harry to Bess Truman, 1910-1959.  Edited by Robert
H. Ferrell. (Norton. $19.95.) Truman's letters chronicle his nearly lifelong
love affair with his wife and are filled with his forthright opinions on the
major issues of the day.

DE GAULLE.  By Bernard Ledwidge. (St. Martin's. $17.95.) A former minister of
the British Embassy in Paris who ''clearly admires de Gaulle'' offers ''an
explanation of, and a contribution to, a great legend.''

DESCENT FROM GLORY. Four Generations of the John Adams Family.  By Paul Nagel.
(Oxford. $25.) The troubled and sometimes disastrous lives of the later members
of one of the great founding families of the nation seem to prove
''disappointment is entirely, ruthlessly democratic.''

THE DIARY OF BEATRICE WEBB. Volume One: 1873-1892, ''Glitter Around and Darkness
Within.'' Edited by Norman and Jeanne MacKenzie. (Harvard. $25.) The prominent
British socialist's early diaries are the story of how an ''elegant swan turned
herself into an ugly duckling. . . . To read them is to meet a glamorous George
Eliot.''

DIFFICULT WOMEN. A Memoir of Three.  By David Plante. (Atheneum. $9.95.) The
novelist's accounts of Jean Rhys, Sonia Orwell and Germaine Greer, linked by his
''idea that his own complicated motives in devoting himself to these friendships
is part of the story he has to tell.''

DISRAELI.  By Sarah Bradford. (Stein & Day. $19.95.) This biography of ''the man
many believe was the greatest British Prime Minister in the 19th century and
possibly in the entire history of England'' achieves ''an admirable balance of
the personal and the political.''

DOWN & OUT IN THE GREAT DEPRESSION.  Letters From the ''Forgotten Man.'' Edited
by Robert S. McElvaine. (University of North Carolina. Cloth, $23. Paper,
$8.95.) An affecting sampling of the millions of letters written to Federal
officials during the Depression, with commentary and a selection of the
memorable photographs of the period.

EASE MY SORROWS.  By Lev Kopelev. Translated by Antonina W.  Bouis. (Random
House. $17.95.) Personal recollections of life in a forced labor camp by a
former Red Army officer who was imprisoned by Soviet authorities for protesting
the murder of German civilians by Soviet soldiers during World War II. He was
finally expelled from Russia in 1981.

EISENHOWER. Volume One: Soldier, General of the Army, President- Elect,
1890-1952.  By Stephen E. Ambrose. (Simon & Schuster. $22.95.) This first of two
volumes by a historian who was an editor of the Eisenhower papers provides ''the
most complete and objective work yet on the general who became President.''

ELENI.  By Nicholas Gage. (Random House. $15.95.) ''Through the personal tragedy
of his mother's death by a Communist firing squad in the Greek Civil war,'' a
reporter ''addresses the essential character of modern war, in which the
distinction between combatant and noncombatant has been lost.''

THE ENTHUSIAST. A Life of Thornton Wilder.  By Gilbert A. Harrison. (Ticknor &
Fields. $19.95.) This biography of the playwright/novelist who knew everyone and
went everywhere ''supplies a good deal of evidence that Wilder wasn't the
affable Babbitt he made himself out to be.''

EVENING LIGHT.  By Stephan Hermlin. Translated by Paul F.  Dvorak. (Fjord Press.
$6.95.) This ''beautiful memoir'' by the novelist who is secretary of the East
German writers' union includes an evocation of childhood in a rich and cultured
Jewish family, an account of his conversion to Communism, a meditation on art
and ''a serene and dignified summing up of a life dedicated to the difficult
marriage of poetry and class struggle.''

FURY ON EARTH. A Biography of Wilhelm Reich.  By Myron Sharaf. (Marek/St.
Martin's. $24.95.) A student, patient and colleague of Reich's for 10 years has
written a remarkable, passionate biography of the analyst and thinker whose life
was a mixture of mysticism and tragedy.

FRIDA. A Biography of Frida Kahlo.  By Hayden Herrera. (Harper & Row. $21.95.)
The life of the half-German Mexican artist and wife of Diego Riviera who ''lived
dramatically, even melodramatically, in dramatic times.''

A GENERAL'S LIFE.  By Omar N. Bradley and Clay Blair. (Simon & Schuster.
$19.95.) Bradley died while still at work on this memoir, in which the mild
voice of his ''Soldier's Story'' is replaced by acerbic readiness to put down
his judgments about other officers and politicians.

GENERATIONS. An American Family.  By John Egerton. (Kentucky. $19.50.) A moving
and revealing account of the lives of a Kentucky couple aged 102 and 93, whose
taped conversations reveal a living memory of a century of history, continuity
and change in American life.

A JOURNEY FOR OUR TIMES.  By Harrison E. Salisbury. (Harper & Row. $22.50.) An
autobiography of a former correspondent for The New York Times that describes
''the forging of an obsession'' with Russia and a gritty, skeptical sensibility
that has ''served his readers for 40 years.''

A JOURNEY IN LADAKH.  By Andrew Harvey. (Houghton Mifflin. $13.95.) Mr. Harvey,
a young poet and Shakespearean scholar, has written a travel book in which he
''records a spiritual quest that culminates in (his) instruction in the
techniques of esoteric meditation by a Tibetan guru.''

KHODASEVICH. His Life and Art.  By David M. Bethea. (Princeton. $27.50.) First
critical biography of the poet Vladislav Khodasevich, who was a contemporary of
Pasternak and Mandelstam and whom Nabokov repeatedly called ''the greatest
Russian poet the twentieth century has yet produced.''

LEON BLUM.  By Jean Lacouture. Translated by George Holoch. (Holmes & Meier.
Cloth, $39.50. Paper, $24.50.) The French journalist and biographer turns to the
life of the controversial French Socialist.

THE LETTERS OF ARCHIBALD MACLEISH. 1907-1982.  Edited by R. H. Winnick.
(Houghton Mifflin. $20.) Letters from seven decades of the poet's life show
that, because of his public duties, ''MacLeish's relation to poetry was mixed
and even sporadic.''

THE LETTERS OF HENRY ADAMS. Volume One: 1858- 1868. Volume Two: 1868-1885.
Volume Three: 1886-1892.  Edited by J. C. Levenson and others. (Harvard. $100.)
This edition of the letters of one of the greatest letter writers in American
history supersedes all its predecessors.

THE LETTERS OF MARGARET FULLER. Volume One: 1817-38. Volume Two: 1839-41.
Edited by Robert N. Hudspeth. (Cornell. $25 each.) The first two of a planned
six volumes of letters by ''one of the most enterprising journalists, critics
and foreign correspondents of the first half of the 19th century.''

THE MEMOIRS OF LEONID PASTERNAK.  Translated by Jennifer Bradshaw. (Quartet
Books. $24.95.) ''Highly entertaining as well as instructive'' personal
recollections of intellectual and artistic life in pre- Revolutionary Russia by
the noted painter and father of Boris Pasternak, the poet and novelist.

THE MONTGOLFIER BROTHERS AND THE INVENTION OF AVIATION, 1783-1784.  By Charles
Coulston Gillispie. (Princeton. $35.) The colorful story of Joseph and Etienne
de Montgolfier, who ''built a series of (flying) 'machines,' changing them from
modified kites to cloth balloons eventually backed with wallpaper to hold . . .
heated air.''

MY LAST SIGH.  By Luis Bunuel. Translated by Abigail Israel. (Knopf. $15.95.)
This ''may be quite simply the loveliest testament ever left by a film director.
. . . It has the same startling but delectable perversity and deep humor as
Bunuel's best films and, like most of them, is a work of old age.''

PASTERNAK.  By Ronald Hingley. (Knopf. $17.95.) The biographer ''takes an
astringent view of the great poet's personality'' in this scholarly study of his
life and works.

ROBERT BROWNING. A Life Within Life.  By Donald Thomas. (Viking. $18.85.) A
biography that uses Browning's poetry to illuminate his life and thus reflects a
new light on the poetry. There is also information on the poet's early reading
and extensive knowledge of medicine, zoology and music.

THE ROOTS OF TREASON. Ezra Pound and the Secret of St. Elizabeths.  By E. Fuller
Torrey. (McGraw-Hill. $19.95.) An examination of the insanity defense used by
the poet to avoid trial for treason after World War II. The author is a
psychiatrist, and his book raises serious questions about the probity of the
doctors who examined Pound and pronounced him insane.

SON OF THE REVOLUTION.  By Liang Heng and Judith Shapiro. (Knopf. $15.) A
''harrowing but spellbinding account of Mr. Liang's growing up and coming of age
in the political maelstrom of the Cultural Revolution.''

THOMAS EAKINS.  By Lloyd Goodrich. (Harvard/ National Gallery of Art. Two
volumes, $70.) This study of the great Philadelphia painter ''is a crowning
achievement of the author's long and productive career.''

THE TOLSTOYS. Twenty- Four Generations of Russian History, 1353-1983.  By
Nikolai Tolstoy. (Morrow. $22.50.) A scion of the celebrated Russian noble
family recounts vividly the rise of the Tolstoys through six centuries. Their
story reveals a good deal about Russia itself and contains many fascinating
tales of exotic, energetic and often strange members of the incredibly varied
and talented clan.

TURGENEV'S LETTERS.  Edited and translated by David Lowe. (Ardis. Two volumes,
$50.) An ''admirable and scholarly'' edition of the Russian novelist's letters,
including more than 200 translated for the first time.

VANESSA BELL.  By Frances Spalding. (Ticknor & Fields. $22.95.) A ''careful and
comprehensive'' biography of a fine painter, the daughter of Leslie Stephen,
sister of Virginia Woolf and wife of the critic Clive Bell, who also had an
affair with Roger Fry and then a lifelong one with the painter Duncan Grant.

VITA.  By Victoria Glendinning. (Knopf. $17.95.) A life of Vita Sackville-West,
a turbulent aristocrat who was a popular writer, the wife of Harold Nicolson, an
outspoken lesbian and eventually the most famous gardener in England.

VOICES.  By James Matthews. (Atheneum. $25.) A careful account of the
contentious life of the great Irish short-story writer Frank O'Connor.

W.

H. HUDSON.  By Ruth Tomalin. (Faber & Faber. $19.95.) This life of the
naturalist and novelist who wrote ''Green Mansions'' includes ''first-rate
chapters on the revolution in the world's thinking about wildlife.''

Children

ANNO'S U.S.A.  By Mitsumasa Anno. (Philomel. $10.95. Ages 6 and Up.) A highly
selective pictorial journey across America, looking at the land, people and
places, history, literature, art and legend.

ARNOLD OF THE DUCKS.  Written and illustrated by Mordicai Gerstein. (Harper &
Row. $10.50. Ages 5 to 9.) A boy, raised by ducks, learns to duck walk, swim and
fly in a story both humorous and poignant and with buoyant illustrations.

BEYOND THE DIVIDE.  By Kathryn Lasky. (Macmillan. $11.95. Ages 12 and Up.)
Vivid, well-researched historical novel about a 14-year-old Amish girl's
harrowing adventures traveling by wagon train to California in the mid-19th
century.

DEAR MR. HENSHAW.  By Beverly Cleary. (Morrow. $8.50. Ages 8 to 11.) In this
popular author's 27th book - cast in the form of letters and a diary - a
10-year-old boy reveals the pain felt from his parents' divorce and the longing
for his absent father. ''A first-rate, poignant story.''

THE GLORIOUS FLIGHT.  Written and illustrated by Alice and Martin Provensen.
(Viking. $13.95. Ages 5 and Up.) This gloriously illustrated account of Louis
Bleriot's experiments with various flying machines is ''as brief, graceful and
direct as the course of a paper airplane across a living room.''

I WILL CALL IT GEORGIE'S BLUES.  By Suzanne Newton. (Viking. $12.95. Ages 11 to
15.) Behind the public faces of a minister's family some dark secrets are
revealed in this ''sad and wonderful story'' set in small Southern town.

THE SIGN OF THE BEAVER.  By Elizabeth George Speare. (Houghton Mifflin. $8.95.
Ages 10 to 14.) This story about a 12-year-old boy surviving in the Maine
wilderness of the late 1760's is ''distinguished in style and compelling in
narrative force.''

THE WITCHES.  By Roald Dahl. Illustrated by Quentin Blake. (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux. $10.95. Ages 9 to 12.) Transformed into a mouse, a 7-year-old schoolboy
and his grandmother fight to save the children of England from The Grand High
Witch of the World and her sister conspirators.

THE WRECK OF THE ZEPHYR.  Written and illustrated by Chris Van Allsburg.
(Houghton Mifflin, $14.95. Ages 7 and Up.) Sailboats fly through the air in this
handsomely illustrated, imaginative story of a boy out to prove he is the
world's greatest sailor.


Current Affairs

& Social Comment

AFTER BREZHNEV. Sources of Soviet Conduct in the 1980's.  Edited by Robert F.
Byrnes. (Indiana. $16.95.) Eight American scholars analyze the economic and
political situation of the Soviet Union and generally agree that not much change
can be expected until a younger generation of leaders emerges.

THE ANATOMY OF POWER.  By John Kenneth Galbraith. (Houghton Mifflin. $15.95.)
The economist anatomizes three kinds of power that shape modern society -
threats of punishment, promises of reward, and conditioning, which educates and
persuades. In the modern industrial world, the last kind, he says, is generally
benign; the one dangerous persuader is the military.

ANDROPOV.  By Zhores Medvedev. (Norton. $14.95.) The best personal study so far
of the Soviet leader, written by an emigre scientist, gives an inside look at
how the top Soviet political, military and police organizations worked to assure
that Yuri Andropov succeeded Leonid Brezhnev.

BLUE HIGHWAYS. A Journey Into America.  By William Least Heat Moon. (Atlantic/
Little, Brown. $17.50.) An account of the part-Osage author's travels by van
along the country's back roads. ''Especially good about the people'' who live in
out-of-the-way places like Dime Box, Tex.

CHILDREN OF WAR.  By Roger Rosenblatt. (Anchor/ Doubleday. $13.95.)''An American
father of three, approaching middle age, embarks on a world journey of just five
weeks to five war zones (or places receiving refugees) in order to interview and
understand children caught up in those wars.''

CLASS. A Guide Through the American Status System.  By Paul Fussell. (Summit.
$13.95.) ''A shrewd and entertaining commentary on American mores today,'' in
which Mr. Fussell finds not five but nine social classes in the United States
and brings a quick ear and a penetrating eye to his observations of them.

DANGEROUS CURRENTS. The State of Economics.  By Lester C. Thurow. (Random House.
$16.95.) The scholar, columnist and author of ''The Zero-Sum Society'' offers an
analysis of ''the discipline of economics rather than the troubled state of the
American economy.''

THE DEINDUSTRIALIZATION OF AMERICA. Plant Closings, Community Abandonment, and
the Dismantling of Basic Industry.  By Barry Bluestone and Bennett Harrison.
(Basic Books. $19.95.) An ''important book'' that ''documents abundantly the
human and social costs'' of American industry's failures in the last decade.

DISMANTLING AMERICA. The Rush to Deregulate.  By Susan J. Tolchin and Martin
Tolchin. (Houghton Mifflin. $16.95.) The Tolchins, who ''believe that any effort
to deregulate threatens to 'dismantle' the country,'' document the Reagan
Administration's successful efforts to cut back Government regulation of
American industry and the markets.

THE ECONOMICS OF POLITICS AND RACE. An International Perspective.  By Thomas
Sowell. (Morrow. $15.95.) ''A comparative historical look at the fate of racial
and ethnic minorities in societies throughout the world'' by the ''iconoclastic
black conservative'' economist. He argues that a free market does more to
alleviate inequalities than affirmative action or civil rights campaigns.

THE EUROPEANS.  By Luigi Barzini. (Simon & Schuster. $14.95.) The journalist who
wrote ''The Italians'' offers a fluent account of the Common Market countries.
''Very often, it is like being at dinner with a fascinating and knowledgeable
causeur.''

FATAL VISION.  By Joe McGinnis. (Putnam. $17.95) A compelling account of one of
the most celebrated criminal cases of recent years, the story of Dr. Jeffrey
MacDonald, the Green Beret who was convicted of murdering his pregnant wife and
two small daughters in their Fort Bragg, N.C., home in 1970.

FIASCO.  By Jack Anderson with James Boyd. (Times Books. $17.50.) A ''polished,
convincing and subtle'' account of the origins of the oil crisis of the 1970's.
It lays the blame not on the oil companies but on President Nixon and former
Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, who the authors argue simply overlooked many
opportunities to head off the huge price increases imposed by oil producing
nations.

HARD CHOICES. Four Critical Years in America's Foreign Policy.  By Cyrus Vance.
(Simon & Schuster. $19.95.) The Secretary of State during most of the Carter
Administration describes the events of those years in a book that reflects his
''quiet, clinical diplomacy.''

''HOW CAN YOU DEFEND THOSE PEOPLE?'' The Making of a Criminal Lawyer.  By James
S. Kunen. (Random House. $15.95.) Personal recollections of two and a half years
as a staff attorney in the District of Columbia Public Defender Service by the
author of ''The Strawberry Statement.'' The book includes discussions of legal
and personal ethics and the American way of justice.

IN THE LAND OF ISRAEL.  By Amos Oz. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $12.95.) A
''stunning'' book of reporting by an Israeli novelist ''who portrays his country
through conversations'' with people holding an enormous range of political,
religious and personal beliefs.

INEVITABLE REVOLUTIONS. The United States in Central America.  By Walter
LaFeber. (Norton. $18.95.) The Cornell University historian ''argues that United
States policy has again and again blocked normal social change and undermined
progressive reformers in Central America,'' making revolutionary violence the
only path of change in the region.

THE JAPANESE MIND. The Goliath Explained.  By Robert C. Christopher.
(Linden/Simon & Schuster. $16.95.) ''A guided tour of Japanese life and culture
. . . all done in a lively journalistic style.''

THE NEXT AMERICAN FRONTIER.  By Robert B. Reich. (Times Books. $16.50.) In this
''first-rate'' diagnosis of corporate malaise, the author shows how American
managers ''have strayed from the attitudes needed to compete successfully in
world markets'' and issues a vigorous call for ''a new managerial ethic.''

NUCLEAR WAR, NUCLEAR PEACE.  By Leon Wieseltier. (Holt, Reinhart & Winston.
$7.95.) ''With elegant clarity, Mr. Wieseltier re-presents the case for nuclear
deterrence and argues against both unilateral disarmament and trying to win a
nuclear war.''

THE OIL FOLLIES OF 1970- 1980. How the Petroleum Industry Stole the Show (and
Much More Besides).  By Robert Sherrill. (Anchor/Doubleday. $19.95.) A
prodigiously researched history of the worldwide oil industry that places the
blame for the great increase in prices directly and entirely on the big oil
companies.

THE POLITICS AT GOD'S FUNERAL. The Spiritual Crisis of Western Civilization.  By
Michael Harrington. (Holt, Rinehart & Winston. $16.95.) The prominent American
Socialist argues that the Judeo-Christian tradition no longer guides the social
order and calls for ''a united front of believers and atheists in search of a
common transcendental'' leading to the construction of ''democratic socialism.''


POWER AND PRINCIPLE. Memoirs of the National Security Advisor, 1977-1981.  By
Zbigniew Brzezinski. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $22.50.) An account of foreign
policy formulation in the Carter Administration that is ''fascinating as an
insight into how a crucial part of government works, intimidating as a
reflection of what it takes to go forth in bureaucratic wars and appealing in
its candor.''

RECOGNIZING ISLAM. Religion and Society in the Modern Arab World.  By Michael
Gilsenan. (Pantheon. Cloth, $16.50. Paper, $7.95.) A historian and
anthropologist ''acts as a guide through a labyrinth of Islamic communities,''
showing ''how the mass of ordinary people have sought to reformulate Islam in
response to the disruption of their societies by Western penetration.''

THE RISE OF THE COMPUTER STATE.  By David Burnham. (Random House. $17.95.) ''Mr.
Burnham skillfully penetrates the Dungeons and Dragons-like maze of credit,
insurance and personnel practices, intelligence operations, market research and
political polling.''

RUSSIA. Broken Idols, Solemn Dreams.  By David K. Shipler. (Times Books.
$17.95.) The New York Times correspondent in Moscow from 1975 to 1979 has
recorded ''the state of mind of the people'' of the Soviet Union. Praised for
his ''sensitive and compassionate eye,'' Mr. Shipler raises questions about the
future of a nation that has suffered a widespread loss of faith and hope in
official ideology.

SALVADOR.  By Joan Didion. (Simon & Schuster. Cloth, $12.95. Paper, $5.95.)
Impressions of El Salvador by the novelist and journalist. ''She argues that the
United States has been persuaded to accept and act on political perceptions that
would never pass muster at home.''

THE TARNISHED DOOR. The New Immigrants and the Transformation of America.  By
John Crewdson. (Times Books. $17.95.) A study of illegal immigration based on
reporting that won a Pulitzer Prize in 1981, when Mr. Crewdson was on the staff
of The New York Times. ''As a survey of the facts . . . it is indispensable.
Concerning the issues behind the facts it is bold and thoughtful.''

THINKING ABOUT THE NEXT WAR.  By Thomas Powers. (Knopf. $10.95.) A ''very
personal, honest and engaging'' essay on nuclear war drawn from the author's
monthly columns in Commonweal.

THE THREAT. Inside the Soviet Military Machine.  By Andrew Cockburn. (Random
House. $16.95.) ''A journalist specializing in military affairs adds greatly to
public understanding of Soviet strength by going beyond mere numerical
evaluation to the human factors behind the numbers.'' He concludes ''that the
Soviet armed forces are far less of a menace than usually pictured.''

THE TROUBLED CRUSADE. American Education, 1945-1980.  By Diane Ravitch. (Basic
Books. $19.95.) A narrative history of 35 years in education and its politics
that not only tells us about the rise and fall of public education but finds it
''resilient and capable of change for better of for worse.''

U/S. A Statistical Portrait of the American People.  Edited by Andrew Hacker
with Lorrie Millman. (Viking. $25.) A witty and clearly written report based on
the Statistical Abstract of the United States and, in turn, the 1980 census. It
''focuses on statistics that either tell us something about American society or
have some interest as highbrow gossip.''

U.S.S.R. IN CRISIS. The Failure of an Economic System.  By Marshall I. Goldman.
(Norton. $15.) Mr. Goldman's ''thesis is that the Soviet Union's economic system
has failed, its economic performance is deteriorating and radical changes are
needed to turn the situation around but that the Soviet leadership is paralyzed
by fear that even minor changes could be politically destabilizing.''

VARNISHED BRASS. The Decade After Serpico.  By Barbara Gelb. (Putnam. $16.95.)
''A rare look at the secretive upper echelons'' of the New York City Police
Department in the years when it developed from ''one of the most corrupt and
brutal'' into ''one of the cleanest and most judicious'' in the nation. The book
is based on several years of reporting, during which the author had access to
the internal operations of the department.



Essays & Criticism

ALL AMERICAN MUSIC. Composition in the Late Twentieth Century.  By John
Rockwell. (Knopf. $15.95.) A ''spirited defense of contemporary composition,
celebrating its many conceptual and technical innovations,'' by a music critic
of The New York Times.

ART & ARDOR.  By Cynthia Ozick. (Knopf. $16.95.) Essays, ''by turns quarrelsome,
quirky, unfair, funny and brilliant,'' by the novelist and critic in her roles
as ''a rabbi, a feminist and a disciple of Henry James.''

ART, MIND, AND BRAIN. A Cognitive Approach to Creativity.  By Howard Gardner.
(Basic Books. $20.) Essays by the cognitive psychologist, paying special
attention to Project Zero, the Harvard University study of creativity in
children.

A DICTIONARY OF MARXIST THOUGHT.  Edited by Tom Bottomore, with Laurence Harris,
V. G. Kiernan and Ralph Miliband. (Harvard. $27.50.) A useful guide to the main
issues and personalities in the fragmented intellectual and political community
of Marxists, not disfigured by dogmatism, sectarianism or factionalism.

ETHNIC DILEMMAS 1964- 1982.  By Nathan Glazer. (Harvard. $20.) Essays written
through 18 years by the Harvard sociologist in defense of ''pluralistic
integration, a kind of limited Americanization with the Government upholding a
common political culture and a universalist law but not directly challenging
ethnic loyalties.''

FREUD AND MAN'S SOUL.  By Bruno Bettelheim. (Knopf. $11.95.) The 80-year-old
Vienna- born analyst muses on English translations of Freud's work and condemns
the editors of the ''Standard Edition'' for losing the humanity of Freud's
vision.

LITERARY THEORY. An Introduction.  By Terry Eagleton. (Minnesota. Cloth, $29.50.
Paper, $9.95.) ''This concise and lucid volume offers a satisfying survey of all
the major theories, from structuralism in the 1960's to deconstruction today,
that have made academic criticism both intriguing and off-putting to the
outsider.''

THE MODERN POETIC SEQUENCE. The Genius of Modern Poetry.  By M. L. Rosenthal and
Sally M. Gall. (Oxford. ($29.95.) A critical study of 19th- and 20th-century
poetic sequences, ''a guided tour of a literary period or phenomenon that might
overwhelm us by its copiousness and variety were it not for the guide's
competence, enthusiasm and readiness to generalize and evaluate.''

THE ODES OF JOHN KEATS.  By Helen Vendler. (Harvard. $18.50.) A critical study
''in movingly accurate prose'' of Keats's six famous odes that treats them ''as
interrelated in the manner of books within a canon and so extends greatly the
possibilities of speculative interpretation'' and ''finds in them a complex
process of development.''

OUTRAGEOUS ACTS AND EVERYDAY REBELLIONS.  By Gloria Steinem. (Holt, Rinehart &
Winston. $14.95.) In a collection of her occasional writings, Miss Steinem's
''views . . . are characterized by engaging qualities of unpretentious clarity
and forceful expression.''

PRESENT HISTORY.  By Theodore Draper. (Random House. $19.95.) A stimulating
collection of political essays about ''subjects of the greatest urgency and
controversy,'' including nuclear arms, Vietnam and the Western alliance.

REFLECTIONS OF A NEOCONSERVATIVE. Looking Back, Looking Ahead.  By Irving
Kristol. (Basic Books. $19.95.) Wide-ranging collection of essays from the 70's
and 80's by a leading neoconservative thinker who ''seems to believe that
mankind, while far from perfectible, is capable of slow but indefinite
improvement.''

SPHERES OF JUSTICE. A Defense of Pluralism and Equality.  By Michael Walzer.
(Basic. $19.95.) An ''imaginative'' way to think about the conflict between
liberty and equality in a democratic society from a noted political philosopher.


A STROLL WITH WILLIAM JAMES.  By Jacques Barzun. (Harper & Row. $19.95.) The
historian conducts a kind of meditative dialogue between himself and the great
psychological investigator he has studied for nearly half a century.

TWENTIETH-CENTURY FRENCH LITERATURE.  By Germaine Bree. Translated by Louise
Guiney. (Chicago. $25.) A ''nimble, if promiscuous, study of literary history''
that is ''written with dash and intelligence.''

THE WITNESS OF POETRY.  By Czeslaw Milosz. (Harvard. $8.95.) These lectures,
given at Harvard by the 1980 Nobel laureate in poetry, draw on ''the terrible
experiences of Polish poets in our time'' and deplore ''everything that is
trivial and trivializing in contemporary poetry.''

WRITERS IN RUSSIA.  By Max Hayward. Edited and introduced by Patricia Blake.
(Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $22.95.) First collection of critical and historical
essays by the late master translator. ''All the essays display an impressive
command of Russian intellectual history and Soviet politics, and a mastery of
the subtleties and symbolism of what Hayward called the 'breathtakingly
resourceful' Russian language.''


Fiction

ABOUT MY TABLE & OTHER STORIES.  By Nicholas Delbanco. (Morrow. $11.95.) A
collection of nine stories, all about successful professional men in New
England, each ''evaluating his life and the limitations set on it by
mortality.''

AFRICAN FOLKTALES. Traditional Stories of the Black World.  Selected and Retold
By Roger D. Abrahams. (Pantheon. Cloth, $21.95. Paper, $10.95.) A collection
culled from ''the oral traditions of varied tribal families throughout the
sub-Sahara'' that is ''earthy and comedic'' and ''covers a wide spectrum'' of
themes.

AN AMATEUR'S GUIDE TO THE NIGHT.  By Mary Robison. (Knopf. $11.95.) A collection
of 13 ''sparse'' stories by a ''free- lance pathologist who takes her little
emotional biopsies in clean slices wherever she finds symptoms of unease.''

ANCIENT EVENINGS.  By Norman Mailer. (Little, Brown. $19.95.) A long,
extravagant novel about gods and mortals, feasting, war, sex and daily life in
early Egypt.

ANGELS.  By Denis Johnson. (Knopf. $12.95.) A ''dazzling and savage'' first
novel about a young woman who falls in with a bad luck family and things go from
wrong to worse.

ARARAT.  By D. M. Thomas (Viking. $13.50.) The narrator, a contemporary Russian
poet named Rozanov, improvises stories about characters who improvise stories.
The author of ''The White Hotel'' here displays an ''astonishing virtuosity in
poetry, prose and translating.''

ARCADIO.  By William Goyen. (Clarkson N. Potter. $12.95) The last novel by the
distinguished Texas writer is the work of a ''master fabulist,'' a visionary
tale full of sympathy for ''the lost, the displaced, the crazy,'' narrated by a
half-Mexican, half Texan, half-man, half-woman.

AUGUST.  By Judith Rossner. (Houghton Mifflin. $15.95.) A teen-age girl and a
middle-aged psychoanalyst ''make permanent marks on each other's lives'' during
five years of analysis.

THE BIRTH OF THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF ANTARCTICA.  By John Calvin Batchelor.
(Dial/Doubleday. $16.95.) An ambitious, futuristic novel narrated by a Swedish-
American adventurer named Grim Fiddle, whose ''fantastic voyages'' encompass
many contemporary moral and spiritual questions.

BLUEBEARD. A Tale.  By Max Frisch. Translated by Geoffrey Skelton. (Helen and
Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $10.95.) Made up largely of remembered
excerpts from the transcript of a fictional murder trial, this short tale by the
Swiss novelist and playwright explores the nature of ''truth'' and ''guilt'' as
reflected in the life of a Zurich physician accused of murdering his former
wife.

BLUE PASTORAL.  By Gilbert Sorrentino. (North Point.  $18.) ''The satire is
Swiftian, and sometimes it almost goes out of control'' as the heroes of this
''lavishly inventive'' novel drag their pushcart across America looking for the
''Perfect Musical Phrase.''

CAL.  By Bernard Mac Laverty. (Braziller. $12.95.) The author, born in Belfast,
focuses on an Ulster County teen-ager's attempt to avoid the political problems
of modern-day Northern Ireland in his second novel, ''a tiny marvel of technical
perfection'' that ''opens into a world larger than itself.''

THE CANNIBAL GALAXY.  By Cynthia Ozick. (Knopf. $11.95.) In her second novel,
the critic and short story writer chronicles the spiritual trials of Joseph
Brill, a survivor of Nazi- dominated France and the headmaster of a primary
school in the Midwest.

THE COLLECTED STORIES OF SEAN O'FAOLAIN.  (Atlantic/Little, Brown. $29.95.)
Stories in a range of voices about Ireland that represent ''choice work of more
than 50 years in (the writer's) favorite genre.''

THE DEATH OF CHE GUEVARA.  By Jay Cantor. (Knopf. $17.95.) A large, ambitious
first novel about the Argentine-born revolutionary that mixes fantasy and fact
and treats its subject ''not as a hero or a curiosity or a demon but as a
historical riddle.''

THE DESERT ROSE.  By Larry McMurtry. (Simon & Schuster. $14.95.) An appealing
novel, both comic and touching, about Harmony, at 39 the most beautiful showgirl
in Las Vegas for nearly 20 years, and soon to be displaced by her own daughter.

DOCUMENTS RELATING TO THE SENTIMENTAL AGENTS IN THE VOLYEN EMPIRE. Canopus in
Argos: Archives.  By Doris Lessing. (Knopf. $12.95.) The fifth volume in the
author's series of visionary novels about life in a distant galaxy is ''a dark
satire, a dissection of the political illusions of our own terrestrial 20th
century - and a parable about how language is debased when used as an instrument
of empire.''

THE END OF THE WORLD NEWS.  By Anthony Burgess. (McGraw-Hill. $15.95.) A novel
composed of a fictional life of Freud, a musical about Trotsky in New York in
1917 and a science-fiction tale of a planet that will crash into the earth
around the year 2000.

THE EYE OF THE HERON.  By Ursula K. Le Guin. (Harper & Row. $11.95.) The
conflict between two groups of space colonists - pacifists and bullies - is the
focus of this tale by a writer who ''as a novelist of ideas has no peer in
science fiction.''

FAMOUS ALL OVER TOWN.  By Danny Santiago. (Simon & Schuster. $14.95.) This first
novel, which chronicles the 15th year in the life of a street-wise Chicano youth
in Los Angeles, is a ''minor classic.''

THE FEUD.  By Thomas Berger. (Seymour Lawrence/Delacorte. $13.95.) Mr. Berger's
12th novel, a ''comic masterpiece'' set in two neighboring Southern towns in the
1930's, is ''a gigantic sprawl of disasters'' triggered by small events.

FLIGHTS.  By Jim Shepard (Knopf. $12.95.) A ''very good'' first novel about
growing up that is ''shaped by'' the pressures 13-year-old Biddy Siebert feels
exerted on him by his peers and his family.

FOOLS OF FORTUNE.  By William Trevor. (Viking. $13.95.) A short, complex novel
about several generations of a wealthy Anglo-Irish family and its political
involvements from 1915 to the present.

HEARTBURN.  By Nora Ephron. (Knopf. $11.95.) In a story that ''bristles
ferociously with wit,'' the author describes the breakup of a marriage between a
Washington newspaper columnist and a food writer.

HIS MASTER'S VOICE.  By Stanislaw Lem. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich. $12.95.) A highly intellectual science-fiction story about an
elaborate Pentagon project to comprehend an interstellar ''letter'' that reaches
the earth as a pulsating neutrino ray.

HOLY PICTURES.  By Clare Boylan. (Summit. $13.95.) A fine first novel set in
Ireland in the 1920's about two girls who ''move into the real world, the adult
world, sure and unafraid.''

JOURNEY TO THE WEST.  Translated and edited by Anthony C. Yu. (Chicago. Four
volumes. Cloth, $35 each. The first two volumes in paper, $8.95 and $12.95.) The
complete text of the 16th-century Chinese classic known until now to English-
speaking readers under the title ''Monkey.''

LIGHT.  By Eva Figes. (Pantheon. $10.95.) The author of ''Waking'' returns with
a ''prose poem . . . in this fastidiously wrought narrative of a day in the life
of Claude Monet in the summer of 1900.''

THE LITTLE DRUMMER GIRL.  By John le Carre. (Knopf. $15.95.) A very ''mature,
inventive and powerful'' novel about Palestinian terrorists, Israeli
antiterrorists and an English actress with divided loyalties.

THE LONDON EMBASSY.  By Paul Theroux. (Houghton Mifflin. $13.95.) In these 18
stories about American diplomats in England, Paul Theroux rings some new and
entertaining changes on old Jamesian themes.

MAGNETIC FIELD(S).  By Ron Lowensohn. (Knopf. $12.95.) This very intelligent
first novel by the author of several collections of poetry is a ''humanely
imagined and mathematically constructed'' exploration of the human tendency to
project ''our secret desires and primal fears into others.''

MARBOT. A Biography.  By Wolfgang Hildesheimer. Translated by Patricia Crampton.
(Braziller. $16.50.) A ''marvelous hoax,'' a biography of the made-up Sir Andrew
Marbot (1801-1830), an English art connoisseur, critic and man of letters.

MEDITATIONS IN GREEN.  By Stephen Wright. (Scribners. $14.95.) A ''brilliant,
scarifying first novel'' in which a heroin addict's experiences in Vietnam and
later in New York City are described in alternate chapters.

MODERN BAPTISTS.  By James Wilcox. (Dial/Doubleday. $14.95.) A first novel by a
writer of ''real comic genius'' about ''a 41-year-old bachelor with a paunch and
a bald spot and a clip-on tie'' who ''dreams of finding a wife with class.''

MOON DELUXE.  By Frederick Barthelme. (Simon & Schuster. $15.95.) In this
collection of stories about ''the malaise of the unattached middle-class male,''
the author displays an exacting sense of dialogue and intimate knowledge of
contemporary life among singles.

MORE COLLECTED STORIES.  By V. S. Pritchett. (Random House. $17.95.) The
masterful English writer offers more tales that are ''comic in design, moral in
vision . . . grounded in and preoccupied with the individual life.''

MY NAME IS SAROYAN.  By William Saroyan. Edited by James H. Tashjian. (Coward-
McCann. $22.50.) A collection of 106 stories, plays, poems and essays Saroyan
wrote in his early years, most of them never before in book form.

MYSTERIES OF MOTION.  By Hortense Calisher. (Doubleday. $17.95.) A ''massive,
densely plotted novel of the not- very-distant future'' in a space shuttle that
is ''primarily a meditation upon the nature of heroism and self-sacrifice in
service to an ideal.''

THE NATURAL MAN.  By Ed McClanahan. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $11.50.) A
''superbly written'' first novel about the coming of age of a 15-year-old youth
in northern Kentucky.

1934.  By Alberto Moravia. Translated by William Weaver. (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux. $14.50.) The 75-year-old Italian novelist focuses on despair in this
brooding novel about the contemplation of suicide in Fascist Italy.

ON THE BLACK HILL.  By Bruce Chatwin. (Viking. $14.75.) Mr. Chatwin's first
novel about inseparable twin brothers who spend the 80 years of their lives on a
Welsh farm reflects ''an enraptured attention'' to rural, homely things ''that
cause them to glow with an almost visionary light.''

A PEOPLE BETRAYED. November 1918: A German Revolution.  By Alfred D"oblin.
(Fromm. Cloth, $19.95. Paper, $10.95.) The first and second volumes of the
German novelist's trilogy ''November 1918'' provide ''one of the most graphic
accounts ever written of what led from Weimar to Auschwitz.''

THE PHILOSOPHER'S PUPIL.  By Iris Murdoch. (Viking. $17.95.) A famous
philosopher arrives unexpectedly in the fictitious town of Ennistone and sets
off ''an uncommon degree of 'battiness' '' among the inhabitants in this novel
of ideas

PILGERMANN.  By Russell Hoban. (Summit. $14.95.) The author of ''Riddley
Walker'' turns from ''imagined future to historical past, but the harrowing
vision remains essentially unchanged'' in this novel set in the 11th century
during the First Crusade.

RATES OF EXCHANGE.  By Malcolm Bradbury. (Knopf. $13.95.) A droll comedy in
which a British professor of linguistics visits the imaginary Eastern European
country of Slaka as it nears revolution.

THE SAMURAI.  By Shusaku Endo. Translated by Van C. Gessel. (Harper & Row.
$12.95.) A Spanish Franciscan missionary, with his samurai companion, sets out
on a diplomatic mission intended to facilitate Christian conversion in 17th-
century Japan and becomes involved in the conflict between the Pope and a
regional shogun in a story by Japan's ''most distinguished Roman Catholic
novelist.''

SCENES FROM THE LIFE OF A FAUN.  By Arno Schmidt. Translated by John E. Wood.
(Marion Boyars. $13.95.) This ''stunning'' 30-year-old novel by the late German
author reveals a pattern of ''doom, disaster and redemption'' in the life of a
county clerk in Nazi Germany during World War II.

SENT FOR YOU YESTERDAY.  By John Edgar Wideman. (Bard/Avon. Paper, $3.50.)
Homewood, the Pittsburgh ghetto in which Mr. Wideman was raised, is transformed
''into a magical location infused with poetry and pathos'' in this fourth novel
by a writer ''with whom any reader who admires ambitious fiction must sooner or
later reckon.''

SHAME.  By Salman Rushdie. (Knopf. $13.95.) A ''lively, amusing and
exasperating'' new novel by the author of ''Midnight's Children'' set in a
country that is ''not quite Pakistan'' and mixing myth, allegory and political
commentary.

THE STORIES OF BERNARD MALAMUD.  By Bernard Malamud. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux.
$17.95.) A collection of 25 stories published since 1950 that ''admirably
represents his special achievement,'' in tales that show ''spare, rigorous
etching of solitary figures caught in the stress of adversity.''

THE STORIES OF BREECE D'J PANCAKE. (Atlantic/ Little, Brown. $13.95.) These 12
tense, elegiac stories set in and about the coal mining and farming area of West
Virginia make up the entire canon of a ''uniquely gifted young writer'' who
committed suicide in 1979.

THE STORIES OF WILLIAM TREVOR.  By William Trevor. (Penguin. Paper, $8.95.) A
collection of five previously published volumes of stories from the noted
British writer that indicates a subtle change in the last decade as the ''harsh
comedy - the gleeful misanthropy - is less in evidence.'' The newer stories,
mostly about marriages, ''will remind some readers of . . . John Updike.''

THE SUMMONING.  By Robert Towers. (Harper & Row. $15.95.) The author sets his
new novel in the deep South of 1974, ''when even Faulkner country has acquired
its share of Holiday Inns and massage parlors.'' The hero, in delayed pursuit of
his best friend's murderer, becomes a born again Christian.

TEMPLE.  By Robert Greenfield. (Summit. $15.95.) The hero of Mr. Greenfield's
second novel, an alienated Harvard Graduate School dropout, returns to Brooklyn
to resolve his ambivalence about his Jewish heritage.

THINGS TO COME AND GO.  By Bette Howland. (Knopf. $11.95.) Three long stories
''by a writer of unusual talent, power and intelligence'' about people living
''in the lonely, anarchic terrain of run-down urban neighborhods.''

THE TIMES ARE NEVER SO BAD. A Novella and Eight Short Stories.  By Andre Dubus.
(Godine. $13.95.) Although the characters in these stories are ''resolutely
ungiving and uncharming,'' the author's sympathy for them and his ''gift for
conveying, with a wonderful sense of clairvoyance, their interior voices,'' give
these tales a unique and compelling allure.

TURTLE BEACH.  By Blanche d'Alpuget. (Simon & Schuster. $14.95.) A fine
political novel from Australia about Vietnamese boat people landing in Malaysia
in 1979.

UNION STREET.  By Pat Barker. (Putnam. $13.95.) An impressive, if bleak, first
novel about working-class women in northeastern England.

WALTZ IN MARATHON.  By Charles Dickinson. (Knopf. $13.95.) A fine, improbable
first novel about a wealthy 62-year- old Michigan loan shark, his business, his
family and his romance with a white-haired 42- year-old lawyer.

WATCH TIME FLY.  By Laura Furman. ( Viking. $14.95.) A collection of skillful
short stories about the ''Vietnam-influenced generation of passively waiting
lost souls, young women and men more concerned with relationships than with
careers.''

WINTER MUSIC.  By Karen Rile. (Little, Brown. $15.95.) ''A generous novel'' with
''good old- fashioned conflict'' that deals with the lives of various artists in
''the small world of classical musicians in Philadelphia in the late 70's.''

A WINTER'S TALE.  By Mark Helprin. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $14.95.) An
''extraordinary'' novel, both futuristic and historical, about, among many other
things, the quest for a truly just city, set in New York City and environs and
upstate.

WE LOVE GLENDA SO MUCH.  By Julio Cortazar. (Knopf. $11.95.) An intriguing
collection of stories about ''ominous characters'' who ''exist below the
threshold of the social no man's land that is, only incidentally, Paris, Buenos
Aires or some anonymous bit of countryside.''

THE ZOLTA CONFIGURATION.  By David Quammen. (Doubleday. $14.95.) A political
thriller in which a medical student and former Green Beret stumbles onto a
document containing the plans for the hydrogen bomb. The author is so soundly
informed on the subject and ''so adept in his presentation that the narrative
never loses a beat.''


History

THE AMERICAN STYLE OF FOREIGN POLICY. Cultural Politics and Foreign Affairs.  By
Robert Dallek. (Knopf. $16.95.) An analysis of key decisions in American foreign
policy in this century by a historian who argues that ''American perceptions and
actions had little to do with foreign reality and much to do with a felt need to
cure domestic disharmony.''

BASEBALL'S GREAT EXPERIMENT. Jackie Robinson and His Legacy.  By Jules Tygiel.
(Oxford. $16.95.) The story of the integration of major league baseball is told
in this ''briskly written and absorbing book.''

A BETTER WORLD. The Great Schism: Stalinism and the American Intellectuals.  By
William L. O'Neill. (Simon & Schuster. $17.95.) A neoconservative account of
''what happened to . . . (American) Communists and fellow travelers in the years
after World War II,'' which suggests that ''the left itself was in large part to
blame for its plight.''

A CONSPIRACY SO IMMENSE. The World of Joe McCarthy.  By David M. Oshinsky. (Free
Press. $19.95.) A well-researched and well-written account of the life of the
demagogic Senator that ''handles the drama of the era without getting preachy.''


CROSSROADS OF MODERN WARFARE.  By Drew Middleton. (Doubleday. $17.95.) The
military affairs correspondent of The New York Times offers an ''entertaining''
study of 16 battles fought in the 20th century.

THE DISCOVERERS.  By Daniel J. Boorstin. (Random House. $25.) Sweeping survey of
''how and what men have discovered about themselves through the centuries, and
about the earth they live on and the space that surrounds them.''

FREEDOM. A Documentary History of Emancipation 1861- 67. Selected from the
Holdings of the National Archives of the United States. Series II: The Black
Military Experience.  Edited by Ira Berlin. Joseph P. Reidy and Leslie S.
Rowland, associate editors. (Cambridge. $37.50.) An emotionally powerful
sampling, drawn from millions of documents, describing the black military
experience during the Civil War and the transition to freedom.

LANDSCAPE TURNED RED. The Battle of Antietam.  By Stephen W. Sears. (Ticknor &
Fields. $17.95.) ''Mr. Sears has . . . the novelist's eye for the illuminating
small event, for the fatal eccentricities of generals and politicians and for
all that was awesome and pitiable in that furious encounter'' near Sharpsburg,
Md., where in September 1862 ''the most ruinous slaughter in all American
history was consummated.''

LOW CITY, HIGH CITY.

Tokyo From Edo to the Earthquake.  By Edward Seidensticker. (Knopf. $20.) ''A
social, cultural and architectural history of Tokyo'' from 1867 to 1923 that is
an ''uncommonly perceptive'' analysis of the modernization of Japan.

NEGOTIATING FOR PEACE IN THE MIDDLE EAST.  By Ismail Fahmy. (Johns Hopkins.
$25.) The ''intensely personal'' memoirs of the Egyptian Foreign Minister
(1974-77) who ''resigned because he opposed President Anwar el-Sadat's trip to
Jerusalem.''

ONE DAY IN CHINA. May 21, 1936.  Translated, edited and introduced by Sherman
Cochran and Andrew C. K. Hsieh with Janis Cochran. (Yale. $19.95.) An
''engrossing'' collection of ''essays, diary entries, letters and other
memorabilia'' that together re-create one day of life in China at ''an uncertain
moment in the course of the longest and greatest social upheaval of our
century.''

RED AND HOT. The Fate of Jazz in the Soviet Union 1917- 1980.  By S. Frederick
Starr. (Oxford. $16.95.) A ''fine history'' that ''chronicles the fate of an
American style of music in the new Bolshevik state and so sheds light on Soviet
attitudes toward the West and toward art in general.''

REVOLUTION IN TIME. Clocks and the Making of the Modern World.  By David Landes.
(Harvard. $20.) ''Something like the complete history of the clock,'' from the
11th century to today which reveals a great deal about how human beings think
and work.

THE SHADOW WARRIORS. O.S.S. and the Origins of the C.I.A.  By Bradley F. Smith.
(Basic Books. $20.75.) The ''unexpected dividend'' of this history of the Office
of Strategic Services, which was ''created and directed'' by William J. ''Wild
Bill'' Donovan during World War II, ''is the pertinence of the story to current
foreign policy and intelligence issues.''

TWILIGHT OF THE COMINTERN, 1930-1935.  By E. H. Carr. (Pantheon. $22.50.) A
posthumous volume from the ''prolific, controversial British scholar'' that
deals with ''the Comintern and relations with individual Communist Parties
abroad''; ''an important corrective to the widespread stereotype of the total
subordination of all Communists to the Kremlin.''

VIETNAM. A History.  By Stanley Karnow. (Viking. $20.) A companion to Mr.
Karnow's lengthy public television series on Vietnam, this history covers both
French and American involvement in Vietnam and looks back over more than 1,000
years of that nation's history.

THE WARRIOR AND THE PRIEST. Woodrow Wilson and Theodore Roosevelt.  By John
Milton Cooper Jr. (Harvard. $20.) ''A masterful portrait of two of our most
intriguing Presidents. . . . the subject is less these two personalities than
the political culture they reflected and shaped.''

THE WHEELS OF COMMERCE. Civilization and Capitalism. 15th-18th Century. Volume
Two.  By Fernand Braudel. Translated by Si,an Reynolds.(Harper & Row. $35.) In
''the second volume of his trilogy 'Civilization and Capitalism,' the noted
French historian . . . continues his examination of the background and nature of
capitalism in its early, largely preindustrial stages.''

WILD JUSTICE. The Evolution of Revenge.  By Susan Jacoby (Harper & Row. $17.95.)
A tantalizing book that ''raises important questions about the emotions that
fuel our passion for justice'' and examines the history of revenge and its
development into punitive law.

WITHOUT HONOR. Defeat in Vietnam and Cambodia.  By Arnold R. Isaacs. (Johns
Hopkins.  $19.95.) A deeply personal and troubled account of the fall of South
Vietnam and Cambodia in the 70's by a reporter for The Baltimore Sun who was
there to report on the action.


Poetry

THE ARGOT MERCHANT DISASTER. Poems New and Selected.  By George Starbuck.
(Atlantic/Little, Brown. $12.95.) ''A relatively late bloomer in full-scale
satire, Mr. Starbuck has been getting steadily better,'' and these poems roll
over many popular pretensions that are taken for wisdom.

THE COLLECTED POEMS, 1945-75.  By Robert Creeley. (California. $28.50.) ''The
elusive continuity of the limpid forward movement of the mind, like rippling
water reflecting, has been the lifelong fascination'' of Mr. Creeley, rather
than the individual poem. But ''the splendid poem (does) occur every now and
then'' and almost always his ordinary observations become ''mysteriously,
triumphantly, poetry.''

COUNTRY MUSIC. Selected Early Poems.  By Charles Wright. (Wesleyan. $15.) His
poetry is ''austere and somewhat difficult'', but ''its rhythms and images are
exquisite and fully reward the reader's effort. Charles Wright is among a
handful of contemporary poets carrying the art to its outermost limits.''

EROSION.  By Jorie Graham. (Princeton. $12.50.) This volume of poems ''brings
the presence of poetry into the largest question of life, the relation of body
and spirit. . . . Miss Graham's subject is the depth to which the human gaze can
penetrate, the opening in reality into which the poet can enter.''

FROM THE FIRST NINE. Poems 1946-1976.  By James Merrill. (Atheneum. $20.) ''An
ample, mostly unrevised collection of 139 poems'' from Mr. Merrill's previous
books, this volume is ''an Olympic contender'' by a man ''who has long since
taken his place as one of the most accomplished satirists, wits and lyricists of
the age.''

GREAT TRANQUILLITY. Questions and Answers.  By Yehuda Amichai. Translated by
Glenda Abramson and Tudor Parfitt. (Harper & Row. $12.95.) ''These new poems by
the distinguished Israeli poet'' have a ''directness of approach linked with a
lively and mischievous imagination, and the power of memory balanced by a
trenchant sense of what is immediate.''

THE KINGFISHER.  By Amy Clampitt. (Knopf. $6.95.) ''It is hard to think of any
poet who has written as well about the natural world as Amy Clampitt does.'' But
hers is more than ''nature poetry.'' ''One is led to imagine the writings of an
expert naturalist with a poet's virtuoso command of vocabulary, gift for playing
the English language like a musical instrument and startling and delightful
ability to create metaphor.''

LETTERS FROM A FATHER AND OTHER POEMS.  By Mona Van Duyn. (Atheneum. $11.95.) A
series of deft, distanced and encompassing poems about the poet's parents grown
old and dying, and many others that are filled with joy and detached compassion.
''Her book holds a world of volatility in fine equilibrium.''

ON TOUR WITH RITA.  By Nicholas Christopher. (Knopf. $11.95.) ''An extraordinary
debut'' by a poet whose facility with words is rare. ''Few poets writing today
can dazzle verbally as this young poet can.''

THE RANDOM HOUSE BOOK OF TWENTIETH-CENTURY FRENCH POETRY.  Edited by Paul
Auster. (Random House. $25.) Poems by the leading French poets in this century,
with translations by dozens of major British and American poets. ''An
indispensable work, a book that everyone interested in modern poetry should have
close to hand.''

SELECTED & NEW POEMS. 1961-1981.  By Jim Harrison. (Delacorte/ Seymour Lawrence.
$14.95.) ''Mr. Harrison has few equals as a writer on outdoor life. . . . At his
best, he writes so winningly that one ignores the formlessness and is simply
content to be in the presence of a writer this vital, this large-spirited.''

TAR.  By C. K. Williams. (Random House. $10.) ''C. K. Williams appears to be
transforming the worlds of adolescence and early manhood'' in his poetry by
treating the ''I'' as a character so that ''life is given a more dramatic,
satisfying shape.'' ''You are conscious of the pace and sound of verse, though
the material is the kind you expect to find in a novel.''


Science & Social Science

ANGER. The Misunderstood Emotion.  By Carol Tavris. (Simon & Schuster. $14.95.)
A social psychologist's energetic analysis of the uses and abuses of anger.

ARISTOTLE TO ZOOS. A Philosophical Dictionary of Biology.  By P. B. Medawar and
J. S. Medawar. (Harvard. $18.50.) A ''delightfully eccentric'' dictionary with
''barely a shred of scientific objectivity in it,'' but from which one can learn
''a tremendous amount about modern biology.''

DICTIONARY OF AMERICAN NEGRO BIOGRAPHY.  Edited by Rayford W. Logan and Michael
R. Winston. (Norton. $50.) This massive volume ''is a model of balanced
judgment, sober assessment and scholarly codification.''

A FEELING FOR THE ORGANISM. The Life and Work of Barbara McClintock.  By Evelyn
Fox Keller. (W. H. Freeman. $14.95.) A biography of the pioneering geneticist
who discovered in her studies of corn that the DNA of a cell could rearrange
itself under certain conditions - a discovery for which she was given the Nobel
Prize in Medicine in 1983.

FOUNDATIONS OF SPACE- TIME THEORIES. Relativistic Physics and Philosophy of
Science.  By Michael Friedman. (Princeton. $35.) This book ''is the result of
the author's intellectual struggle to clarify the foundations of relativity
theory for himself, and it will deeply influence all future thinking about the
philosophy of space and time.''

GOD AND THE NEW PHYSICS.  By Paul Davies. (Simon & Schuster. $16.95.) ''One of
the most adept science writers on either side of the Atlantic'' explores the
impact of physics ''on what were formerly religious issues.''

GORILLAS IN THE MIST.  By Diane Fossey. (Houghton Mifflin. $19.95.)''Miss
Fossey's research is invaluable (the book will no doubt prove to be definitive
on gorilla behavior), her dedication unremitting, her subject matter of
unquestionable ecological importance.''

THE HEARTS OF MEN. American Dreams and the Flight From Commitment.  By Barbara
Ehrenreich. (Doubleday. $13.95.) A ''witty'' and ''provocative'' argument that
the past three decades have witnessed ''a 'male revolt' against maturity and
responsibiity in general and against women in particular.''

HEN'S TEETH AND HORSE'S TOES.  By Steven Jay Gould. (Norton. $15.50.) A new
collection of the Harvard paleontologist's columns from Natural History
magazine. No one since J. B. S. Haldane ''has written about biology with (such)
regularity, clarity and engagement.''

IN SUSPECT TERRAIN.  By John McPhee. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $12.95.) The New
Yorker writer and author of ''Basin and Range'' continues his attempt to suggest
''the general history of this continent by describing what geologists see
written in rocks.''

JACQUES LACAN. The Death of an Intellectual Hero.  By Stuart Schneiderman.
(Harvard. $14.95.) An American reports on his four years in analysis with the
celebrated French psychoanalyst and theoretician. The author ''does a remarkable
job placing Lacan's thought, if not exactly within the grasp of the
nonspecialist reader, at least within waving distance.''

THE LEFT HAND OF CREATION. The Origin and Evolution of the Expanding Universe.
By John D. Barrow and Joseph Silk. (Basic Books. $17.95.) The authors ''attempt
to summarize nearly everything important that the new physics has to say about
the creation and evolution of the universe, and to do so in simple, nontechnical
language.''

LOCAL KNOWLEDGE. Further Essays in Interpretive Anthropology.  By Clifford
Geertz. (Basic Books. $18.50.) Eight essays on cultural relativism by the
celebrated anthropologist who argues that there are enormous differences in
societies but some universal observations about mankind can be drawn from close
observation of particular groups.

THE MANAGED HEART. Commercialization of Human Feeling.  By Arlie Russell
Hochschild. (California. $20.) Perceptive study of ''emotional labor'' - jobs,
like those of airline stewardesses, in which workers are trained to use emotion
the way actors do, but who, according to this thoughtful sociologist, often end
up unsure of what they really feel.

THE MOMENT OF CREATION. Big Bang Physics From Before the First Millisecond to
the Present Universe.  By James S. Trefil (Scribners. $15.95.) ''The first
comprehensive and readable account for the layman'' of the ''new cosmology''
that carries scientists back to the very first moments of time.

THE NATURAL HISTORY OF ALCOHOLISM.  By George E. Vaillant. (Harvard. $25.) The
results of ''a 40-year study of about 600 men from two research populations - an
upper middle class college group and an inner city group'' and of treatment over
eight years of 100 men and women at a Cambridge, Mass., clinic.''

100 BILLION SUNS. The Birth, Life, and Death of the Stars.  By Rudolf
Kippenhahn. Translated by Jean Steinberg. (Basic Books. $25.) In this
''thoroughly delightful and informative book,'' the author ''describes the
processes of nuclear burning, the crucial role of the total mass for a star's
future evolution, the interrelationship between temperature and luminosity and
the development of older stars into red giants, white dwarfs and pulsars.''

WOMEN IN SCIENCE. Portraits From a World in Transition.  By Vivian Gornick.
(Simon & Schuster. $15.95.) Journalistic account drawn from studies of 100 women
scientists that raises fascinating questions not only about the role of women in
science and their future, but also about the nature and conduct of scientific
research itself.

The following list covers books by New York Times staff members that consist
principally of material previously printed in The Times.

COOKING WITH CRAIG CLAIBORNE AND PIERRE FRANEY.  By Craig Claiborne and Pierre
Franey. (Times Books. $17.95.) More than 600 recipes, previously uncollected in
book form.

ON THE RISE: Architecture and Design in a Postmodern Age.  By Paul Goldberger.
(Times Books. $19.95.) A selection of essays from a decade of reportage and
criticism by The Times's architecture critic.

THE RESCUE OF MISS YASKELL: And Other Pipe Dreams.  By Russell Baker. (Congdon &
Weed. $14.95) A collection of more than 100 of the Observer humor columns
written over the past three years.

ROLLING BREAKS. And Other Movie Business.  By Aljean Harmetz. (Knopf. $13.95.) A
collection of 20 inside-the- movie-business articles.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 4, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SANE HEAD TO BE HONORED

BYLINE: By RAY WARNER

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 23, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 934 words


MONTCLAIR IN HER sophomore year at

Mount Holyoke College, Dorothy Eldridge recalls, she decided to be a physician
because: ''It was the most useful way to relieve pain and suffering in the
world. There was so much of it, and I wanted to make myself as useful as
possible to the human species.''

Mrs. Eldridge never entered medical school, she said, ''because when I went for
an interview and they found out how little money I had, they persuaded me not
to.''

She has no regrets, however, since ''all the other things, like people being
sick, can be taken care of after we prevent a nuclear war.''

And much of Mrs. Eldridge's life has been spent trying to prevent such a war.

On Wednesday, Mrs. Eldridge, the director of New Jersey SANE, will be honored at
Caldwell College on two occasions - her 80th birthday and her 25 years as a
leader of SANE, the peace organization alternatively known as A Citizens'
Organization for a Sane World.

In a prepared statement anticipating the Caldwell celebration, Representative
Peter W. Rodino Jr., Democrat of Newark, said that Mrs. Eldridge truly deserved
to be called ''New Jersey's First Lady for Peace.''

State Senator Carmen A. Orechio, Democrat of Nutley and president of the upper
house, has hailed her ''outstanding accomplishments in seeking world peace.''
Anne Martindell, a New Jersey resident and former Ambassador to New Zealand and
Western Samoa, said she had ''kept the issue of nuclear warfare alive when most
people were not taking it seriously.''

And Peter Shapiro, the Essex County Executive, said:

''Dorothy Eldridge has a rare sensitivity that speaks personally and very
effectively to all people.''

Mrs. Eldridge, who became a microbiologist instead of a physician, and then a
volunteer full-time peace advocate instead of a microbiologist, says of these
changes:

''It seems to me more important as an individual that I work for the prevention
of nuclear war; my personal accomplishment is greater this way than the other
way.''

As Mrs. Eldridge views it, SANE is at its peak, and in describing that peak she
discussed another one, in which there were also some valleys.

During the Vietnam war, SANE organized and coordinated the activities of 30
peace centers, many just storefront quarters, throughout the state. However,
most did not use the name SANE because, Mrs. Eldridge recalled, SANE ''appeared
to be very radical because of opposition to atom- bomb testing and because we
were talking so early about ending the war.''

''So we went away from SANE to make ourselves respectable,'' she said. ''If we
were the Smithville Peace Center and we had a storefront, we were respectable.''

Now, she said, ''national SANE has taken on a new life and is organizing across
the country like it never did before.''

New Jersey SANE, working within the New Jersey Campaign for a Nuclear Weapons
Freeze, with Mrs. Eldridge as state coordinator, ''is part of the biggest
movement the country has ever had,'' she said, adding:

''We are now part of a national group that has a majority on its side, with
recent national polls showing that 80 percent of the people support the freeze.

''The whole situation is very different. Neither SANE nor the freeze is
considered radical. There's greater acceptance of us now; for one thing, the
great majority came around to our view on the Vietnam war. People said we had
been right all along.''

''Even Congress has come to recognize us as a force for peace and, I think, for
justice. We are now highly respected and listened to in Congress, and right now
there are 12 New Jersey Congressmen for the freeze and only two opposed.''

The freeze campaign, Mrs. Eldridge said, calls for ''a mutually verifiable
freeze of all nuclear weapons and their delivery systems,'' which she sees as a
first step.

''Following that,'' she said, ''is an arms reduction. First you freeze and then
you start getting rid of them.''

The freeze campaign in New Jersey is operated out of New Jersey SANE's
storefront headquarters on Bloomfield Avenue, the main street in Montclair. It
is there that Mrs. Eldridge works full time - without pay - as the head of an
organization that has two full-time paid staff members.

She was, she recalled, the first paid staff member for a New Jersey SANE
organization - the Essex County chapter - in 1958, but she gave her small salary
back because ''although I didn't have a lot of money, I had more than the
organization.''

Later, Essex County SANE became New Jersey SANE, and Mrs. Eldridge said that she
''accepted $1 a year because people don't take you seriously if you're not
paid.''

Mrs. Eldridge's husband, Bob, a retired chemist, is a strong supporter of her
efforts and is always present at SANE affairs. They have three children, all
volunteers in the peace movement in other areas. The Eldridges live in Nutley.

Recently, Mrs. Eldridge's activities have been limited. She underwent an
operation on Aug. 31 to replace her left hip, a result of arthritis, and she
returned to work part time just two weeks ago.

Confident of public and Congressional support, she is optimistic about the
freeze but pessimistic about the Reagan Administration and a foreign policy that
she says ''consists of anti- Communism in a military way.''

''We've got to persuade the Administration to seek an agreement with the Soviet
Union,'' Mrs. Eldridge said. ''It's not impossible.

''A small example is the recent signing by Reagan of a bill for a Martin Luther
King holiday. He very much didn't want to sign that, but he did. It's a small
example of what pressure can do.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Dorothy Eldridge

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 5, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. BOMBERS HIT LEBANON, SYRIANS DOWN 2; REAGAN ISSUES WARNING; ;
8 MARINES KILLED

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1797 words

DATELINE: BEIRUT, Lebanon, Dec. 4


Fighting in Lebanon increased sharply today, beginning with an early morning
American air strike on Syrian targets east of here in which two United States
carrier jets were shot down.

Later in the day, eight marines were reported killed and two wounded during an
intense artillery attack by Syrian-backed militiamen. Sixth Fleet warships then
opened fire on the militia positions.

In Washington, President Reagan said the American attack was in response to
Syrian antiaircraft attacks on unarmed reconnaissance aircraft on Saturday and
warned that he was determined to defend American forces in Lebanon.

The air raid, which followed an Israeli aerial strike in the same area 24 hours
earlier, was directed against Syrian antiaircraft batteries and involved 28
American fighter-bombers.

In Damascus, Syria, Foreign Minister Abdel Halim Khaddam called for
international and Arab action against what he called America's aggressive policy
in Lebanon and the Middle East. (Page A12.)



2 Syrians Reported Killed

Syria reported that one American airman had been captured after his plane fell
in Syrian-held territory, and there was an unconfirmed report that a second
airman in the same plane had been killed. The pilot of the other downed plane
parachuted to safety and was picked up in the Mediterranean.

A Syrian military communique said two Syrian soldiers were killed and 10 wounded
by the American bombing. The Syrians said one of their ammunition dumps and one
vehicle were hit.

Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel called the Reagan Administration's
decision to bomb the Syrian antiaircraft positions understandable and
reasonable. (Page A11.)

A Marine spokesman, Maj. Dennis Brooks, said the marines were under continuous
shelling for four hours beginning around 7 P.M. (noon New York time). At first
the marines returned the fire with their own machine guns and M-60 tanks, but
later, as the shelling instensified, they called in support from American
warships offshore. A United States ship blasted away at the sources of fire
beginning at 10:55 P.M. and the loud booms from the naval guns could be heard
all across the Lebanese capital.



Strikes Called Retaliatory

This morning's American air strike marked the first time American warplanes have
been involved in bombing raids inside Lebanon since the marines arrived here in
August 1982. It was also the first time American jet aircraft have been lost in
combat since the Vietnam War.

The American bombers, which were launched from the aircraft carriers
Independence and John F. Kennedy, hit a cluster of Syrian bunkers around the
mountain village of Hammana, between 9 and 18 miles east of Beirut, according to
Lebanese security sources.

The downed American aircraft were a single-seat A-7E Corsair and a two- seat
A-6E Intruder. The A-7E fell in flames into the coastal village of Junieh,
injuring at least eight people, setting two brick houses and at least seven cars
on fire, and scattering pieces of the aircraft all over the neighborhood. The
pilot parachuted safely from his plane and floated down into the Mediterranean,
where he was rescued by the Lebanese Army.  (The Pentagon identified the rescued
pilot as Comdr.  Edward T. Andrews, 41 years old, of Virginia Beach, Va.)

The stricken A-6E Intruder crashed into a small wooded area in the middle of a
group of camouflaged Syrian gun batteries near Kfar Salwan, 15 miles east of
Beirut. Reporters who went to the scene found Syrian soldiers cavorting on the
wings of the wrecked aircraft, firing their guns in celebration and flashing the
V-for-victory sign.

Syrian soldiers and witnesses on the scene said the two pilots of the A-6E
parachuted from their jet as it fell to the ground trailing smoke from its tail.
A Syrian military spokesman confirmed that one pilot was captured alive, after
having apparently been wounded in the leg. Witnesses told reporters that the
second pilot was killed from unknown causes as he floated down to earth and hit
the ground. There was no independent confirmation of the pilot's death.

(The two pilots of the A-6E were identified by the Pentagon as Lieut. Mark A.
Lange, 26, of Fraser, Mich., and Lieut. Robert O. Goodman, 27, of Virginia
Beach, Va.)

The two American fighter jets were relatively slow-flying aircraft designed to
carry heavy bomb loads and to engage in close support of ground troops. In both
cases, witnesses said they saw the planes hit by what appeared to be Soviet-made
surface-to-air missiles, most likely portable SA-7's that are standard issue
among Syrian troops in Lebanon.

'Heavy Antiaircraft Fire'

A Pentagon spokesman, Comdr. Fred Leeder, said the American air attacks were in
retaliation for the ''heavy volume of antiaircraft fire and at least 10
surface-to-air missiles'' thrown up by Syrian batteries against two American
F-14 Tomcats on a reconnaissance mission over Lebanon Saturday.

''The Syrian authorities clearly knew they were firing on U.S. reconnaissance
aircraft, and the volume of fire makes it clear that it was not locally directed
or random,'' he added. ''This attack on U.S. reconnaissance aircraft represents
a serious and deliberate threat to the multinational peacekeeping mission.
Today's defensive strikes are clearly within the stated rules of engagement for
our multinational force contingent.''

The 1,500-man American Marine contingent based at Beirut International Airport
went on its highest state of alert immediately after the morning air strikes,
bracing itself for the reprisals, which came later in the day.

Late tonight - roughly 11 hours after after the 8:00 A.M. American air raids -
the Marine compound at Beirut International Airport came under heavy fire. The
state-run Beirut radio said the firing came from areas controlled by
Syrian-backed Druse militias in the hills to the east and south of the capital
and was directed against both the marines and nearby Lebanese Army positions.

Warships Return the Fire

The shelling by the warships was the first by American naval vessels since Sept.
23. After the American ships fired their guns for several minutes, the shelling
on the marines subsided.  The American planes could be heard roaring back and
forth over Beirut shortly before 8:00 A.M. According to witnesses in Zouk
Mikhael, the planes flew in pairs coming from the sea, over their targets in the
mountains east of Beirut and then back out to sea - spewing heat ballons in
their wake to confuse the heat-seeking surface-to-air missiles.

According to both Syrian statements and the state-run Beirut radio, the American
planes hit Syrian positions in Kfar Salwan, Falougha, Hammana, Dahr el-Baidar,
Jabal Knayset and Sofar, all of which are in the central Lebanese mountains
between 9 and 18 miles east of Beirut.

''The sky was full of smoke from the heat balloons and antiaircraft fire,'' said
Joe Cherabie, who watched the air strikes from his mountain home in Bikfaya, 15
miles east of Beirut. ''I could hear the bombs hitting in the distance. They
made at least two passes over the targets behind the mountains. As the planes
were flying back out to sea, one was hit by a missile, started smoking and
headed down into Beirut.''

Suffered a Few Bruises

The pilot of the single-seat A-7E Corsair ejected from his plane only a few
thousand feet off the ground, witnesses said. Lebanese military sources said the
American airman suffered a few bruises and a hand wound, which was apparently
related to his midair ejection. After being picked up from the sea by the
Lebanese Army, he was quickly transferred by American helicopters to a Sixth
Fleet carrier.

The A-7E Corsair was believed to have been hit by a SA-7 missile fired from
around the Syrian-controlled villages of Arbaniyeh and Ain Soha, 7 miles
northeast of Beirut. The villages are in the natural flight path of planes
striking the mountaintop villages and flying back out to sea, and the Syrians
are believed to have packed the area with ZSU-23 antiaircraft guns and SA- 7's.
An Israeli Kfir was downed by a SA-7 fired from the same area during an air raid
on Nov. 20.

The Lebanese civilians who gathered around the crash site just north of Beirut
appeared to be stunned at the idea of the Syrians having shot down American
planes. Since the Israeli invasion began on June 6, 1982, the Israelis have
flown hundreds of sorties over Syrian and Palestinian positions in Lebanon and
lost only three aircraft. The eight- plane Lebanese Air Force lost only one
antiquated Hawker-Hunter during last September's mountain war against
Syrian-backed anti-Government militiamen equipped with Soviet-made antiaircraft
guns and missiles.

The two-seat A-6E may have been hit by rockets fired from the same general area,
although it fell in the Syrian-controlled mountains overlooking Beirut. A Syrian
military spokesman said a third American jet was shot down during the air raid,
but there was no proof of this claim.

No Syrian Demands

There was no immediate indication of what demands, if any, the Syrians would
make for the release of the captured American pilot.

Western diplomats and Arab analysts argued that today's American air strikes
against the Syrians would have serious political implications for Lebanon and
the Middle East at this time.

To begin with, the air raids came only two hours after President Amin Gemayel of
Lebanon had taken off from Washington after his meetings with President Reagan,
and it will be very difficult for him to dispell the impression among the
Syrians and Lebanese opposition groups that he was given advance warning that
the attacks would take place and did nothing to prevent them.

This comes at a time when relations between President Gemayel and President
Hafez al-Assad of Syria were improving and hopes were rising that the Syrians
might use their good offices with the Lebanese opposition groups to convene
another round of Geneva reconciliation talks.

''Let's just say this air raid does not bode extraordinarily well for Lebanese
national reconciliation,'' said one senior Western diplomat. ''I don't see how
we get from here to national reconciliation and a withdrawal of all foreign
forces. I think it will have the opposite effect.''

Could Spur Arab Support

Second, the American attack on the Syrians is expected to improve both the
domestic and Arab standing of President Assad, just as the British and French
attacks on President Gamel Abdel Nasser of Egypt did in the Suez crisis of 1956.
It will also put America's Arab allies in an awkward position.

''Everyone may hate the Syrians,'' remarked the Western envoy, ''but when
American planes bomb them, you can bet the Arabs are going to side with them.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Syrian soldiers (page A10); photo of captured American flier;
map of Lebanon

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 5, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam Said to Prepare For Drive in Cambodia

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 125 words

DATELINE: ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand, Dec. 4


Thai military intelligence officials said today that Vietnamese troops armed
with Soviet weapons were massing in western Cambodia for an attack against
Cambodian guerrilla units.

Thai authorities have begun moving some of the more than 200,000 Cambodian
refugees from the border area to safer places in preparation for the expected
offensive.

Recent fighting between the guerrillas and the Vietnamese has been limited to
skirmishes because the ground is still swampy from the just-ended rainy season.

Thailand's national security chief, Prasong Soonsiri, said at least two
shiploads of Soviet tanks, trucks, weapons and supplies had recently arrived at
the southern Cambodian port of Kampong Som and had been turned over to
Vietnamese forces.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 5, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FOES OF NUCLEAR ARMS RACE ORGANIZE FOR '84 CAMPAIGN

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1054 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Dec. 4


Several major groups opposing the nuclear arms race are forming new lobbying or
political action committees through which they will seek to play an influential
role in the 1984 elections.

Leaders of the antinuclear movement, who have previously concentrated on
educating the public about the dangers of nuclear war, say the switch to more
direct political action represents an important step in their development.

''It's a big step beyond just collecting signatures on petitions,'' said Randall
Forsberg, who originated the idea of a nuclear arms freeze. ''It will be the
first significant involvement of the peace movement in electoral politics since
the Vietnam War.''

The nuclear freeze proposal passed the House last spring but was defeated by the
Republican-controlled Senate in October after the downing of the Korean Air
Lines jetliner and extensive pressure by the White House. The antinuclear
movement was also dealt a setback when the House voted last month to finance the
MX missile, a sign that many Congressmen accept President Reagan's policy that
it is necessary to build up American nuclear forces before negotiating with
Moscow.

One Million Are Sought Miss Forsberg will be president of the largest new group,
Freeze Voter '84, that is to be the political arm of the freeze campaign. Its
formation was publicly announced Friday at a national meeting of the freeze
campaign in St. Louis.

Unlike regular political action committees, which give money to friendly
candidates, Freeze Voter '84 will try to recruit one million volunteers to help
win votes for Congressmen who support the freeze concept. This ''freeze force,''
as Miss Forsberg terms it, will also try to register voters for the Presidential
election and endorse a Presidential candidate.

At the same time, three other antinuclear groups with headquarters in Boston are
forming a lobbying group, the Professionals Coalition for Nuclear Arms Control,
that will also work to influence the 1984 elections. The three are the
Physicians for Social Responsbility, the Union of Concerned Scientists and the
Lawyers Alliance for Nuclear Arms Control.

Groups Foresee Wide Backing

The three groups decided to form the lobby because their tax-exempt status as
educational organizations prevents them from direct political action.

The creation of the groups is predicated on their leaders' conviction that
despite the recent unfavorable votes in Washington, a large majority of
Americans want to end or slow the arms race. Their suggestions include a freeze
on the development, production and deployment of nuclear weapons, the
renunciation of any first use of such weapons and a greater effort placed on
reaching some agreements on the use of nuclear weapons with the Soviet Union.

William E. Curry Jr., the executive director of Freeze Voter '84, said, ''The
institutional leadership of the country, the Congress, the political parties and
the media, have all totally missed what public sentiment is.''

As an indication of public feeling, he pointed to a series of public opinion
polls that he said showed that about 75 percent of the American people support a
mutual and verifiable nuclear freeze. Many public opinion experts believe,
however, that the polls reflect a general public fear of the nuclear arms race
more than they do any endorsement of specific proposals to end it.

National Canvassing Effort

Freeze Voter '84 is to begin its activities officially on Saturday with groups
of 100 volunteers canvassing in 10 cities, according to Mr. Curry. They will ask
people to sign pledge cards to vote in November for candidates who back the
freeze. They will also solicit funds and ask people to contribute time to join
the freeze force, Mr. Curry said.

He said he expected to have similar groups of at least 100 volunteers in 30
cities by January and in all major metropolitan areas by next spring.

The organization has targeted 10 seats in the Senate and 30 in the House where
it believes it may have a substantial impact.

Eric Van Loon, executive director of the Union of Concerned Scientists, said he
believed the Professionals Coalition would be a particularly effective lobby
because it would enable prominent local doctors and lawyers to join with
scientists in putting pressure on their Congressmen. Mr. Van Loon said the
coalition had targeted about 50 Congressmen who hold key assignments on
committees like Armed Services or Appropriations.

Groups Are Growing Fast

Although the antinuclear movement suffered reversals in Congress in the fall,
virtually all the peace groups report continuous rapid expansion in their
membership.

The Physicians for Social Responsibility has grown to 30,000 members in 150
chapters, a 50 percent increase over 1982. It has 18 more chapters in formation
and now includes five percent of all American doctors, according to Jane Wales,
its director.

The Lawyers Alliance, which was only created last year, has grown to 5,500
members in 45 chapters, including six former presidents of the American Bar
Association.

The movie ''The Day After'' on ABC television last month has further spurred
public interest in the arms control issue, said Tina Krasover, founder of the
Nurses Alliance for Nuclear Arms Control.

''It's going to be the B.C. and A.D. of the movement,'' she said. ''People no
longer have excuses for ignorance.''

Long-Range View Taken

Mr. Van Loon admits disappointment at some of the recent Congressional votes.
But he believes it is wrong to judge the movement on a few votes or a few
months' time frame.

''This is more akin to other great movements like the civil rights movement and
the anti-Vietnam War movement,'' he said. It took them years to gain momentum
and Congressional acceptance, he said.

Others take an even longer view. Dr. James Muller, the secretary of the
International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War, compares it to the
abolition of slavery.

''This is more than just the freeze, it is a movement against the whole idea of
nuclear weapons for national defense,'' said Dr. Muller, a cardiologist at the
Harvard Medical School. ''People said you couldn't abolish slavery, but they did
after the abolitionist movement made people change their attitudes.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 5, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FOR VICTIMS OF AIDS, SUPPORT IN A LONELY SIEGE

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2996 words


Cold in a warm hospital room, Stephen Lamb pulled his yellow blanket tighter
around his emaciated body.

''My friends have abandoned me,'' Mr. Lamb said, his voice a tired whisper.
''They're afraid of AIDS. But instead of just saying that, they would promise
and promise to come and see me and then not show up. That really hurt.''

Fighting a triple assault of cryptococcal meningitis, tuberculosis of the bone
marrow and an intestinal infection, Mr. Lamb withered from 180 pounds to under
100. One of his few visitors at the New York University Medical Center was
William Carroll, a man he barely knew.

Mr. Carroll is a volunteer with the Gay Men's Health Crisis, a nonprofit New
York group that is currently helping 250 people with AIDS, acquired immune
deficiency syndrome.

The story of the organization reflects the dramatic changes that have recast
life in the city's homosexual community in the two years since AIDS emerged as a
mysterious and frightening national epidemic. Fighting a siege of death and
prejudice, the community that was once characterized by a carefree and
freewheeling spirit has evolved into a more mature and politically savvy
population.

Mr. Carroll, who works in a law library, joined the Gay Men's Health Crisis
after seeing its newspaper advertisement soliciting ''buddies'' for debilitated
AIDS victims.

''I felt compassion for these guys' loneliness and despair,'' he said. ''I heard
that they had been neglected by their family and friends, even other gays, and
that they had been treated badly by some hospital personnel.''

He overrode the objections of his own friends and family, who worried that he
might be exposing himself to the disease, which sabotages the body's immune
system.

''I deeply identified with these men,'' he said. ''I wanted to offer the support
I hope that I would get if I were to come down with it. There is a sense of
taking care of one's own.''

He was assigned to Mr. Lamb in early September. The two men were both 40 years
old, and shared a love of literature.

While Mr. Lamb was still in his East Side apartment, Mr. Carroll shopped for his
groceries and ran other errands. Two months ago, Mr. Lamb entered the hospital,
so weak that the smallest movement required intense effort.

Mr. Carroll continued to visit three times a week. He cut his charge's food,
fixed him snacks of corn flakes and sherbet, and read him poetry by John Keats
and Andrew Marvell. Mostly, though, he listened as Mr. Lamb reminisced about his
job as a travel consultant and his personal life. ''Stephen regarded his
previous life in the fast lane as sort of a waste,'' Mr. Carroll said.

One recent night, as rain pelted the windows of his hospital room, Mr. Lamb
talked about how much having a ''buddy'' had meant. ''It's been tremendous,'' he
said, reaching out a skeletal hand to clasp one of Mr. Carroll's. ''Bill and I
have grown to like each other. I just needed some companionship.''

Four days later, on Nov. 14, Mr. Lamb died, one of 514 AIDS fatalities in the
city since the epidemic began. ''I tried not to become emotionally involved,''
said Mr. Carroll, shaken after hearing the news. ''But you necessarily become
involved with something like this.''

Different Life Style, Different Expectations

Housed in a ramshackle Chelsea brownstone, the Gay Men's Health Crisis is a
clutter of people, desks, file cabinets, ringing telephones and an always-busy
computer.

The group was started two years ago by six men who had lost friends to the
disease and who were worried about the lack of services for AIDS victims. It has
become a sophisticated social-service organization with growing political power,
12 paid staff members, an 8-member board of directors, 500 male and female
volunteers, and a 1984 budget of $900,000.

''AIDS pointed up the inequitable status of gays,'' said Rodger McFarlane, the
group's 28-year-old director. ''We were forced to take care of ourselves because
we learned that if you have certain diseases, certain life styles, you can't
expect the same services as other parts of society.''

Members of the organization represent a broad spectrum, from judges and bankers
and playwrights to students and carpenters and bartenders. Most have never been
active in volunteer work before. They are drawn by a matter of life and death.

''It's ugly work,'' Mr. McFarlane said. ''When persons with AIDS come to us,
their lives are shattered and their heads are twisted. They've just been given
the devastating news that they have a disease that's probably fatal with a
stigma the size of Manhattan attached to it.''

''They've usually been fired from their jobs and kicked out of their
apartments,'' he added. ''Often, their lovers have abandoned them. They feel
like lepers. They don't know the ropes through the traditional social- service
agencies and they're much too sick to pursue that route anyway. They're just a
mess.''

''We're there primarily to hand- hold and troubleshoot,'' Mr. McFarlane said,
''and help these people get some control over their lives.''

According to the latest statistics released by the Centers for Disease Control
in Atlanta, the AIDS crisis continues at a steady rate. Nationwide, about eight
people a day are diagnosed as having AIDS. A total of 2,803 cases have been
reported, and of those, 1,146, or 41 percent, have died. The death rate is close
to 100 percent for those who have the disease two years or more.

Of the sufferers, 71.5 percent are homosexual or bisexual; 17.3 percent use
drugs intravenously; 4.6 percent are Haitians; sixth-tenths of 1 percent are
hemophiliacs, and 6 percent appear to fit into none of these high-risk
categories. Most victims are men.

New York City has been hardest hit, with 1,261 cases, 38 percent of the
country's total. Of those, 41 percent have died.

Although there are no census or other official accounts, conservative estimates
based on the work of Alfred C. Kinsey put New York's homosexual population at
350,000. City officials say they believe the number is much higher, and
homosexual leaders put the figure between 1 million and 1.5 million.



A Crushing Caseload

Dr. Rand Stoneburner, an epidemiologist with the city's AIDS program, said that,
although the rate of increase has slowed somewhat since last year, the number of
AIDS cases rose 48 percent in the first six months of 1983 compared with the
same time period last year.

At the Gay Men's Health Crisis, the caseload has spiraled at a crushing pace.
There are ordinarily about 50 new cases every month. But in the last two weeks
alone there have been 45 new admissions.

The organization helps all AIDS patients. Thirty-five percent of its caseload is
made up of people who take drugs intravenously, most of them heterosexual, and
three are Haitian. Out of a total of 420 patients the group has helped, 63 have
died.

The organization runs 20 therapy groups for AIDS patients and their partners and
families. To try to correct misconceptions about the disease and about
homosexuals, the group sends experts to speak to hospital employees, church
groups and schools.

While some homosexual activists have criticized the organization's tactic of
focusing all homosexual issues around AIDS, the group has become an effective
lobby for winning financing. With benefits and parties in homosexual bars, the
Gay Men's Health Crisis has raised more than $600,000 in contributions.

It has also received a $200,000 grant from New York State and $24,500 from the
city, and the Board of Estimate recently approved a $1.2 million contract with
the American Red Cross to recruit and train home attendants for about 200 AIDS
victims. Thanks in part to Health Crisis lobbying, Federal funds for AIDS
research have jumped from $22 million to $40 million.

'City Has Done Little'

But officials of the group have been strongly critical of what they consider
inadequate support from Mayor Koch and the city. ''Considering the fact that
G.M.H.C. has given $16 million worth of volunteer services this year,'' Mr.
McFarlane said, ''the city has done very little.''

The speed with which the group has grown is reflected in its offices at 318 West
22d Street, between Eighth and Ninth Avenues.

One day not long ago, a man walked in, identified himself as a psychic from
Madrid and announced he had learned the cure for AIDS in a dream: shrimp and
bananas. ''Everybody's got an idea,'' Mr. McFarlane said. ''Everything from
zither playing to Kundalini yoga to Jesuit priests.''

In a ground-floor office, Barry Davidson was manning the 24-hour hot line, which
receives about 1,200 calls a week. ''The lesions are the size of a dime, raised
or flat, red or purple,'' he explained to a woman who had called the number,
807-6655. ''They will show up on different parts of the body and spread. There
will be noticeable loss of weight in a short time and a hacking cough.''

Fear of Contagion

Another caller wanted to know about contagion. ''It's not spread by casual
contact,'' Mr. Davidson said. ''You can't get it by walking down the street or
being in the same room or touching someone who has it. It seems that there has
to be intimate contact with bodily fluids or shared needles.''

In an upstairs office, Chuck Jones, an intake officer, pored over paper work. On
a bulletin board next to him was a cartoon of a middle-aged woman airing her
views on AIDS: ''Good Christian people have nothing to fear as long as we stay a
million miles away from the slimy creatures who may have it.''

''A lot of people feel that gays have gotten what they deserve,'' said Mr.
Jones, who is 28. ''There's a lot of hostility.''

Mr. Jones assesses the needs of new cases to see what sort of services he can
offer - money to help pay the rent; a buddy to shop for food; a counselor to
help them fill out forms to get welfare, Medicaid or Social Security disability
funds; a lawyer to help them make a will, transfer an insurance policy to a
lover or fight an eviction notice.

''My gut turns over when I talk to somebody on the phone and they die before I
can even send a counselor over there,'' Mr. Jones said. ''One week I had three
people die within 10 days. I was just sitting in the chair kind of vibrating. I
used to cry. Now there are no more tears.''

Doing Errands While Preparing for Worst

The buddies and crisis counselors, most of them young professionals, are, as one
put it, the ''Mother Theresas of the organization.'' When they sign on, they are
told not to expect a Junior League sort of volunteerism.

''It's a heavy trip to stand there and watch a 30-year-old person waste away
over a period of a few months,'' Mr. McFarlane said. ''I've seen some of these
guys age 10 years, all of their illusions about good intentions destroyed.''

The volunteers do whatever is necessary, from taking orange juice in the morning
to serving as intermediaries with the city's social-service agencies. They clean
apartments, do laundry, make dinner, pick up prescriptions, mail rent checks,
walk dogs, take their patients to doctor's appointments and simply keep them
company.

''You come to a total stranger and suddenly announce, '' 'I'm yours,' '' said
David Richardson, a magazine news editor. ''My client watches Spanish TV. I
don't speak Spanish, but if he wants to watch Spanish TV, that's what we do.''

Victims Ask, 'Why Me?'

Sometimes, there are suicides. Always, the work is emotionally exhausting.
''Your client may be hostile,'' said Joanne Tamm, 33, a psychiatric nurse at
Cabrini Hospital who works for the group in her spare time. ''They want to know,
'Why me?' If someone says thank you, you're lucky. And, after all your work,
they may die.''

Miss Tamm is one of the 50 or so volunteers who are heterosexual. ''I'm not gay
but I have good friends who are gay men,'' she said. ''These people are sick and
dying. You have to be concerned.''

The volunteers have a litany of horror stories about the treatment of AIDS
sufferers. They tell of government clerks who neglect AIDS cases because they
are afraid to be in the same room to fill out forms. They tell of nurses and
orderlies in hospitals who are so loath to enter the rooms of AIDS patients that
they let the food trays pile up outside the door, leave trash baskets
overflowing, or neglect patients lying in their own urine or excrement.

Diego Lopez, 35, a soft-spoken admissions counselor at Hunter College who trains
Gay Men's Health Crisis volunteers, recalled that he went to visit a dying
patient in the hospital and discovered him with blood seeping from his nose and
mouth. He quickly found a doctor and asked her to look at the patient.



Feelings of Vulnerability

''She gave me the gauze and told me to clean it up,'' Mr. Lopez said. ''I was
shocked but I did it. Afterward, I looked at my hands and there was blood all
over them. I realized I had to start being more careful. But when you see a
person dying, you don't think about finding some gloves to wear.''

Like other volunteers, Mr. Lopez said he signed on because he knew people who
had died and because the work helps him cope with his own feelings of
vulnerability.

''I'm a gay man and, all around me, gay men are dying,'' he said. ''I never
expected to be dealing with questions of mortality with my people my own age and
younger. I was a marine in Vietnam and I dealt with fear. But then we were
fighting a known enemy. With AIDS, it's so out of control. Just by the nature of
my sexuality I'm at risk.''

Volunteers said it is especially difficult because their patients are specters
of their own worst fears. ''It's strange to think that at any minute we could
become one of them,'' Mr. Richardson said. ''There's a creeping feeling of
fatality. There's something out there. I may get it or I may not. Every morning
when I shave I check to see if my lymph nodes are swollen.''

''You eat, drink, sleep and breathe AIDS,'' he continued. ''Once in a while I go
to the opera or the movies just so that I don't think about it for a couple of
hours.''

'No Success Stories'

Allan Kendric, 46, a landscape architect from Queens, used to worry that he had
little to say to his patient, a 30-year-old horticulturist from Brooklyn. ''My
life is so full,'' Mr. Kendric said. ''His whole experience is sitting in his
bed in his lonely hospital room.''

On one recent visit, as the two sat silently, the young man asked Mr. Kendric
softly: ''Can you hold me for a minute? Nobody ever holds me anymore.''

''That just made me cry,'' Mr. Kendric recalled, his voice breaking. ''This
person has the same needs you and I do. It was so pathetic.''

On Nov. 10, the young man died.

''There are no success stories,'' said Mitchell Cutler, 32, a dealer in rare
books who runs the buddy program. ''Sometimes I think if I hear about one more
sick person I'll go crazy.''

A New Maturity Among Homosexuals

Paved with AIDS fatalities, the fast lane became unfashionable for a time. There
was a trend toward conservatism in the city's once-libertarian homosexual
community.

But with the crisis going into its third year and no cure in sight, homosexual
leaders have detected a backlash of apathy. ''The numbers of people going to gay
bars and baths is increasing again and that's depressing,'' Mr. Lopez said.
''Those guys are insane. How many more people will get sick before there are not
enough of us to help them? How many more will have to die before they stop
functioning with their libido and start functioning with their intellect?''

Mr. Lopez and many others, however, have remained conservative and have
developed more serious relationships.

''I'm not as active anymore out of a sense of self-preservation,'' Mr.
Richardson said. ''But it took AIDS to make some of us realize, the health issue
apart, that that life style was pretty empty anyway.''

Professionals Drawn Out

Kenny Weinberg, a 33-year-old sportswear merchandiser, agreed. ''Gay men in New
York have realized there's more than superficial sex, Bloomingdale's and upward
mobility.''

Homosexual leaders talked of another positive result of the crisis. They said it
has drawn many young professionals out of the closet. One such case is Dr. Ken
Wein, 34, a psychologist who works as the clinical director of the Gay Men's
Health Crisis.

''I wouldn't have put myself on the line before,'' Dr. Wein said. ''AIDS finally
strenghtened my will to confront my boss, who was biased against gays, and quit
a job at a hospital where I worked. You get enraged at the feeling that the
world thinks you're disposable because you're gay.''

On the whole, homosexual leaders agreed, the community has developed a new
maturity in coping with the AIDS crisis. ''We're more responsible,'' said Larry
Kramer, a writer and one of the organization's founders. ''Everyone realizes now
that homosexuality is defined by more than what you do sexually. Being gay is a
cultural tradition, a heritage to be proud of.''

A Litany of Death

On a sunny afternoon not long ago, Mr. Kramer sat in his spacious Fifth Avenue
apartment in Greenwich Village. The apartment was decorated with pictures of the
actress Glenda Jackson in ''Women in Love,'' a film Mr. Kramer produced and
wrote.

From his bookcase, he pulled a small green notebook in which he has logged 37
names of friends who have died. ''I heard about Vinny on Saturday,'' he said.
''Ron is a black actor I know. Paul, a pianist. Gayle went to Yale with me. Ron
Doud, the designer of Studio 54. Mark, I was involved with a long time ago.
Peter, an architect.''

Mr. Kramer stopped his litany, his hands clenched tightly around the notebook.

''Can't something be done?'' he asked. ''The rest of the city, my straight
friends, go on with life as usual and I'm in the middle of an epidemic.''

''We're dying,'' he said. ''Why is this happening? Is it because we loved each
other too much or not enough? I just don't know.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Jeanne Tramm (page B6); photo of Chuck Jones; photo of Kenny
Weinberg; photo of David Richardson

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 5, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

GRENADA AND LEBANON BRING A RUSH OF MEDALS

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 511 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 4


Since the Revolutionary War, American soldiers have been awarded military
decorations for gallantry in battle and participation in military campaigns.

Now, as a result of American military involvement in Lebanon and Grenada, the
various service branches have authorized the largest batch of medals and
campaign ribbons since the Vietnam War. Congress and the White House have had
their differences about the War Powers Act and the ultimate nature of the
operations in Grenada and Lebanon, but this has not deterred Defense Department
officials from moving to reward individual bravery and accomplishment and unit
efficiency. Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger has also authorized a $65-
a-month hostile-fire pay bonus.

Until now, only the Army has announced decorations for the Grenada campaign, but
the other services say they are considering the matter.

Infantryman's Badges

The Army has awarded the Combat Infantryman's Badge to members of the 82d
Airborne Division and the two 75th Ranger battalions that were involved in the
assault, and military review boards are now poring over field commanders'
recommendations for such individual awards as the Purple Heart and Bronze Star.
The infantryman's badge was initiated in World War II and is given only to
infantrymen who have come under hostile fire.

About 500 Rangers who parachuted into Grenada also qualified for the Arrowhead
Pin combat jump medal, including one trooper whose jump harness snarled and left
him dangling outside the plane until he could be hauled to safety. ''He
jumped,'' one Pentagon officer said. ''The rule states only that you have to
make a combat jump. It doesn't say anything about landing.''

Army units that fought in Grenada will soon add to their flags a four-foot
battle streamer bearing the name of the Caribbean island.

Only a few Army personnel have been involved in the Lebanon operation. They will
not receive any decorations, but they have been given bonus pay for being under
hostile fire.

Navy and Marine Corps

While the Navy and the Marine Corps have not yet decided which awards they will
hand out for the Grenada operation, the several thousand Marines and Navy
personnel who have served in the Beirut operation have been awarded the
Expeditionary Medal.

The Marine version is emblazoned in the scarlet and rust colors of the Corps. It
was first authorized in 1919 by Franklin D. Roosevelt, then the Secretary of the
Navy. The Navy medal is similar in shape, but carries that service's blue and
gold colors.

Marine and Navy review boards also are considering recommendations from unit
commanders for individual valor awards and Purple Hearts for Lebanon and
Grenada.

The three Marine amphibious units that have seen service in Beirut have received
a Naval Unit Commendation, and the 7,200 Marines in those units have earned a
Sea Service Deployment Ribbon for serving at least 90 continous days in a mobile
naval deployment force.

The Air Force currently has no plans to award any decorations for Grenada or
Lebanon.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of medals

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 5, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: 'CROSSFIRE,' ON VIETNAM WAR

BYLINE: By RICHARD F. SHEPARD

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 545 words


There is a taut thriller and a thoughtful study of doves and hawks in Vietnam in
the body of ''Crossfire,'' a new drama by Theodore Faro Gross being done by
Double Image Theater at the Intar on West 42d Street, but, like a sculpture, it
has yet to be hewn out of the script surrounding it.

Here is an engrossing story, an enigma, about a marine we never meet, Andy
Dundee, who has just died. In a hotel room, two Harvard alumni, she (Ann Lange)
a reporter for a Boston paper and he (Robertson Dean) a famous war photographer
and peacenik, are putting the final touches on a story about the heroic figure
who, as told to the young reporter, had become an antiwar activist. The editor
telephones that he wants confirmation but the photographer is her only source.

Enters a Marine colonel (Basil Wallace), who supplies a highly disturbed
character (Scott Renderer), a former buddy in battle of Dundee, who swears that
the hero was the toughest, cruelest, gook-hating soldier that ever was.


This is one play in which the plot actually thickens before the audience's eyes,
as the evidence mounts on each side, involving claims of espionage that led to
the death of American soldiers. Mr. Gross studies the value judgments of both
sides and quite sensitively and humanly comes down in the middle of this moral
quagmire: War is rotten, of course, but the people you are close to in it,
G.I.'s or Vietnamese, do make a difference in your outlook.

Under Max D. Mayer's direction, the action and the tension builds to the first
act curtain and is sustained in the first part of the longish second act by a
bravura performance by Mr. Renderer, the acme of menace, as he threatens the
reporter and lies in wait for the photographer. Leaping on a bed and rocking and
swaying with remarkably appropriate motions, he recalls a bloody incident in
Nam. It is a high point of the play, and shortly thereafter, the drama shifts
into slow verbose complexity, tortuously coursing through a maze of plot
switches that may lose the onlooker's comprehension altogether.

Miss Lange makes the part of the young and idealistic reporter ring true and she
deftly handles the many emotional ups and downs of the piece. Mr. Dean, as the
photographer, comes across as a very earnest and self-assured young man and is
very good at projecting the breakdown of his own certitude.

The very able cast, one suspects, tides ''Crossfire'' over its weakest moments.
It is a play that sustains, most of the way through, attention and interest, and
it would be nice to see it sculpted even further into a more perfect monument to
the confusion of those unhappy years.

The Cast

CROSSFIRE, by Theodore Faro Gross; directed by Max D. Mayer; settings by Loren
Sherman; costumes by Robert Wojewodski; lighting by John Tissot; production
stage manager, Neal Ann Stephens; sound by Paul Schierhorn; managing director,
Leslie Urdang; associate artistic director, Max D. Mayer; administrative
director, Grace Jones. Presented by Double Image Theater, Helen Waren Mayer,
executive/artistic director. At Intar Theater, 420 West 42d Street. Kim
MoriahAnn Lange Hugh Madison FlandersRobertson Dean Lieut. Col. Wade CooperBasil
Wallace Richie ScogginsScott Renderer Sun-LeeHaru Aki


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 6, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CRITICS IN CONGRESS DECLARE REAGAN IS HEADING FOR WAR

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 704 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 5


Critics of the Administration's Middle East policy in both parties expressed
fears today that President Reagan was leading the country into war. They renewed
calls for the removal of American troops from Lebanon.

Supporters of Mr. Reagan argued that retaliatory air strikes ordered against
Syrian positions over the weekend had been justified, to protect the Marine
contingent based at the Beirut airport. But even these supporters worried openly
that the intensifying battles in Lebanon could prove politically troublesome for
the President and his fellow Republicans.

''It makes us nervous,'' said a Republican campaign strategist on Capitol Hill.
''It's the uncontrollable nature of the situation. The word is risky. We don't
know how it's going to be perceived.''

One of the strongest reactions of the day came from Senator Barry Goldwater,
Republican of Arizona, who said in a statement, ''The latest loss of the lives
of U.S. servicemen is an outcome which was predictable, and the time to withdraw
our forces is now.''

Danger of 'Major War' Seen

Echoing the views of many lawmakers, Mr. Goldwater added, ''There is an
increasing danger of our involvement in a major war in that area of the world as
a result of our participation, as a superpower, in a peacekeeping effort.''

Senator Goldwater's statement, like many that were issued on Capitol Hill today,
repeated previously held views and broke little new ground. But there was a
clear increase in concern that President Reagan's policy was leading the country
on an uncertain and potentially dangerous course.

Sensing the Republicans' political vulnerability, most of the candidates for the
Democratic Presidential nomination attacked Mr. Reagan and his policies in
unusually harsh terms.

A typical comment came from Senator Ernest F. Hollings, Democrat of South
Carolina, who said: ''Mindless escalations like this will lead to a lot more
than the President is bargaining for. We have been down this road before in
Vietnam. You would have thought we would have learned.''

'Unanswered Questions'

''Where are we going?'' asked the Republican political strategist. ''How long
will we be there? These are all unanswered questions.''

Earlier this fall, Congress passed legislation that invoked the War Powers Act
in Lebanon and gave President Reagan authorization to keep the marines in Beirut
for an additional 18 months, a time period that will run out in March 1985.

During debate on the issue, many legislators said that while they feared for the
safety of the marines, they could see no way to remove them without setting off
a new round of civil strife in Lebanon. Today, supporters of the President's
policies repeated that argument and asserted that the attacks on the marines
made it even more difficult to bring them home.

''We're not going to be driven out through terrorism,'' declared Senator Charles
H. Percy, the Illinois Republican who heads the Foreign Relations Committee.

Retaliatory Strikes Defended

Mr. Percy said President Reagan was ''absolutely right'' in ordering retaliatory
strikes against Syrian targets after American reconnaisssance planes had been
fired upon. The Syrians, he said, ''have been on notice for months'' that such
attacks would bring retribution.

Senator Howard H. Baker Jr. of Tennessee, the majority leader in the upper
house, reiterated his feeling that the marines should not have been sent to
Lebanon in the first place. ''But while they're there,'' he told reporters,
''you can't have them as sitting ducks. We are not going to turn tail and run.''

Walter F. Mondale, a leading contender for the Democratic Presidential
nomination, said that if he were President he would present the Gemayal
Government with a timetable ''for Lebanese takeover of the primary
responsibility for the security of the Beirut airport and for the removal of
American ground forces from exposed positions.''

The former Vice President was more cautious in his response than some of his
rivals. He said the marines had to respond to ''unprovoked attacks,'' and he did
not call for their immediate withdrawal. Instead, he said they should not be
deployed in Beirut indefinitely.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 7, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AIR POWER IN LEBANON: LIMITS TO EFFECTIVENESS

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 719 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 6


Military operations and intelligence specialists in Washington and other NATO
capitals question whether bombing alone or in concert with naval gunfire will
halt shelling of the Marines in Beirut.  They also question whether such action
will stifle missile and artillery antiaircraft fire against American
reconnaissance planes.

Although air forces have demonstrated their punitive power around the world
since 1939, the orthodox military view is that only tanks and infantry can take,
occupy and hold disputed ground.

The attacks on Sunday by Navy bombers on a Syrian command and control center may
have eliminated that target for the time being, officials said in interviews
here today, but it can be rebuilt quickly and be operational again.

U.S. Faces a Choice

The losses on Sunday, 2 aircraft of 28 engaged, were just over 7 percent, which
is not prohibitive by the standards of World War II or the Vietnam War. But it
must be taken seriously in the planning of other, heavier air operations in a
nonwar situation.

Officials pointed out that such sweeps, air bombardment and naval gunfire are
unlikely to silence the guns and missiles that bombarded the Marine position on
Sunday, killing eight Americans. In that bombardment the Druse or Moslem
guerrillas apparently used Soviet-made 23-millimeter antiaircraft guns,
designated ZSU. These are mobile and easily hidden from reconnaissance aircraft.

Inevitably, the military sources said, the American high command must realize
that either operations must be confined to naval and air bombardment with the
marines as immobile targets for guerrilla shelling or tactics must be changed to
permit active infantry operation supported by Marine tanks against the guerrilla
positions in the hills around Beirut.

Ground operations would raise the military and political stakes. No serious
ground operations could proceed for long without encountering Syrian troops and
that, one NATO officer said, ''would mean a war with Syria, declared or
undeclared, and a calculated escalation of American intervention in Lebanon.''

Leaving the Job to Lebanon

An alternative canvassed by several American officers and diplomats was to avoid
ground operations until the Lebanese Army is trained and equipped to attack the
guerrilla strongholds in the mountains.

This suggestion inspired little confidence among allied officers, who said they
believed that the Lebanese Army, in its operations against the Druse and Moslem
irregulars, had failed to demonstrate great combat ability. In addition, the
Lebanese Army's command and control organization is viewed as weak. According to
these sources, the Lebanese Army will be doing well if it is able to hold
Beirut's inner suburbs against the guerrillas, who increasingly are armed and
advised by Syria.

This expansion of Syrian involvement in guerrilla operations worries American
officers and those directing the work of the British, French and Italian
contingents around Beirut. The general feeling is that the Syrians will press
their military surrogates to increased activity with the Marines as the main
target.

An Army Alternative

The events on Sunday raised another familiar question: Are the Marines the force
best suited either to their present passive role or to active operations against
the guerrillas.

For over a year influential senior officers in the Pentagon have held that the
Marines are unsuited to the mission of establishing an American presence in
Lebanon that would help stabilize the country and strengthen the position of
President Amin Gemayel.

The consensus is that the Marines, through no fault of their own, have not been
able to accomplish this mission. As one former senior officer put it: ''Lebanon
remains unstable and Gemayel's writ runs no further than Beirut's suburbs.''

In this situation some officers return to the familiar argument that Lebanon and
the United States would be better served if the Marines were replaced by an Army
mechanized infantry brigade.

Such a brigade, these officers reason, would be better equipped for passive
garrison duty or, if the decision was made, for operations against the
guerrillas because of its strength in heavy weapons - including 54 tanks
compared with the Marines' 6.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of nurse treating patient

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 8, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. SAID TO DRAW PLAN FOR SHIFTING MARINES IN BEIRUT

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1350 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 7


The Joint Chiefs of Staff have begun drafting plans to redeploy the American
Marine unit in Beirut away from the airport to safer ground in Lebanon or to
amphibious vessels offshore, Administration officials said today.

Officials said the plans had not yet reached the National Security Council,
where they would be discussed with President Reagan, but they said the idea
would be welcomed there. They cautioned, however, that no consideration was
being given at this time to withdrawing the marines.

The plans are being drafted in response to military, political and diplomatic
pressures, the officials said, among them these:


- Increasing uneasiness expressed by senior military officers over the
Administration's course in Lebanon. The officers fear development of a situation
like Vietnam in which political and military objectives would be vague, military
forces insufficient or under restraint and public support lacking.


- The rise of concern in Congress after the American bombing of Syrian positions
last Sunday, which raised the level of conflict in Lebanon.


- Evident anxiety among the allies that have provided troops for the
multinational force in Lebanon. France, Italy and Britain have contributed
contingents.



Troops' Safety a Key Concern Among the critical issues to be decided by the
National Security Council and the President, the officials said, would be how to
balance the display of a visible United States presence in Beirut with the
safety of the marines.

They suggested that those favoring a move would argue that the marines have
already lost some visibility because they do not patrol beyond the bounds of the
airport and have dug in there in an effort to protect themselves from deliberate
or accidental fire.

Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger was scheduled to return to Washington
tonight from a North Atlantic Treaty Organization meeting in Brussels after
having met with the French Defense Minister, Charles Hernu, in Paris and talked
with the British Defense Minister, Michael Heseltine.

The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. John W. Vessey Jr., was
scheduled to visit Rome after the meeting in Brussels to confer with Italian
military officials. He plans to return to Washington over the weekend.

The Administration officials said the initiative for moving the Marine
Amphibious Unit of 1,600 men came from the military services, with the
encouragement of the civilian leaders who reflected Mr. Weinberger's continuing
reluctance to have American forces tied down in Lebanon. Even though the plan
has not yet reached the White House, the officials said, soundings there showed
that it would be considered favorably.

The officials said one plan was to move the marines south of the Beirut airport
somewhere along the road to Tyre, where they would be away from the factional
strife of Beirut and in positions where they could patrol and defend themselves
more easily.

Basing on Ships a Possibility

Another possibility is to move the marines back aboard their amphibious ships
offshore, sending in small units for short tours of duty to maintain visibility.
But there were questions whether that would be a sufficient showing of the flag.

Who would replace the marines to provide security at the Beirut airport was
unclear. The French and Italians have large enough contingents to take on the
task, or troops from another, more clearly neutral nation might be brought in,
it was suggested.

Officials said the Joint Chiefs were looking at what one called ''all reasonable
options'' for moving the marines. Said another official, ''Anything that would
make the Marine presence there more viable would be welcomed.'' He amended that,
adding: ''Anything but pulling out.''

The Joint Chiefs of Staff, who are the President's senior military advisers,
have never been enthusiastic about the dispatch of the marines to Lebanon
because they have feared a quagmire from which there would be no easy
extraction.

Warning on Embroilment

In October 1982, just after President Reagan ordered the marines to return to
Beirut, General Vessey told an audience in Washington: ''I think it's fair to
say that the Joint Chiefs don't want to get embroiled in Lebanon. And I don't
think the President of the United States wants to get embroiled in Lebanon.''

Pentagon officials said that General Vessey had not changed his mind over the
last year and that he spoke for the four other members of the the Joint Chiefs.
The officials said the chiefs, including Gen. Paul X. Kelley, Commandant of the
Marine Corps, thought the position of the marines in Beirut was militarily
untenable.

A month ago, General Vessey said in a televised interview that the marines were
in Beirut as a ''sort of United States earnest to the Government of Lebanon as
they get on with the political solution.

'Larger Strategy' Cited

General Vessey, who is an Army officer, went on: ''One has to think through very
carefully putting American troops in any kind of an operation where we're using
them as a political lever.''

''We would like to get them out as quickly as possible,'' he continued, ''but
our Government has set a mission there. It's involved in our larger Middle East
strategy.''

In Beirut, the marines have begun dispersing away from the airport terminal,
digging in and building bunkers to protect themselves. But eight marines were
killed Sunday when a mortar scored a direct hit on their sandbagged outpost on
the roof of a three- story building.

Some military officers said United States forces in Lebanon, after Sunday's
bombing raid on Syrian positions, were no longer serving as peacekeepers, as is
maintained by the Administration. ''It looks to me like we've run up different
colors,'' said one. ''We've become combatants.''

Another officer, asked whether the heightening of hostilities in Lebanon
reminded him of the early days of Vietnam, said: ''It begins to look like that,
doesn't it?''

Address to Congress Urged

Representative Mario Biaggi, Democrat of the Bronx, urged President Reagan to
address a joint session of Congress next Monday, when Mr. Biaggi said the
President was required by the War Powers Act to file his first report to
Congress on Lebanon. Congress is now in recess.

In a telegram, Mr. Biaggi said: ''In light of the serious escalation of
hostilities in Lebanon, the report would provide an excellent opportunity to
advise the Congress and the American people about the present and future status
of our commitment in Lebanon.''

A spokesman for the Speaker of the House, Representative Thomas P. O'Neill Jr.,
Democrat of Masschusetts, said a meeting of a group monitoring developments in
Lebanon would be held Friday. Representative Dante B. Fascell, Democrat of
Florida and acting chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, announced he
had scheduled a briefing for all members of the House on Friday.

In an effort to limit the hostilities, Defense Department officials said,
American forces in Lebanon have been ordered to limit their targets to positions
from which Syrian or other forces have fired at them and not to engage in
widespread reprisals.

Allies Under Different Rules

That rule, along with orders to avoid damage to other than military targets,
appeared to differ from conditions set for the Israelis and the French. Both
those countries have mounted air strikes at Syrian targets not proved to have
been sources of attacks on their own forces.

Defense Department officials also said the Administration had not yet planned to
reinforce the marines in Lebanon because the unit there was considered strong
enough to hold its beachhead and because more marines would only make more
targets.

In addition, the officials said, the Administration believes the United States
has enough firepower on hand to deal with current threats. Two aircraft carriers
with nearly 200 planes are offshore as is the battleship New Jersey with her
nine 16-inch guns. Altogether, about 35 American warships are in the area.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 8, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

LONG HUNT IS ALLOWED FOR INDIANS

BYLINE: By ANDREW H. MALCOLM

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 739 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, Dec. 7


One of the regular rituals across the Middle West in the waning days of autumn
is the slaughter of thousands of deer wearing antlers by an equally large number
of hunters wearing orange caps, camouflage coats and boots.

Nowhere is deer hunting more avidly pursued than in Wisconsin, a state where
employers know that a rising number of severe colds and family emergencies
somehow seems to coincide with the start of deer-hunting season. Rural
Wisconsin's citizens are outdoors-minded to begin with, and the thick forests of
yesteryear have given way to smaller woods, neat pastures and grain fields that
make ideal habitat for the white-tailed deer.

In fact, that deer is the state's official wild animal. And the 650,000 humans,
a new record this year, who seek to shoot the state's 900,000 deer also enrich
the state by more than $7 million annually with their $11 hunting licenses.
(Non- Wisconsin humans must pay $80.)

To many citizens, the slaying of gentle deer for sport is distasteful. ''It's a
revolting experience,'' says John Barnes, a member of the Alliance for Animals,
who regularly finds trails of blood across his property.



More Money for Area

To others, however, hunting is an income-generating tourist attraction that
helps keep a wildlife population in balance. Frank Haberland of the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources estimates there are more deer today than 150
years ago when a young soldier named Abraham Lincoln fought the braves of Chief
Blackhawk in the area.

But this year several thousand extra deer will be shot under an agreement
between Wisconsin and six Chippewa bands. The special 43-day hunt, which runs
through Dec. 31, will allow the Indians to shoot 6,250 extra deer of either sex
outside their reservation lands.

The one-year agreement - a long- term arrangement has yet to be negotiated -
stems from recent Federal court decisions holding that Indians have the right to
hunt off reservation out of season under terms of treaties signed with the
Federal Government 100 years ago.

The agreement still prohibits the sale of deer meat, night hunting or the use of
bright lights, which transfix the deer for easier aiming. But it does permit
Indians to drive with loaded, uncased guns in their cars and to shoot from their
vehicles.

State officials called the extra harvest of more than 6,000 deer ''insignificant
biologically.''


In the controversy over firearms in Minnesota in recent days, opponents of
gun-control legislation have suggested a ban on bans on guns.

Middle Western gun-control opponents have been particularly aroused since the
Chicago suburb of Morton Grove successfully imposed a ban on pistols and then
won a legal fight that went all the way to the United States Supreme Court.

No Minnesota community has adopted similar legislation. ''In Minnesota,'' said
Jon Willand, secretary of the Minnesota Committee for Effective Crime Control,
''we've wiped out handgun prohibitionists for the moment.''

But State Representative Robert Vanasek is sponsoring the ban on bans anyway.
''I don't think you're going to solve the problem of handguns,'' he said, ''with
one city having an ordinance and another not.'' So Mr. Vanasek, a former
proponent of gun controls who has now become a proponent of controls on gun
controls, believes it would be better if no one had any bans on guns.


Buddhism has come to western Kansas.

In Garden City, in the heart of the nation's wheat belt, Thich Thien Phap, a
Buddhist monk, has set up residence to tend to the religious needs of local
Buddhists. ''It shows the changing nature of our community,'' said Monty Fey, a
Presbyterian minister and president of the city's Ministerial Alliance.

About 50 Buddhist worshipers from Vietnam, Cambodia, Laos and India live in the
area, attracted by new job opportunities in such local industries as an
electrical generating facility and a beef packing plant. One recent school
survey showed that about 5 percent of the district's 5,200 pupils are from
Southeast Asia.

Every Sunday morning the 67-year- old monk conducts religious services in his
temple, a converted lawyer's office. Otherwise, he seldom leaves his home,
preferring to stay there for meditation, prayer and ministering to his
congregation's members, who pay for his rent and food. The Buddhist monk, a
native of South Vietnam, migrated to Kansas from his last home, in Albany, N.Y.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 8, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

PBS HEAD IS NAMED PRESIDENT OF NBC NEWS

BYLINE: By SALLY BEDELL SMITH

SECTION: Section C; Page 31, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 675 words


Lawrence K. Grossman, president of the Public Broadcasting Service for the last
eight years, was named president of NBC News yesterday.

Mr. Grossman will assume his position next May, thus becoming the fifth
president of NBC's news division in seven years. He will succeed Reuven Frank,
who has had the job since March 1982.

''The decision to leave PBS was very hard,'' said Mr. Grossman, who is 52 years
old. In the PBS post he earned $80,000 a year. ''There is an extraordinary
future for public television. But running the news division at NBC is an
incredible opportunity.''

Grant Tinker, chairman of NBC, said he had approached Mr. Grossman several
months ago, after Mr. Frank had indicated that he wanted to leave his position
after the 1984 Presidential election. ''He's the only guy I ever talked to,''
Mr. Tinker said. ''He was my first and only choice, because I have known him for
years, and I know who and what he is.''



'We Have Great Faith'

Mr. Grossman has not worked in television news previously. From 1962 to 1966, he
was NBC's vice president in charge of advertising when Mr. Tinker was vice
president of programming. For 10 years prior to joining PBS in 1976, Mr.
Grossman ran his own advertising agency in New York, Lawrence K. Grossman Inc.

Mr. Tinker said he did not consider Mr. Grossman's lack of experience in
journalism as a problem. ''We have an awful lot of people who have a lot of
experience in news,'' he said. ''We are hiring a man in whom we have great
faith.''

Mr. Grossman will join the network in February, to work with Mr. Frank through a
three-month transition.

During his tenure at PBS, which is responsible for scheduling and distributing
programs to the nation's 300 public-television stations, Mr. Grossman was
responsible for binding together the often-fractious stations into a unified
organization with a common prime-time schedule.

In recent years, he has also helped start a number of news and public-affairs
programs, including ''Frontline,'' a prime-time weekly documentary series, and
''Vietnam: A Television History,'' a retrospective on the Vietnam War. Mr.
Grossman was also instrumental in expanding the nightly ''MacNeil/Lehrer
Report'' from a half hour to an hour this fall.

PBS announced yesterday that a search committee had been formed to find a
successor to Mr. Grossman by the end of March.

Mr. Grossman said that he had not yet formulated any plans for change at NBC
News: ''It would be presumptuous and totally inappropriate to talk about that. I
will go in there without any preconceived notions.''

Mr. Grossman is likely, however, to inherit some unfinished business at NBC
News, according to sources at the network. One decision could involve the fate
of ''First Camera,'' NBC's 7 P.M. Sunday news magazine, which is consistently
the lowest- rated program in prime time. Since its debut in September, the
program has attracted 12 percent of the audience; 26 percent is considered the
minimum for success.

The once-dominant ''Today'' show is also under review following slippage in the
ratings. Last year at this time, ''Today'' was second in the morning, with 22
percent of the audience, after ABC-TV's ''Good Morning America.'' This year,
''Today'' has dropped to 19 percent of the audience, and is tied with the ''CBS
Morning News,'' behind ''Good Morning America.''

The ''NBC Nightly News'' is not considered by network sources to be a likely
candidate for change. It currently attracts 20 percent of the audience,
virtually even in the ratings with ABC's ''World News Tonight'' but behind the
''CBS Evening News with Dan Rather.'' Last year at this time, ''Nightly News''
was in third place behind ABC and CBS.

Upon leaving the presidency of NBC News, Mr. Frank will supervise the network's
political coverage through the 1984 political conventions. After that, Mr.
Frank, who turned 63 yesterday, will return to producing news programs for NBC,
where he has worked since 1950. Mr. Frank previously served as president of NBC
News from 1968 to 1973.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Lawrence K. Grossman

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 9, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SIR KEITH HOLYOAKE DIES AFTER A STROKE; NEW ZELAND LEADER

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 33, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 277 words

DATELINE: WELLINGTON, New Zealand, Dec. 8


Sir Keith Holyoake, a former Governor General of New Zealand and one of the
country's longest-serving Prime Ministers, died today, the Government announced.
He was 79 years old.

Prime Minister Robert Muldoon, addressing Parliament, eulogized Sir Keith as
''the greatest New Zealander of our time.''

Sir Keith entered Wellington Hospital six weeks ago after a stroke.

When first elected to Parliament in 1932 at the age of 28, Mr. Holyoake, who
received a knighthood from Queen Elizabeth II in 1970, was the youngest
representative the country had elected.

He became Prime Minister in 1957, but his National Party was voted out of office
11 weeks after his appointment.

In the general election in 1960, the National Party regained power with Mr.
Holyoake as its leader, and he began an 11 1/2-year term as Prime Minister. He
resigned as party leader in 1972 but stayed in government until 1976.

Appointment Caused Controversy

In 1977 Sir Keith was appointed New Zealand's Governor General - the Queen's
representative - causing resentment among many New Zealanders who believed that
a former politician should not hold the position. The controvesy was the
fiercest of Sir Keith's political career.  He retired from the post in October
1980 after his health began to fail.

His service as Prime Minister was dominated by two issues of foreign policy, New
Zealand's military involvement with American and Australian forces in Vietnam
and the threatened loss of its traditional agricultural produce markets in
Britain when that country entered the Common Market.

Sir Keith is survived by his wife, Dame Norma, and a son and daughter.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Sir Keith Holyoake

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 9, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PENTAGON AIDE VOWS PRESS PLAN

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 370 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 8


The new head of public relations for the Pentagon said today that he would like
to arrange for news agency reporters to cover future United States military
actions from the moment they begin.

Michael I. Burch, referring to The Associated Press and United Press
International, said, ''I'd like to call in the bureau chiefs for AP and UPI''
and ask for a reporter from each to cover the story from the outset.

Mr. Burch, who has been Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs for
two weeks, said he hoped he could have a plan in place ''within weeks'' to
provide for a few journalists to be present during any future limited military
operations.

''Media should have complete access so long as it does not violate the security
of our operation or endanger the lives of our forces,'' he said.

In the first two days of the United States invasion of Grenada, reporters were
kept off the island, and for the next three days they were allowed only limited
access. That policy came under sharp criticism from news organizations, which
said American correspondents had historically been allowed to cover United
States combat actions.

Mr. Burch said he would be willing to include a photographer in any future pool,
but noted special problems with television, because of the bulkiness of
television equipment and some union restrictions on who can operate it.

The Pentagon news chief expressed concern that television technology, mostly
unavailable even as recently as the Vietnam War, could give enemy commanders
''live pictures from behind a commander's lines.''

Ed Fouhy, Washington bureau chief for ABC News, charged the real reason for
restricting journalists' access to Grenada was ''to keep pictures of dead
marines and Rangers off American television.''

He suggested a pool of reporters could have been briefed to go in with the
invasion force with the understanding that they would not broadcast or publish
their reports until the invasion was under way.

The remarks came during a panel discussion on the media and international
affairs sponsored by the Citizen's Choice National Commission on Free and
Responsible Media. Citizen's Choice is affiliated with the United States Chamber
of Commerce.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 9, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

LEGACY BEYOND MERE POLICIES

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK

SECTION: Section D; Page 4, Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 719 words


News

 Analysis


When President Reagan named William F. Baxter to lead the Justice Department's
antitrust division, backers and detractors alike saw his appointment as a
watershed in Government antitrust policy.  As a Stanford law professor, Mr.
Baxter had been highly outspoken in his criticism of past antitrust practices,
and big changes were expected from him.

Today scholars and antitrust lawyers agree that he has left a pronounced mark in
the last three years. But they say he leaves his most important legacy in the
intellectual foundation underlying antitrust enforcement, rather than in the
substantive policies of the antitrust division. His impact might have been
stronger, they say, had Mr. Baxter managed to tone down his sometimes acerbic
rhetoric.

Mr. Baxter's tenure in Washington is notable for several milestones. Under his
leadership the Justice Department promulgated new guidelines governing corporate
mergers, the first since 1968.

It also took the politically risky step of dropping the Government's costly and
protracted antitrust action against the International Business Machines
Corporation - the case once described as the ''antitrust division's Vietnam'' -
and settling its antitrust suit against the American Telephone and Telegraph
Company.

''The greatest strength of his tenure was a willingness to grapple with
difficult and complicated cases and do what he thought was right in a rather
courageous way,'' said Phillip Areeda, who teaches antitrust at the Harvard law
school.



Slowing of Enforcement Seen

Mr. Baxter's critics charge that along the way he slowed down the level of
antitrust enforcement in some areas, particularly in resale price maintenance -
pricing agreements between manufacturers and those who sell their products.

Mr. Baxter has argued, most recently in a case heard by the United States
Supreme Court earlier this week, that such agreements should not be illegal per
se - a view heatedly opposed by consumer groups.

''He believed that bigness is better - that the only thing that ought to be
against the law were smoking-gun price fixing and mergers between the first and
second largest companies in an industry,'' contended Jay Angoff, a lawyer with
Congress Watch, a consumer-oriented organization.

But this appears to be a minority view, even among Mr. Baxter's critics.
Supporters and detractors alike maintain that, despite his strong views, he did
not significantly alter the actual enforcement of antitrust laws, either because
he was disinclined or politically unable to do so.

Mr. Baxter, they note, was not the first antitrust chief to soft-pedal
enforcement in the area of resale price maintenance. And he has pursued the
criminal actions for price fixing and bid rigging that are the division's bread
and butter.

What Mr. Baxter did change, they say, is the discourse about the purpose of
antitrust enforcement. More than any other division chief in the past
generation, they say, Mr. Baxter challenged the intent of the antitrust laws,
re-examined tenets he considered irrelevant, dated or sentimental, and infused
them with modern theories of economic efficiency.

''If you line up the cases, Baxter's tenure has not been dramatically
different,'' said Richard J. Favretto, Deputy Assistant Attorney General in the
Carter Administration. ''But his analysis of the economic underpinnings of the
law will have a lasting impact on those who enforce it and on how private
practitioners, corporations and the courts look at antitrust problems.''

Friends and foes alike say Mr. Baxter could have had a still greater impact had
he managed to leave some of his candor behind him.

He once charged that the United States Supreme Court had based its antitrust
opinions on ''wacko economic propositions'' and said on another occasion that
there was ''no respectable academic support for the outmoded, jerry-built,
amateur, pseudo-economic propositions that underlie some antitrust opinions.''

''I think his rhetoric was a big problem,'' said Donald L. Flexner, another
Deputy Assistant Attorney General during the Carter Administration. ''It
deflected attention from the level of enforcement activity, distorted their own
accomplishments, and wasn't necessary to what Baxter wanted to achieve.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 10, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

OBSERVER;
LOST ON THE DARK PLANET

BYLINE: By Russell Baker

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 802 words


Last year there was trouble in Chad. It made me nervous. I am an American; I
have an American education in geography. When I heard there was Chad trouble, I
thought it had something to do with fish. Maybe the price of shad roe would go
out of sight.

Fortunately, the French stepped in. I know who the French are. I am an American.
They are in charge of Paris and perfume and they are to blame for the word
''gourmet,'' which changed the good old American eatery into the gourmet
delicatessen.

The French were also responsible for Chad, which was a place, not gourmet
seafood. A place in Africa. I have always been well-disposed toward the French.
I have an American education in history. I know it was the French who helped us
win the American Revolution by trapping the British at Yorktown and crying,
''Lafayette, we are here!''

So I was pleased when the French took charge of the Chad problem. It meant I
wouldn't have to learn anything about Chad. Not that I have anything against
learning about weird places, but I am an American, and I have American habits.
How could I stay on top of daily shifts in money- market rates if I had to take
a weekend off to learn about Chad?  I was still feeling smug about the poor
French, who would have to interrupt their gourmet activities to bone up on Chad,
when El Salvador, Nicaragua and Honduras started making trouble again. It made
me angry. I am an American. I have an American education in geography. I knew El
Salvador, Nicaragua and Honduras were nowhere near France, Russia or Vietnam, so
what right did they have to be the scene of trouble?

True, I had heard about these places in the days of Alexander Haig, who had a
way of expressing himself that could get you interested in geography. When he
said there was ''a conscious castration of America's eyes and ears around the
world'' and mentioned Central America as a place where these mutilations
occurred, I was interested. I am an American; I have an American taste formed by
reading American best-sellers. When the subject is castration of eyes and ears,
I perk up.

Unfortunately, though, President Reagan got rid of Mr. Haig before I could get
from my money fund to the library geography book, so I am still not sure whether
Nicaragua is separated from Honduras by Paraguay, or vice versa.

To be candid about it, I don't know where Paraguay is either. I am an American.
I hope there isn't any trouble in Paraguay any time soon, because I am deeply
absorbed in the professional football competition right now and don't see how
anybody can possibly cope with Paraguay when the Super Bowl is just two months
away.

After the Super Bowl, of course, baseball will start again. It would be
infuriating to have trouble in a place like Paraguay before the World Series is
over next fall. If there is, I hope Paraguay is a place our military can
surround, seize and occupy in two or three days, like Grenada, so I can feel
good about it. I am an American; and I have the American urge to feel good about
our military successes, provided they happen so fast that I don't have to learn
anything about the place we've been successful in.  This is why I am uneasy
about the trouble in Lebanon. I have an American education in geography. To me,
Lebanon was for years just a place where Lebanon bologna and the Tall Cedars of
Lebanon came from. Then, of course, I began watching television. I am an
American. I watch television. I learned that Lebanon was part of the troubled
Middle East.  That was all right. The troubled Middle East had always been
troubled and always would be troubled. Four thousand years of trouble behind it
was just a prelude to eight thousand years of trouble ahead of it. But it had
always been somebody else's trouble, and so - So I didn't expect the football
season to be interrupted with news that it was now our trouble. ''Lebanon?'' I
asked. ''What will I have to learn?'' The news is grim. Apparently you can't
begin to understand why we are there until you can tell Sunni, Alawite and
Shiite Moslems apart. Until you can tell a Maronite from a Druse. Until you know
the difference between the Phalangists and the Baathists, and why the P.L.O.
loyal to Yasir Arafat is different from the P.L.O. fighting Yasir Arafat, and
why all these groups take such pleasure in murdering each other, as well as the
women and children.  I am an American. I have an American education and am proud
of it. I know why the Washington Redskins game with the Dallas Cowboys this week
is absolutely vital and why, in spite of that, it may not be. I have an American
suspicion of big shots, too. It makes me wonder. If Moses, who was in personal
communication with God, couldn't stabilize the Middle East, what makes President
Reagan think he can do it with a handful of marines?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 11, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE MARINE TRAGEDY ;
ACCOUNTABILITY: 'A LOT OF HIGH-POWERED CAREERS ON THE LINE'

BYLINE: By Philip Taubman and Joel Brinkley

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 52, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1938 words


A month after the bombing, Colonel Geraghty sat in his bomb-damaged office at
Beirut International Airport and talked about the loss of the marines, sailors
and soldiers who had been under his command.

''It is the toughest thing that has ever occurred to me,'' he said. ''I knew all
those men. I worked with them and trained them. They are the best our country
produces.''

Thick transparent plastic sheets were taped to the wall behind him, replacing
the windows, which were shattered by the nearby blast. Sandbags were stacked on
the ledge outside. Colonel Geraghty, who has been a marine for 24 of his 46
years, including a 22- month tour in Vietnam, was dressed in combat fatigues,
his hair cropped short. His deep blue eyes surveyed the office as he spoke.

''It's an act against mankind to destroy young men like that,'' Colonel Geraghty
said, expressions of anger and sorrow flashing across his face.

'I Don't Quit'

He was asked if he felt some responsibility for the loss of life and whether he
had considered resigning.

''I don't quit,'' Colonel Geraghty answered sharply. After a long silence, an
aide, Major Jordan, said, ''Do you want mass resignations?'' In his office
aboard the Puget Sound, the flagship of the Sixth Fleet, the fleet commander,
Admiral Martin, said, ''I see no indication of incompetence by anyone
involved.'' Seated erect on the couch in his office, he considered the issue of
responsibility, and said: ''We have a great penchant for self-flagellation, and
I don't fault that. But the only person I can see who was responsible was the
driver of that truck.''

A 29-year Navy veteran who spent 68 months as a prisoner of war in North Vietnam
after his fighter plane was shot down in July 1967, Admiral Martin added firmly,
''I think Colonel Geraghty should be commended, and I'm going to see that he
is.''

Responsibility for Posture

The deputy commander-in-chief of United States Naval Forces in Europe, Admiral
Holcomb, occupies an office overlooking Grosvenor Square in London. During World
War II, Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower commanded allied forces from the same
building.

Sitting beneath a map of the world, Admiral Holcomb, who started his Navy career
in 1949 as a midshipman at the Naval Academy, said, ''I don't think there's
anyone in the chain of command who doesn't feel responsible for the posture and
preparedness of the units we had in the field.''

Asked if marine explanations for the lack of security in Beirut on Oct. 23 were
convincing, he replied: ''No, because you would have liked to avoid a tragedy.
You would like to have been smart enough to have forseen it and done something
to avoid it.''

Admiral Holcomb said he was certain that accountability for the inadequate
security would be established. ''Unless there is culpability demonstrated at a
specific node in the system,'' he said, ''the whole chain is accountable.''

Inquiry on Circumstances

Establishing accountability for the marines' vulnerability on Oct. 23 is the
responsibility of the special investigative commission headed by Admiral Long,
who retired last summer as commander in chief of the American forces in the
Pacific. The commission's mandate, as spelled out by Secretary of Defense Caspar
W. Weinberger when he appointed it in early November, is to ''advise the
Secretary of Defense by making a thorough investigation into all the
circumstances connected with the attack, and by reporting its findings of fact
and opinions relating to the attack and the adequacy of security measures in
place at the time of the explosion.''

The other members of the commission are Lieut. Gen. Joseph T. Palestra Jr. of
the Air Force, currently deputy commander of American forces in the Pacific;
Lawrence F. Snowden, a retired Marine lieutenant general and the third ranking
officer in the Marine Corps before his retirement in 1979; Eugene F. Tighe, a
retired Air Force lieutenant general and the former director of the Defense
Intelligence Agency, and Robert J. Murray, director of national security studies
at the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard.

Issue of Dispersal

The full panel has made two inspection trips to Beirut and some members have
been there four times, according to a spokesman for the commission. Defense
Department officials said that during the first visit in November commission
members, who were also authorized by Mr. Weinberger to report on current
security at the Marine compound, concluded that the marines were still not
adequately dispersed throughout the airport compound and that a large
fast-moving vehicle could roll past newly erected earthen barriers and sentry
posts and threaten Marine positions.

The commission, which has a staff of 23 officers and civilians, has made a
verbatim record of more than 100 interviews in Beirut, Europe and the United
States. It hopes to complete work by Dec. 16.

The commission will submit its report to the Joint Chiefs of Staff and Mr.
Weinberger for review and possible action. Defense Department officials said
that except for sections that may be classified because they deal with
intelligence matters, most of the report is likely to made public after the
Administration has reviewed it.

Congressional Report Expected

The House Armed Services Committee and members of the Senate Armed Services
Committee, in separate efforts, are also investigating the bombing. The more
formal House inquiry, which is being directed by Representative Bill Nichols,
Democrat of Alabama, is expected to result in a public report later this year or
early in 1984. Lawmakers familiar with the investigation said the report was
likely to be highly critical of the security measures taken by the marines and
the officers above them.

While the Congressional investigations may lead to eventual changes in the way
the military deploys and supports its forces, it is the Long Commission
investigation that bears on the immediate question of whether any individuals in
the Defense Department will be held accountable and punished for the failures in
Beirut.

The military has had a mixed history of trying to assess blame after serious
blunders.

After eight servicemen died in the unsuccessful effort to rescue American
hostages in Iran in 1980, a Presidential commission directed by Adm. James L.
Holloway 3d, retired, the former Chief of Naval Operations, sharply criticized
the preparations for the mission but found no evidence of culpable neglect or
incompetence.

There was no formal Pentagon investigation after 41 servicemen were killed
during the 1975 effort to rescue the crew of the Mayag"uez, an American cargo
ship that was seized by Cambodia. The troops were killed when they encountered
intense resistance while assaulting Tang Island, where the crew was thought to
be held; the crew had been moved to another island. It was later shown that the
attacking force had failed to receive intelligence warnings about Cambodian
troop concentrations on the island because the assault force lacked a secure
communications link to Washington.

Seizure of the Pueblo

North Korea's seizure of the Pueblo, an intelligence ship, in 1969 led to a
series of investigations culminating in a recommendation by a Naval Court of
Inquiry that the Pueblo's captain, Comdr. Lloyd M. Bucher, be court- martialed.
The Secretary of the Navy, John H. Chafee, now a Republican Senator from Rhode
Island, rejected the recommendation on the grounds that Mr. Bucher and his crew,
who were held prisoner by North Korea for 11 months, had suffered enough.

Investigations into the 1968 massacre of civilians at My Lai in Vietnam led to
the 1971 court-martial conviction of Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. for the murder
of 22 civilians. After being reversed by a Federal court, a Federal appeals
court upheld the conviction.  After Japan's surprise attack on Pearl Harbor on
Dec. 7, 1941, a series of Presidential, Congressional and military commissions
investigated the lack of preparedness and the concentration of Navy ships in one
place. Although senior officials in Washington, including President Roosevelt,
were criticized, formal action was taken only against Adm. Husband E. Kimmel,
the commander of the Pacific fleet, and Lieut. Gen. Walter C. Short, the
commander of Army forces in Hawaii. Both men were relieved of their commands and
forced to retire.

Establishment of Accountability

In the case of the Beirut bombing, as with some of those earlier incidents,
accountability can be established one of several ways, according to military
officers and experts in military law. The Long Commission itself, while lacking
any authority to discipline individuals, can fix blame for the inadequate
security on individual as well as institutional failures and make
recommendations for corrective or disciplinary action by the Defense Department.

The appropriate action depends on the degree of failure that is determined. The
most severe action would be court-martial proceedings under the Uniform Code of
Military Justice, equivalent to criminal prosecution under civilian law. That
would require evidence that individuals were culpably negligent, according to
military law experts.

Eugene R. Fidell, a Washington attorney who is an expert in military law, said
any crime implicit in the inadequate security in Beirut ''would probably be cast
in terms of dereliction in the performance of duty, which is a recognized
offense under the code.''

'A Negligence Standard'

The Manual for Courts-Martial, an official explication of the standards for
criminal conviction, says: ''A person is derelict in the performance of his
duties when he willfully or negligently fails to perform them, or when he
performs them in a culpably inefficient manner. When the failure is with full
knowledge of the duty and an intention not to perform it, the omission is
willful. When the nonperformance is the result of a lack of ordinary care, the
omission is negligent. Culpable inefficiency is inefficiency for which there is
no reasonable or just excuse.''

Edward F. Sherman, a professor at the University of Texas Law School who
specializes in military law, relating that passage to the Beirut bombing. ''This
is basically a negligence standard,'' he said. ''It means an officer doesn't
have to willfully fail. It is enough that he failed to take corrective action
and this resulted in a breach of security and the death of his men.''

There are many steps short of court- martial proceedings. If the Long commission
report is critical, the individual services can their own internal
investigations or proceed directly with mild, nonlegal forms of punishment, such
as transfering officers or including critical information in fitness reports.
Those steps, while indirect, can be tantamount to ending a career, military
officers said.

A middle level of discipline, known in the military as nonjudicial punishment,
ranges from suspension of pay to detention in quarters to the issuance of a
reprimand. The target of such actions can reject the punishment and insist on
formal judicial proceedings.

As the Long Commission made its way through Beirut and Europe last month, a
sense of unease settled over the officers in the chain of command.  Word spread
that the questioning was intense. One senior officer was interviewed for eight
hours, colleagues said.

''There are a lot of high-powered careers on the line,'' a former senior
commander said after talking to friends in the chain of command. He added,
''Everyone thinks heads may roll.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Valerie Giblin mourning for her husband

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 11, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE MARINE TRAGEDY;
SECURITY: AS THREATS GREW, DEFENSES WERE IMPROVISED

BYLINE: By Philip Taubman and Joel Brinkley

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 49, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2115 words


Lieut. Col. Hisham Jaber of the Lebanese Army recalls the marines' arrival at
Beirut International Airport in September 1982 this way:

''They ran from tree to tree with their rifles pointed, thinking they were going
to be attacked by an army. I think they must have thought they were in Vietnam.
''

Colonel Jaber, who serves as liaison officer between the Marine Corps and the
Lebanese Army, said he warned them right away: ''Do not expect any classical
offenses against you. Do not expect tanks or companies or battalions to attack.

''Here,'' he added, ''the only threat is terrorism.''

It was a warning the marines apparently did not heed. Until the bombing Oct. 23,
the Marine commanders seemed to underestimate the terrorist danger and instead
to devote most of their energies to defending themselves against conventional
military threats, which at times were severe.

General James M. Mead, who served twice as the Marine commander in Beirut, said
he was aware of the terrorist threat but ranked it third among the possible
dangers facing his men when he first arrived at Beirut International Airport in
September 1982.  ''The first threat was unexploded munitions'' left around the
airport from the summer's fighting. he said. ''We detonated 3,000 of them. The
second threat was the Israelis, who kept coming through our lines. So now you've
got a very conventional threat: tanks. And the third threat was terrorism.'' But
that threat ''wasn't foremost in our minds,'' he said.

During the marines' first months in Lebanon, they were welcomed as liberators.

''The atmosphere was permissive,'' said General Mead, who was a colonel when he
served in Beirut.  To defend the Marine compound, he said ''initially we just
put in some sentry posts with sandbags. The threat was of such a low order that
the sandbags were put in more to keep our personnel busy than anything else.''
In addition, he said, the compound's circumference was watched from several
vantage points, but the defense was ''just M-16's. ''

The other members of the international force were not much better protected. The
Italians, tied strings around Pepsi cans and hung them from a fence, thinking
the cans would rattle if someone tried to climb into their compound, one Italian
officer said.

In the following months, the marines added to their defenses in what seemed to
be an almost casual manner.

''Everything evolved in a reactive kind of way, as the threats appeared,'' Major
Jordan said. ''There was no long-range plan that we were going to be here for a
year or two, so let's build some permanent defenses.''

First Direct Attack in March

General Mead was replaced as the Marine commander in Beirut by Col. Thomas M.
Stokes in November 1982, but returned the following February for another tour of
about four months. Still he ranked terrorism low on his list of possible
threats, he said.

In February the marines strung barbed concertina wire around the southern end of
the compound for the first time.  Then on March 16, in the first direct attack
against marines since they arrived in Lebanon, someone tossed a grenade at a
squad on patrol.  Five were wounded slightly.

On April 18 the United States Embassy was bombed, collapsing the building's
front and killing 63 people.

Across town at the Marine compound, General Mead said later in an account of how
he had felt at the time, he appreciated that the attack ''wasn't a car bomb of
the normal size.''

''You've got a biggie, 2,000 pounds- plus'' of explosives, he said, ''enough to
almost collapse an eight-story building.''

''It was a suicide attack, and they had used the same thing against the Iraqi
Embassy earlier,'' he added. ''So that wasn't unknown to us.''

Defenses Are Increased

After the embassy bombing, General Mead said, he put two sentries at every post
instead of one. More concertina wire was strung, and an 18-inch sewer pipe was
placed in front of the main entrance to the headquarters. Cars driving into the
Marine compound were searched.

''Still,'' General Mead said, ''terrorism was just one of the threats, and we
didn't put our mindset inordinately in that area.''

After the embassy bombing, the State Department dispatched a team of
counterterrorism experts to Beirut to help set up defenses around the new,
temporary embassy, according to a top-level State Department official who was
directly involved in matters concerning Lebanon.

No experts were sent to the marines, because, he said, ''Can you imagine me
walking up to P. X. Kelley and trying to offer him advice?'' He was referring to
Paul X. Kelley, the Marine Corps Commandant.

Normal Defensive Planning

The responsibility for planning the marines' defenses was spread among dozens of
men - the battalion commander, company commanders, squad commanders and
sergeants of the guard, among others, in each of the Marine Amphibious Units
that occupied the compound, several commanders said.

Lieut. Col. Donald F. Anderson was the Marine battalion commander, second in
command, when the embassy was bombed. He said his approach to ordering increased
security was ''just to give my company commanders a mission-type order: 'You
secure this area against these threats.' ''

''That's all I'd tell them,'' he said. ''Then they'd draft a plan, and I might
modify it and then pass it on'' to General Mead.

He added, ''Very honestly, it was just normal defensive planning that we would
use in combat situations.''

General Mead said he did not modify the defensive plans submitted by Colonel
Anderson.

When Col. Timothy J. Geraghty arrived in Beirut to command the 24th Marine
Amphibious Unit in late May, he said, he was aware of the terrorist threat but
also considered it a secondary concern.

He did not modify the defenses that General Mead's unit had put in place
earlier, General Mead said, adding that when he visited the Lebanese capital two
days after the bombing of the compound, he observed that defenses around the
headquarters building were ''pretty much the same.''

Colonel Geraghty said he felt his first problem was to protect his men from
artillery fire.

Friendly Smiles Faded

Early in August, ''the friendly smiles we'd been seeing in the neighborhood
began to fade,'' Major Jordan said. ''We were seeing young men in uniforms with
weapons instead.''

Then the Lebanese Army and Druse militiamen, longtime antagonists, began
fighting in the nearby mountains. Artillery and small arms fire started falling
on the compound. Several marines were killed.

The fighting intensified in early September, when Israel pulled its troops out
of the mountains, leaving the Druse and the Lebanese Army to battle for that
territory.

A cease-fire was arranged in late September. But in mid-October, two marines
were killed by sniper fire, so until the bombing on Oct. 23, Colonel Geraghty
said, ''our greatest threat continued to be the shelling.''

Truck Bomb a 'Quantum Increase'

To protect his men from the incoming fire, Colonel Geraghty moved many of them
into the steel-reinforced headquarters building. The possibility of terrorist
acts was not forgotten, he said. ''Our defenses were keyed against the threat.
Car bombs, pickup trucks, etc. - we were taking countermeasures against all of
this.''

The truck bomb at the Marine compound, he said, ''was a clear quantum increase
that took us by surprise.''

No Specialized Training

The marines' failure to anticipate the truck attack on the compound may be
explained, in part, by their preparation for the Lebanon mission. Asked how much
specialized training the marines had received before they were first deployed 15
months ago, General Mead said, ''Absolutely none.''

Instead, he said, they had received ''basic soldiering, mostly.'' He and other
commanders said the focus of training changed little as successive units were
sent to Beirut, even after the embassy bombing.

General Mead added, ''We were kind of writing the book as we went along.''

And to this day, some of the marines say they need no counterterrorism training.

When the general returned to Beirut for a second tour last February, he and his
men did get some specialized training, he said, including ''four days on dealing
with the press: how to project.''

Col. Robert B. Johnston, commander of the Eighth Marine Regiment at Camp
LeJeune, N. C., from which four of the five units sent to Lebanon have been
drawn, said ''only about 5 percent'' of the marines' training before going to
Beirut was keyed to the specific mission.

Prepared for All Contingencies

The Marine troops, he said, were prepared for all possible contingencies
because, even as they set sail for Beirut, they could not be sure they would not
be sent somewhere else at the last minute. That happened in October, he noted,
when the marines on their way to Beirut were diverted to Grenada.'' That wasn't
a problem, Colonel Johnston said, because ''marines are supposed to be able to
do anything.''

Colonel Johnston, who served in Beirut last year, said, ''You often think of
operations like Beirut being carefully planned and orchestrated, but they
aren't. We had little idea what we were doing until we did it.''

At Camp LeJeune, the standard training before being sent overseas includes the
courses ''Combat in an Urban Area,'' ''Bombs and Boobey Traps'' and others that
are useful for troops going to Lebanon, Colonel Johnston said. But the standard
courses include no special training in counterterrorism, and none were added for
the units going to Beirut, he said.

'Really Just Common Sense'

''People have the notion that there's this magic package of counterterrorism
training that would have prevented that attack,'' he said. ''But it's really
just common sense: being alert, looking for suspicious cars parked near your
compound. That sort of thing.''

No one at Camp LeJeune is specifically in charge of determining how the marines
are trained for their mission, Colonel Johnston said. The responsibility is
spread among many officers, he said.


''There's nobody who sits down and says counterterrorism will or will not be a
part of it,'' Colonel Johnston said.

General Defends Training

Gen. Alfred M. Gray, commanding general of the Second Marine Division at Camp
LeJeune, said, ''I'm not saying we know everything we need to know'' about
counterterrorism. ''But a lot of our courses and a lot of our field training is
related to the subject of terrorism, even if it's not pure counterterrorism
training.''

He added, ''I dare say my people know more than a lot of people think they do -
more than even some of them think they do.'' Colonel Geraghty said his men ''had
some considerable training on the background in Lebanon, the religious
factions'' before going to Beirut. ''We got the chaplain involved and showed
videotapes on closed circuit TV.''

At Camp LeJeune, Comdr. John Maiorana, the regimental chaplain, said he and
other chaplains on his staff ''did get cranked into the training.''

''Part of it is character guidance, making moral choices and interrelationships.
And part of it is on Lebanon: 'Who are these people we are going to be
interacting with? The Druse, the Christians.' ''

Videotape on Lebanon Shown

''I am no expert,'' Commander Maiorana added. ''I read and discuss it with
people. But it's pretty informal.''

The hourlong videotape shown to the troops is a mix of film clippings from
various places and times in Lebanon. It shows battles, street scenes, children
playing. There is no narration, and Master Sgt. Steven Wyatt, a Marine spokesman
at Camp LeJeune, said no one explains the tape as it is being shown. ''It's
really just for awareness,'' he said.

Camp LeJeune does have counterterrorism experts on the grounds: two British
Royal Marines with experience combating terrorists in Northern Ireland. But
Colonel Johnston said they were not involved in the training of marines going to
Lebanon.

Senator John W. Warner, the Virginia Republican who is a member of the Armed
Services Committee and the former Secretary of the Navy, observed that ''since
the crusades, every force that has occupied Lebanon has been attacked by
terrorists, not conventional forces.'' Given that, Mr. Warner asked, why wasn't
anyone with the marines ''trained in counterterrorism?''

In retrospect, several Marine officers said, the units sent to Beirut should
have received specialized training.

''Oh, absolutely,'' said General Mead. ''Everyone's homing in on the word
'terrorism' now, and I guess that's right. But that wasn't our thought process
then.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: diagram of the marines' vulnerable position; photo of commanders on the
scene (p.50)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 11, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RUMANIAN APPEALS FOR HALT ON MISSILES

BYLINE: By JOHN KIFNER

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 26, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 643 words

DATELINE: BUCHAREST, Rumania, Dec. 10


President Nicolae Ceausescu, saying that he fears ''nuclear destruction,'' has
reiterated a call to both the United States and the Soviet Union to stop
deploying nuclear missiles and to resume arms control negotiations.

''The deployment of the new missiles and development of the ones in place will
not bring extra security to either side, least of all to European countries,''
the Rumanian leader said in an interview on Thursday. ''On the contrary, they
will increase insecurity and the nuclear war threat.''

Instead, he called on both sides to agree on a balance of forces at the lowest
possible level.

His remarks came amid Soviet- American tension over the issue of medium-range
missile deployment in Europe. The United States, under a decision of the
Atlantic alliance, has begun to install new missiles in Britain, Italy and West
Germany, and the Soviet Union has said that it is countering the deployment with
new missiles in Czechoslovakia and East Germany.

 2 Sets of Negotiations Halted

Last month the Soviet Union walked out of negotiations on medium-range missiles
and, on Thursday, declined to set a date for the resumption of the parallel
talks on limiting strategic, or long-range, missiles.

''These steps pave the way for an escalation of the arms race, generate further
dangers of a nuclear war, confronting Europe and the whole world with nuclear
destruction that will bring an end to life on our planet,'' Mr. Ceausescu said.

Within the Soviet bloc, the Rumanian leader has achieved something of a maverick
reputation by persuing a relatively independent foreign policy while maintaining
tight controls at home. Rumania declined to join the Soviet-led invasion of
Czechoslovakia in 1968, condemned the Soviet military intervention in
Afghanistan in 1979 and does not take part in joint troop exercises of the
Warsaw Treaty countries.

Rumania was also absent on Friday in Moscow at a meeting of Soviet bloc
ideological chiefs aimed at forging a united response to the American missile
deployement. In addition to the Warsaw Pact members, the meeting was also
attended by three other Soviet allies - Vietnam, Mongolia and Cuba.

 Nuclear-Free Balkans Sought

The limiting of nuclear weapons has become one of Mr. Ceausescu's favorite
themes, and he has campaigned for making the Balkans a nuclear-free zone. Two
weeks ago the Rumanian party's Central Committee called on the United States and
the Soviet Union to abandon the deployment of new missiles, saying they were
pushing the world over a precipice.

Mr. Ceausescu wore a dark suit with broad stripes, a polka dot tie and stiff
white shirt with French cuffs as he received a visitor in an ornate hall of
party headquarters. He answered questions that had been previously submitted in
writing.  After replying to the written questions, he engaged in a wide-ranging
discussion in which he brushed off criticism of his human rights policies and
strict rule and spoke animatedly of efforts to improve Rumania's troubled
economy. His office later said these comments were off the record and were not
to be quoted.

In the formal part of the interview, he said that, while the United States
should stop deploying its missiles, ''the Soviet Union in turn should not put
the announced countermeasures into effect and should undertake to reduce some of
its missiles in place, at least to the previously announced level, which,
however, should not exceed the number of British and French warheads.''

With regard to Soviet insistence that French and British weapons be counted on
the Western side, Mr. Ceausescu agreed that they should be taken into account in
the East-West balance.

''However,'' he added, ''in a first phase, they might be just inventoried, so to
say, and they should be included in the general balance of forces only in a
subsequent phase.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Nicolae Ceausescu

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 11, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Historical Film Secure

SECTION: Section 2; Page 16, Column 4; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 178 words


To the Editor:

I would like to take exception to points raised about CBS News in the article
''Preserving the Best of Today's Programming for Tomorrow's Viewers,'' by
Richard Lacayo (Oct. 31).

Mr. Lacayo writes that ''one of the most famous broadcast reports of the (
Vietnam) war . . . was nowhere to be found'' in the CBS archives. This is simply
not true.

The report exists in the CBS News archives, not only in the original film but in
numerous videotape reproductions which have been incorporated in various CBS
News broadcasts and retrospectives. I am told that the researcher who looked
through our footage was told that, but said he knew how to locate the specific
report elsewhere.

Please be assured that this important piece of historical footage was

always

 secure. Kenn Rabin did not arrive on the scene to save it for CBS News as the
article suggests.

CBS News takes great pride in its archival system as one of the finest and most
exhaustive of its kind in the country.  ANN MORFOGEN Director, Communications
CBS News

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 11, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHEN MORAL OBLIGATION CONFLICTS WITH THE LAW

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 270 words


To the Editor:


In his Dec. 4 Op-Ed article, ''Military Service: A Moral Obligation,'' Donald
Kagan states that if a citizen reaches the age of majority and has not
emigrated, he gives tacit approval to his nation's laws. He further holds that
it is the citizen's moral obligation to obey these laws if he wishes to remain
in his country.

Does Professor Kagan believe that those practicing civil disobedience in the
1960's to secure the constitutional rights of black citizens, abridged by law in
many states, did not satisfy the moral demands of citizenship? Would the Vietnam
War have ended if the Government had not been forced by public opinion to cease
fighting, and would public opinion have been swayed if not for the draft
resisters? Were those injured or killed by law enforcement officials while
carrying out acts of civil disobedience getting a ''free ride and failing in
their moral responsibility as citizens''?

Throughout history, dissent in the form of civil disobedience has been one of
the greatest tools of democracy, exposing injustice and forcing change.
Professor Kagan's paraphrase of the ''my country right or wrong'' philosophy
allows for no such constructive criticism.

In this time of nuclear proliferation and an expanding U.S. military presence
abroad, we must each consider our moral responsibilities as Americans and as
citizens of the world.  Professor Kagan's suggestion that only service
prescribed by the Government fulfills the obligations of citizenship does not
aid us in this difficult task.

BRUCE POLSKY ROBIN DIBNER New York, Dec. 4, 1983

*

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 11, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

OF THE GRENADA NEWS BLACKOUT AND REACTION AGAINST THE MEDIA

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 141 words


To the Editor: I, too, was surprised to discover a public ''exasperation'' with
the news media, as revealed by a majority sup

port for the news blackout during the invasion of Grenada. My students, who are
spending the semester examining the ''theory and practice of mass
communication,'' were 2 to 1 in favor of the Reagan/Pentagon lid on live and
immediate follow-up coverage by the news media.  Far from expressing the
outraged liberality or restless idealism once ascribed to campus collegians,
these students said things like: ''The media disgraced our Vietnam vets and only
would have turned us against the decision to invade Grenada'' and ''There has to
be more balance between the people's rights and the media's rights.''

 NEIL J. MORSE

Instructor, Fairfield University Fairfield, Conn., Dec. 3, 1983

*

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 11, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LEBANON REKINDLES U.S. FOREIGN POLICY TROUBLES

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 938 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


On the surface, much of political Washington reacted numbly at first to the
latest spasm of violence in Lebanon. Perhaps the loss of eight more Marines, the
first combat death of a Navy flier and Syria's capture of a second flier could
not match the horror of the bombing of the Marine compound six weeks ago, but
last week marked a new watershed, robbing President Reagan of the foreign policy
momentum he had gained after the invasion of Grenada. He was again on the
defensive, braced for trouble when Congress returns in January.

Grenada had been a distraction, providing a brief sense of triumph and giving
the President a boost in the polls. ''The Grenada high is now over,'' asserted
Senator Charles McC. Mathias, a moderate Maryland Republican. ''We have to get
back to the grim realities in the Middle East.'' Republican loyalists like
Senate majority leader Howard H. Baker Jr. and Charles H. Percy, chairman of the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee, gamely defended Mr. Reagan's retaliatory
strikes against Syrian antiaircraft as ''absolutely right'' despite the loss of
two planes. But after campaigning in Illinois, Mr. Percy told colleagues he had
been ''beaten up'' by angry public questioning about Lebanon.

For Democratic Presidential hopefuls, it was a chance to rekindle their critique
of Reagan foreign policy. ''Trigger-happy and reckless'' said Senator Alan
Cranston of California. ''Mindless escalations like this will lead to a lot more
than the President is bargaining for,'' warned Senator Ernest F. Hollings of
South Carolina. ''We have been down this road before in Vietnam.'' Senator Gary
Hart of Colorado called for a special session of Congress to block emergence of
an American ''military role.'' Already, said the Rev. Jesse Jackson, the
American presence is ''not neutral enough to be a peacekeeping factor.''

The two Democratic front-runners were more careful. Perhaps considering Israel's
security needs and the interest among some Jewish voters in keeping the United
States engaged, neither former Vice President Walter F. Mondale nor Senator John
Glenn of Ohio called for a Marine pullout. The American forces have to react to
''unprovoked attacks,'' Mr. Mondale said, but if he were President, he would
give the Lebanese Government a timetable for taking primary responsibility for
the Beirut airport, to let the American Marines move to a less exposed position.

Senator Glenn called for ''the utmost caution'' in using American force to
prevent ''stumbling toward'' war. It was left to the Arizona Republican Senator,
Barry M. Goldwater, to vent the anxieties in Congress about ''the increasing
danger of our involvement in a major war in that area'' and to state bluntly
that ''the time to withdraw our forces is now.''

Privately, some members of Congress asked whether the aerial reconnaissance
missions over Syrian-held areas were not provocative, inviting Syrian
antiaircraft fire to set up American retaliation. House Speaker Thomas P.
O'Neill Jr. was concerned, aides said, that after talks with Israeli Prime
Minister Yitzak Shamir and Lebanese President Amin Gemayel, the Administration
might be moving to a more aggressive policy toward the Syrians and their allies
in Lebanon, writing off hopes of political settlement among the warring Lebanese
factions.

But in his weekly radio address yesterday, the President vowed to ''redouble our
diplomatic efforts'' to achieve peace and said the marines would leave ''once
internal stability is restored and withdrawal of all foreign forces is
assured.'' He insisted the United States had acted ''with great restraint''
against Syria.

For the Administration, the latest flareup was a new lesson in the President's
political vulnerability on Lebanon and how precarious is the support for his
policy. Even before the latest fighting, a new Gallup poll showed international
tensions and the threat of war cited as the country's top problem, ahead of
economic issues.

Military Qualms

In the Administration, some top military officers were uneasy. Just over a year
ago, Gen. John W. Vessey Jr., Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said that
''it's fair to say that the Joint Chiefs don't want to get embroiled in
Lebanon.'' Senior officers feared that the Marines were unsuited to an
essentially political mission of buttressing the Gemayel Government while
American force is little help in settling Lebanese political schisms. With the
White House and State Department in no mood to withdraw, the Joint Chiefs were
hoping to reduce casualties by removing the Marines from exposed positions.

Administration policy-makers, banking on greater realism from Syria in the wake
of American pledges to cooperate more closely with Israel, contend that American
air attacks last weekend were successful ''in getting Syrian attention.'' Said
one official, ''They've been very careful about what they've done ever since.''
One hope is that Syria may lean on its Lebanese allies to move toward compromise
with Mr. Gemayel if talks on national reconciliation can be resumed.

But the Reagan entourage sensed Congressional patience wearing thin. When
Congress returns, the Foreign Relations Committee is to consider a resolution by
Senator Mathias calling for withdrawal of American forces from Lebanon by Feb.
25. ''We should now prepare a rational and appropriate alternative to the
multinational force,'' he said. The Administration hopes to stave off such
pressures. ''It's going to be a problem how much longer Congress will let the
Marines stay,'' a high official conceded. ''I'm not sure how it's going to come
out.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Capt. Monte Hoover

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 11, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE NATION'S MOOD

BYLINE: By Adam Clymer

SECTION: Section 6; Page 47, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 771 words


DECADE AFTER UNITED States troops left Vietnam and the Watergate hearings
gripped the public, Americans are starting to show more trust in their
Government and to voice greater support for the freedoms it promises, polling by
The New York Times shows. (See selections from the poll on page 89.)

The national mood is characterized by a selective sense of patriotism that
praises the Bill of Rights more than economic strength, feels individuals should
support wars they consider wrong, and prefers, by a margin of 2 to 1, risking
national destruction to tolerating Russian domination.

Acceptance of these ideas is not uniform. Blacks value the symbols of patriotism
far less than whites do, for example, with 89 percent of whites and only 56
percent of blacks saying it is patriotic to sing the national anthem. Almost
twice as many blacks as whites could not recall anything patriotic they had
done. But as many blacks as whites think of political campaign work or jury duty
as patriotic acts, and more blacks than whites think the Government can never be
justified in suppressing a newspaper. Women honor some symbols more than men do,
with more women than men considering it harmful to the nation to criticize a
President. But far more women than men think campaign work is patriotic.

The most important differences between the sexes and the races, the polling
showed, are that women and blacks are gloomier about the state of the nation
today and less hopeful for its future than are men and whites. Fewer blacks and
women believe the Horatio Alger myth, and more think the nation has seen its
best days.

The Times initially polled on patriotism in June. But some public moods last and
others wane before the data leave the computer. Economic recovery, Beirut,
Grenada, or even 100 million Americans watching ''The Day After'' could have
changed the mood, so some key questions were asked again in November.

Nothing critical changed much; the feelings tapped in June were strong, not
flimsy. In June, for example, 47 percent said the country was going in the
''right direction,'' while 44 percent said it was on ''the wrong track.'' In
November it was 47 to 43.

There were two interesting changes, however. In November, 45 percent of
Americans answered yes when asked ''Do you think that when Americans criticize
the President - any American President - it hurts the country?'' while in June
only 39 percent said so. This shift, despite the emphasis on ''any American
President,'' appeared to result from a rise in President Reagan's popularity at
a time of controversy over foreign affairs.

The other was a decrease from 51 to 44 percent in the percent who said ''you can
trust the Government in Washington to do what is right'' either always or most
of the time. Still, 44 percent was much more than the 25 percent recorded by the
Center for Political Studies at the University of Michigan in 1980, after a
decline that began in 1964.

While 62 percent of the public said that what made them proudest about this
country was one or more of its freedoms, the theory of America was one thing and
its Government in practice was another. When asked what they liked least, 16
percent mentioned Government; 13 percent cited America's role in the world.

Several speculative choices were put about how major changes could affect
someone's pride in America. Repealing the Bill of Rights mattered far more than
Government taking over industry. Again, the step from theory to practice was
slippery. By 52 to 34 percent, the public rejected ever ''suppressing newspapers
that advocate overthrowing the Government.'' But by 50 to 43 percent, it opposed
letting extremist groups hold nonviolent protests. Still, when CBS News asked
the question in 1970, an overwhelming 76 percent opposed such protests.

Different population groups differ in what matters to them. The higher people's
income and education, it seemed, the more conditional the allegiance. The Bill
of Rights mattered more to their pride in country; so did keeping industry in
private hands. They were more likely than the poor and uneducated to say they
would leave the country if they could double their income.

But there was only a modest difference between rich and poor on an ultimate
question: ''Would you be willing to risk the destruction of the United States
rather than be dominated by the Russians, or not?'' Women, however, were less
ready to take that risk. The answers were not very different among watchers of
''The Day After,'' and for the nation they were constant: 55 to 29 in June and
55 to 28 in November.  - ADAM CLYMER

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of marines arriving in Key West last summer

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 11, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW STIRRINGS OF PATRIOTISM

BYLINE: By R.W. Apple Jr.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 43, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5891 words


R. W. Apple Jr. is chief of The Times's London bureau.

 NOT long after the American invasion of Grenada, President Reagan welcomed home
hundreds of American medical students from St. George's University on the
island. It was an exuberant little ceremony on the South Lawn of the White
House, with the students waving small flags and the Marine band playing marches,
and President Reagan was clearly delighted. ''What you saw 10 days ago was
called patriotism,'' he remarked.  What in the world, I wondered, did he mean by
that? Did he mean that he himself had acted patriotically by ordering the
invasion, because he saw the country endangered by Cuban activities on the
island? Did he mean that those who criticized the invasion, saw it as an
overreaction or a violation of international law or a cynical piece of
pre-election melodrama, were by definition unpatriotic? Did he mean that any
red-blooded American ought to feel proud of this demonstration of American might
and resolution, and of the speed with which American troops did the job assigned
to them? Why was it ''patriotism'' and not a distasteful job, well enough done?
Why was he gloating so much?

In Western Europe, where I have lived for the last seven years, the perspective
was different. There were, of course, those who applauded what the United States
had done. But America and Americans are not highly Patriot Opener THIS IS REVISE
AS OF 5:30 WEDNESDAY - USE THIS ONE!  Pages 44,46,47





 thought of these days by many Europeans, and the American ''liberation'' of
Grenada reinforced the widespread notion that Ronald Reagan is a dangerous man
who could blow up the world by mistake. The British public, which has never
really understood how the United States could elect an actor President in the
first place, found the whole episode so unsettling that 6 out of 10 people told
the poll takers they thought American policies made nuclear war more likely. As
it happened, the invasion seemed to me far less cataclysmic than it did to many
of the Europeans, but I didn't feel that the evidence justified it. Did that
make me unpatriotic? Ought I not to give in to that atavistic tribalism that
makes our hackles rise when outsiders criticize our families or our countries,
however much we may complain among ourselves? No, I reassured myself, it was
enough to love my country; there was no need to pretend to love all its
policies.



 CTUALLY, I HAD begun thinking a lot about this subject earlier this year, long
before Grenada or the hideous explosion in Beirut that killed more than 200
American marines. Visitors from home had begun to tell me that there had been a
rebirth of patriotism in the United States, and I had been impressed by the
fervor of my 10-year-old stepson's belief in everything American - even to the
point of his remonstrating with me during the Wimbledon tennis tournament for my
dislike of John McEnroe, who strikes me as about the worst advertisement for our
system of values since Al Capone. So when I had the chance to spend a month
crisscrossing the country a few months ago, talking to old friends and making
fresh judgments, I was on the lookout for signs of renewed pride. Sure enough,
from Dallas to Cleveland to Boston, I saw displayed more flags and bigger ones
than I remember seeing since my Ohio boyhood; sure enough, people said they were
glad to be out from under what they considered to be the humiliation of Vietnam
and Watergate and the Iranian hostages - episodes that they felt had dragged
their coun try's name and its honor through the muck.

''We weep now for the Vietnam veterans and not the Vietcong,'' said a West Coast
businessman friend who had opposed the war, ''and that's probably much
healthier.''

These new stirrings were reflected, in a somewhat equivocal way, in a poll on
patriotism conducted by The New York Times in June and repeated, in part, in
November. More than half of the respondents said they considered themselves
''very patriotic,'' and 44 percent (51 percent in June) said they thought that
''you can trust the Government in Washington to do what is right'' - compared
with only 25 percent in a survey by the University of Michigan only three years
ago. But there wasn't very much agreement on what constituted patriotic or
indeed unpatriotic conduct, which suggests that when a group of people say they
are patriotic they may well mean different things. Still, my own wanderings
persuaded me that Americans of all kinds have pulled the whole question out of
the backs of their minds and are examining it with some care. That in itself
represents a significant change. (A separate article on the polling appears on
page 47.)

When I returned from three years in Vietnam in 1968, patriotism was not a
popular topic for serious conversation among most people of a philosophic cast
of mind. We were going through one of those periods when the concept had been
appropriated as its own by one group in the society; to describe oneself as a
''patriot'' was to identify oneself as a supporter of the war. Critics of the
war were disloyal, unpatriotic. Journalists in Saigon were told to ''get on the
team,'' and when they came home they were likely to be told, as I was by some of
my parents' friends, that by writing of American difficulties in Southeast Asia
I was giving aid and comfort to the enemy. It was not easy to put across the
idea that telling the citizens of a democracy of the consequences of their
Government's policies so that they might better evaluate them could constitute
one kind of fulfillment of patriotic responsibilities.

Today many people who would have dismissed talk of patriotism as political code
discuss the subject often. One example I came across was a young California
couple, Maureen Draper, a musician, and Paul, her husband, who runs the Ridge
vineyard south of San Francisco, who said they had spent a lot of time recently
wondering about things like national self-identity and pride and, yes, about
patriotism, too. Their discussions had led them to the heart of the matter -
what it was that they valued about the country and sought to preserve and
enhance. Maureen Draper took great pride, she said, in living in a society
''where freedom and self-expression are so deeply anchored

Page 46 that I can seek my own self-fulfillment without worrying about and
struggling for things that others can never take for granted.'' Rather
paradoxically, she said that she would be stirred to political action only if
someone threatened to take away the luxury of seeking her own fulfillment.

Much of what I heard sounded, from my point of view, more like relief and
restored pride than like patriotism, which I have always taken to be an active
rather than a passive emotion. Yet there was no question that the people who
called themselves patriotic genuinely believed that they were just that, and
that there were more of them than there had been during the last decade or two.
So I began, inevitably, to ask myself exactly what Americans, who use the word
more often than any other people I know, mean when they say ''patriotism.''

Clearly, patriotism does not mean love of the status quo, however conservative
the politics of such ''patriotic'' organizations as the American Legion.
Jefferson was a radical and so, in his way, was Theodore Roosevelt, and few
would question their patriotism. Clearly, it does not mean love of any given
government, however hard politicians may try to wrap themselves in the flag.
Woodrow Wilson once told a group of newly naturalized citizens: ''You have just
taken an oath of allegiance to the United States. Of allegiance to whom? Of
allegiance to no one, unless it be God. Certainly not of allegiance to those who
temporarily represent this great Government. You have taken an oath of
allegiance to a great ideal, to a great body of principles, to a great hope of
the human race.'' But since everyone will interpret those principles in a
different way - one man thinking that they impel the nation to fight in Vietnam
to preserve liberty, his neighbor believing with equal fervor that the
Vietnamese must be left free to determine their own destiny - it follows that
patriotism is a supremely personal and individual matter, the property of no
sect or party or philosophy.

For Americans, that creates a problem. We have no king or queen - not even a
substitute monarch, like the Italian president or the West German chancellor -
whom we can all revere as the repository of patriotism, as the embodiment of
nationhood. We have no racial or ethnic identity in common. We have, in

 Page 47 contrast with much of the world, no history or traditions stretching
back a thousand years and more. Perhaps that is why the flag means so much to
us, why we revere it as few other nations do. Certainly it is one of the reasons
why our Presidents are so easily able to proclaim their policies as the only
patriotic policies; the President is, after all, not only head of government but
also head of state, the one person we have in common.

In part, Americans have remedied this lack by focusing on their country's
uniqueness. For the first century and a half of our existence, we believed with
Wilson that we were the ''great hope of the human race,'' the refuge from
corrupt and cynical regimes in the Old World and elsewhere, the place where
someone born in a log cabin could be President, where a kid from the slums could
be a millionaire. Until World War I, or maybe until World War II, we believed
that we could stand apart from the world; for a relatively short time after
that, we believed that we could dominate the world.

But the turmoil of the 1960's and the 1970's robbed us of that self-confidence.
My mother could assure me a few days after Pearl Harbor, when I fearfully asked
her what would happen if the Germans and the Japanese won, that we would beat
them because ''God is on our side.'' Only 25 years later, American troops and
officials whom I knew in Vietnam kept asking themselves how the underfed,
underequipped, undersized Vietcong could possibly be causing so much trouble.

The same question, in different form, leaped to people's lips when they had to
wait in line for hours to buy gasoline because (as many saw it) a bunch of Arab
princes had become greedy; when a bunch of kids fired up by religious fanatics
called Shiite mullahs (a breed most of us had never heard of before) could hold
our diplomats hostage; when the United States Marines - those pre-eminent
symbols of the self-evident truth that the United States would not be trifled
with - could be humbled by a single truck full of dynamite.



 IKE THE CITIZENS OF most other democracies, we have come to know self-doubt,
and ours has been the more pervasive because our self-confidence was once so
great. A major consequence of that, my trip convinced me, has been a loss of an
essential component of patriotism. Ronald Dworkin, a legal philosopher, said in
the course of a long afternoon's conversation that in addition to a belief in
one's country's intrinsic worth (to which Americans seem to be returning after a
nightmarish period of confusion) patriotism ought to involve a commitment to
action of some sort to advance one's own conception of what imparts that worth.
In the 1940's and 1950's, we studied what was called ''civics'' and took it to
be essential preparation for fulfilling our responsibilities as free men and
women; by the 1960's, we had come to use the phrase ''civics lesson'' as a term
of opprobrium to be applied to people - politicians especially - who spoke too
earnestly of our duties as citizens.

It may well be that I spoke with an unrepresentative sample of our people, but
few whom I met in the United



 Page 87






 States said they would buy an American product that they considered inferior to
a foreign one, simply for the sake of backing the home team (although I saw a
truck, on a road near Las Vegas, that displayed a bumper sticker announcing that
it was ''made by, paid for and driven by an American''). More important, few
seemed to think that their patriotism imposed upon them any active part in the
political process, which may be why so shockingly few Americans bother to vote
compared to Europeans. And yet absolutely every person I asked, young or old,
left-wing or right-wing or apolitical, rich or poor, unhesitatingly described
himself as a patriotic American.

In Washington, I talked with Charles Morgan Jr., the civil-rights lawyer, whom I
first met in Birmingham 20 years ago, at the time of the bombing of the 16th
Street Baptist Church in which four black girls were killed. His experience as
an advocate of unpopular causes, he said, had made him deeply suspicious of
people who tried to specify for others what consituted patriotic acts. Then he
quoted Adlai E. Stevenson to the effect that ''to strike the freedom of the mind
with the iron fist of patriotism is an old and ugly trick.'' But he said he had
no doubt that patriotism required individual action, however much those
individual actions might differ or even, in some cases, seem to cancel each
other out in the short term.

''In the bad old days of interposition and massive resistance,'' Morgan said,
''we used to make a special point of flying the flag at our house every holiday,
just to make the point that we were loyal Americans even if we disagreed with
all our neighbors about civil rights. And when they played 'Dixie' at the
football games, we sat down when everyone else stood up, to show that that
wasn't our national anthem. We ran someone for mayor when we knew we'd lose, and
we filed lawsuits every time we had the slightest chance.

''Sometimes you have to be like the Soviet dissidents - people who love their
country so much that they would rather go to jail than keep quiet, rather go to
jail than go into exile. But I don't think that's where we are in this country.
We were shamed endlessly by a bunch of hoods who captured our diplomats, and we
didn't have the guts to stand up and demand that Carter bomb their oil wells.
We're so afraid of nuclear war that we say, 'If we do anything . . . .' Well,
Mrs. Thatcher didn't say that. It didn't take me five minutes to decide whom I
wanted to win in the Falklands: at last, a wonderful war, a democracy against a
bunch of fascists who probably had Hitler in the situation room. If we're so
patriotic, why aren't we automatically for democracy, which is what the United
States is about? Why weren't people in this town excited about Spain turning its
back on the civil war and on Franco's bullies and voting for this kid
Gonzalez?''

What did he think, I asked Morgan when we talked on the telephone after the
invasion, about the Grenada affair? ''I'll admit I felt a surge of pride at
first,'' he replied, ''but after about 10 or 12 minutes I changed my mind. I
don't want another missile base pointed at the underside of the United States. I
want us to stand up for democracy, too, but we hadn't done anything to establish
or enhance democracy in Grenada for the last three or four years. It doesn't
show much character to ignore a place, let it drift, then send in a great huge
military force to overwhelm a tiny island in the Caribbean.''

One man's view - but for me a view well worth listen

 page 89





 ing to, because it involved something more than a rush of blood to the head.


My trade leads me to distrust sentimentality, and I suppose that's why I am
suspicious of flag-waving politicians and professional patriots who tell us with
mindless facility that the United States is the greatest country in the world
without thinking much about what kind of country it is. I was in college during
the McCarthy era, and that taught me a lifetime's worth of lessons about zealots
who confuse conformity with patriotism. But my

 page 90/91






 experiences since, especially those in the third world and in the Soviet Union,
have made it clear to me that there is nothing sentimental at all about liberty
and justice. To see friends slammed into prison for criticizing the Government,
to be followed every hour of the day, to witness the arrogance of Government
officials unchecked by popular elections or a free press - such experiences make
one ready to speak out for, even to fight for, the basic freedoms that still
exist, however eroded, in the United States. The American ideal remains a
powerful one, and not for us alone; it is the main reason why Europeans and
Africans and Asians hold us to a high standard. A leader of the Dutch peace
movement once told me when I asked why he did not spend more time criticizing
the Soviet Union: ''We expect everything of Americans and nothing of the
Russians.'' Again, the British writer Jan Morris, in a bitter crticism of the
United States over Grenada, insisted that ''as the most powerful, the most
enviable, the most fortunate nation of the world - you have no excuse for
paranoia.'' It is also the reason why the ambitious and the persecuted still
flock to our shores. I think the thing that stirred my heart most during my time
in the United States was conversations with African refugees driving taxis in
Washington and Soviet refugees driving taxis in New York; to a man, they talked
about freedom. Ward Just, the novelist, with whom I covered the war in Vietnam,
said he had seldom felt prouder of his country than in contemplating what
Vietnamese refugees have been able to achieve here, like the 17-year-old girl
whose academic record brought a phone call of congratulations from President
Reagan.

Paul Fabry, once the youngest member of the Hungarian Parliament, is a member of
an older generation of refugees; he arrived in 1949 and now heads the New
Orleans International House World Trade Center. He can remember how startled he
was, when he first arrived, to find that one could be patriotic in the United
States without hating anyone, because in central Europe patriotism was
equivalent to nationalism, and nationalism was equivalent to hostility toward
ancient rivals. Here, he said, ''I found a capitalistic patriotism, connected to
property, where you worked hard and eventually owned a little bit of the
country, where you showed your love of country by helping to build it, and where
your contribution was judged by your performance and not by your bloodline.'' A
crucial part of the equation, he believes, was the ''almost mythic
significance'' Americans attached to their conviction that anyone could become
President; every mother not so secretly hoped that her child would do so. The
symbolism of the Presidency has been lost, he argued, and replaced by ''a new
religious fundamentalism and political dogmatism - the kinds of things that I
associate with the bad old Europe, where they always led to intolerance and
violence.''

''Immigrants,'' he told me, ''always worry about fanaticism - the Birchers and
the Moonies, for example - because it's why many of them came here in 1848 or
1948. 'America, love it or leave it' is a parody of what we stand for. This is
what there is to be patriotic about: the ability to criticize and the ability to
contribute, together.''

Fabry seemed to me to have struck the balance just about right, but our views
are not shared by the majority, if the poll taken by The Times just before my
trip is any guide. Asked whether one had to do anything to be patriotic, beyond
loving one's country, 61 percent said ''no.'' Only 17 percent said that peaceful
anti-Government demonstrations were unpatriotic - an encouraging sign - but only
49 percent thought that working in a political campaign had anything to do with
patriotism, and 4 out of 10 said that criticizing the President hurts the
country - not very encouraging at all, at least for me. Two other results
astonished me: A quarter of all respondents, in a country founded on a belief in
separating church and state, said it was necessary to believe in God to be
patriotic, and 61 percent, in a nation of immigrants, said it was now too easy
for new immigrants to

 page 92



 enter the United States. That first poll was completed in June, and the
intervening months, what with Lebanon, Grenada and the breakdown of the missile
talks in Geneva, have been full of portentous foreign-policy developments. But a
second poll late last month suggests that the broad views of the American public
haven't changed much. In June, 52 percent of the respondents described
themselves as ''very patriotic,'' and in November, 53 percent of them did so.
American optimism, according to the poll and to my own observations, remains
strong; 62 percent of those interviewed said things would get better; 78 percent
agreed, with varying degrees of enthusiasm, that ''the American way of life is
superior to that of any other country''; and 60 percent still believe, with
Horatio Alger, that someone can start out poor and end up rich in the United
States. But confidence in government, though stronger than in the late 1970's,
has still not been rebuilt. Only half the population thinks that Washington can
be trusted some or all of the time, and more than half thinks the big interests
run things in the capital. Many people seem to agree with the man in Ohio who
told me, ''There is no good news from Washington, not what you see on television
and certainly not what comes from there in an envelope.''


But if some Americans distrust Washington, many foreigners find it
incomprehensible. For Europeans, one of the hardest things to understand about
American politics is the absurdly overblown, overexpensive, overlong process of
choosing a President, and the kind of results it produces. European prime
ministers are automatically professionals, seasoned professionals who have risen
through the parliamentary ranks, and they are surrounded by equally experienced
cabinet members with

power bases of their own. How, I am asked, can you run a government with
well-meaning amateurs? And why should you spend hundreds of millions of dollars,
in campaigns lasting two years, disrupting the normal processes of government,
when we can hold general elections in four weeks at minimal costs? I found far
more sympathy with that view among American politicians than I would have
thought possible when I left the United States. They, too, now complained of
wretched excess, and suggested that it had a lot to do with continuing public
cynicism.

The subject came up on my first night in the United States. I watched a bit of
television - a nice little ceremony for new Americans at Monticello, a
reassuring speech by Representative Jim Wright, a Texas Democrat, who told
Fourth of July revelers that ''this economic difficulty isn't permanent, and
we'll get out of it'' - and then a drive through Dallas on a sultry evening,
cicadas chirping on the lawns of the mock Taras of the newly,

exuberantly rich, and a superb dinner of barbecue and tamale pie. My host was
Robert S. Strauss, the expansive former chairman of the Democratic National
Committee, a self-made millionaire and an optimist if ever there was one. We
chatted for a few minutes about patriotism, and he voiced the opinion that the
country had not yet recovered from the psychic wounds of the Iranian episode.
''The country wants some set of ideas, some common goals to unite on, but the
leadership isn't there,'' he said.  When I remarked that none of the
Presidential candidates of the moment excited me very much, his wife, Helen,
objected: ''But nobody in this country expects to be excited by politicians
anymore.'' Strauss agreed, to my surprise, and said the whole primary system was
to blame. He called it ''degrading.'' It is difficult, he said, for anyone to
take seriously a government that requires grown men and women to put up with
such a system.

A week or so later, in Chicago, I had lunch with Newton Minow, who headed the
Federal Communications Commission under John F. Kennedy and is now one of the
Middle West's leading lawyers. He went further in



 Pages 93 94 96





 his complaints than Strauss had. The problem, he said, was that the old
political bosses of his youth - Carmine DeSapio of New York, Jacob Arvey of
Chicago, David Lawrence of Pittsburgh - had been replaced as kingmakers by
''self-appointed pressure groups, a bunch of kids with WATS lines.'' The
old-timers were wiser, he told me, because they paid closer attention to the
concerns of average people; the results of the primary reforms of the late
1960's were a perfect demonstration of ''the law of unintended consequences.''
At the time we talked, the Democratic hopefuls were outbidding one another in
promises to women's groups that they

could never hope to keep, and that people knew they wouldn't keep. The result of
what he called ''a barbaric, tawdry, excessively expensive system,'' he argued,
was a widespread belief, especially among young people, that ''the political
system is not the place to look for redress of grievances or solutions to
problems.''

It was also in Chicago that I realized how tense race relations had become in
some Northern cities. In the South, where I had been briefly put in jail two
decades ago for talking with black civil-rights leaders, things seemed to me to
have improved beyond all recognition. People in New Orleans complained about the
Mayor, but not a single

white person even suggested to me that they disliked him because he was black,
and I was staggered in Dallas to see black men holding hands with white girls on
the street without attracting anyone's attention but mine. I would never have
believed it possible 20 years ago, as I watched George C. Wallace's police and
dogs attack Martin Luther King Jr.'s peaceful demonstrators in Alabama, nor
would I have thought it possible that in 1983 half of Atlanta's police force
would be black. But in Chicago, people I regard as liberals, as well as more
conservative working-class ethnics, groused about the mayoral victory of Harold
Washington. ''The blacks,'' they all

said, were taking over; ''the blacks'' would make a mess of things; ''the
blacks'' were mostly welfare cheats and criminals.

Well, the blacks don't think much of the way the country is being run by the
whites. A highly successful black businessman in a Northern city, whom I have
known since the 1950's, told me that he felt ''less wanted by white society than
ever before.'' Our survey showed even more vividly that blacks see one America
and whites another. Only 17 percent of the blacks think the country is on the
right track; only 38 percent expect to be better off in five years than they are
now; only 31 percent (as against 56 percent of whites) think of themselves as
very patriotic, and fewer than a third trust the Government. I looked up some
statistics when I got to London, which made me wonder why any black man feels
patriotic. How can we live with the fact that half of black 17-year-olds are
illiterate, that black unemployment is twice white unemployment, that blacks
still earn little

more than half as much, on average, as whites do? If patriotism involves pride,
as surely it does, a good deal of mine crumbles when I see numbers like that
(and a little bit more goes, I feel constrained to say, when Strauss, a man
known and respected by Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher and Helmut Schmidt,
tells me that he still can't join the country club near his house because he is
Jewish).

It must be harder to be out of work in the United States than in most developed
countries, not only because the welfare net is less secure than in Britain or
Germany or France, but also because the material abundance is so much greater
and so much more visible. I was terribly impressed, on a visit to a K Mart in
Akron, my hometown, by something that every other customer must have taken for
granted: the lavish variety of goods offered at low prices. A working man in
Leeds or even Essen would have shared my wonder, because he must do with less.
And Europeans would also be startled, as I was, to hear ordinary people
discussing their money-market funds and their investments; again, in the rest of
the world, those are things quite beyond the reach of the civil servant or the
secretary or the factory worker. Technically, Americans may no longer have the
highest standard of living in the world, but the average American still seems to
me to be able to afford more, even in recession, than his counterpart anywhere
else.


Whether Americans have as good a life is another matter. Much of what I saw of
contemporary American life depressed and disturbed me. Perhaps things have got
worse in the last seven years, perhaps not; it may be that my values have been
changed by Europe or simply by getting older. Whatever the explanation, I can
only report candidly that the violence, the abrasiveness, the philistinism and
the materialism that I saw all around me made me feel, on occasion, like a
stranger in my own country. It is not a very comfortable feeling. I don't expect
my country to be perfect; I certainly don't expect it to be the biggest and the
best at everything. But I do want to feel proud of its basic impulses - the way
I felt this fall in reading, in Lord Bullock's new biography of Ernest Bevin,
about the origins and consequences of Marshall Plan aid to postwar Europe. What
kind of patriotism can the bulk of the American people feel, I keep wondering,
when they seem willing to accept the glorification of violence and the savaging
of the landscape?

The cities of America seem inured to violence - to rape and murder, to the
physical abuse of children and the beating of spouses - on a scale unimaginable
in Vienna or Paris or Stockholm (or, for that matter, in Moscow or Prague).
People seem to accept it as inevitable and develop a kind of stockade mentality
to deal with it. In Britain, the popular papers carried screaming headlines for
weeks about the sexual molestation of a little boy in Brighton, an incident that
would pass almost unnoticed in Chicago or Miami. My wife, having moved to London
from Washington less than a year ago, can still not believe that women can walk
alone at midnight in almost every neighborhood in London. I could not believe my
eyes in Beverly Hills, one of the richest communities in the world, when I saw
placards on almost every front lawn warning would-be intruders to expect an
''armed guard response,'' when I saw an adverisement in a glossy magazine in my
room for a ''24-karat gold designer gun'' at $10,000 each. In New Orleans, I
learned that Al Hirt, the trumpeter, has closed his nightclub because of the
violence in the French Quarter; ''when you hear a firecracker, you better
believe me, it's a gunshot,'' he said, ''and when you see someone clutching his
stomach, you know it's a stab wound.''

Are there really 2.5 million

PAGE 140 shine, the good life and the fast buck. But I seriously doubt that we
agree, as a nation, with President Reagan's astonishing declaration that his
greatest hope ''is that this country remains a country where someone can always
get rich.''

It is ever so much more complicated than that. It may well be that American
vigor and vulgarity are inseparable, as they seem to have been for other
aggressive societies in the past - the Romans, for example, and the Victorian
English. Perhaps if a society worries too much about refinement, it loses its
drive and its will to excel. In modern-day Britain a person's accent and
Oxbridge connections and tailoring and social graces often count for everything,
and the capacity to accomplish something counts for little. The result is a
semistagnant society. Ours is less civil, less appealing in many ways, but far
more thrusting and creative. Its greatest asset is the self- made man or woman,
the canny and hard-working if not very cultivated leader. Throughout our
history, we have benefited from regular transfusions of fresh blood, with
ambitious people entering and reinvigorating the ranks of politics, management
and the professions. It is happening again, with Americans of Oriental origin,
with the astonishing young entrepreneurs of Silicon Valley, and with women,
whose role has changed out of all recognition in a single decade. (The
breakthroughs at the top, like Martha Layne Collins's election as Governor of
Kentucky, draw the most attention, but I was more gripped by the sight of female
forest rangers, female bulldozer operators and female partners in hundreds of
law firms all over the country.)

In the Fourth of July speech that no one will ever ask me to make, I would talk
about my own kind of patriotism, what makes me proud to be an American - above
all the freedom to write and say and do what we please, so long as we do not
infringe on another's freedom - but also what makes me ashamed. I would welcome
the signs of continuing renewal but argue that they are no longer enough. We
must find ways to use our energy and our intelligence and our resourcefulness in
our own country and the world. I would urge us to be less Manichaean, more
inclined to see the multiplicity of forces at work in places like Central
America and the

Middle East; too often our picture of the world has all the verisimilitude of a
child's stick figure. Thumbing our noses at our ''enemies,'' engaging in what
Lord Carrington recently called ''megaphone diplomacy,'' counting our money,
caring little for beauty and serenity in our daily lives - that might do for a
young frontier society but not for a country celebrating the 200th anniversary
of its acceptance, through the Treaty of Paris, into the world family of
nations.

In his powerful graduation address at Harvard this year, the Mexican diplomat
and man of letters Carlos Fuentes appealed to the United States to listen to the
distinctive voice of other, weaker nations, even when they are critical voices.
''We know,'' he said, ''that in public life as in personal life, nothing is more
destructive of the self

than being surrounded by sycophants.'' That is why, it seems to me, the higher
patriotism has always consisted in constructive criticism in the search for ways
to improve if not to perfect what we love. That presupposes a maturity that is
won only through hard struggle, not through a self-congratulatory sense of
supremacy. Let no one destroy us, I would say at the end of my speech, including
ourselves, through overconcentration on power at the expense of less tangible,
more fragile but perhaps even more important assets.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of miniature statue of liberty surrounded with U.S. flags; photo
of man with child; photo of Grigori Shvahbein, Brooklyn, cabbie, (p.44); photo
of demonstration last month in Washington (p.44); photo of view along the
highwayfrom the Dubuque (p.46); photo of police officers at Atlanta station
house (p.90); photo of library in Westbury, L.I. (p.91)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 11, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EL SALVADOR

BYLINE: By Lydia Chavez

SECTION: Section 6; Page 53, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4441 words


Lydia Chavez reports for The Times from Central America.



 T IS ''BECAUSE OF THE SITUATION,'' SAYS MY Salvadoran friend, that she no
longer attends mass in the Metropolitan Cathedral of San Salvador. The former
Archbishop was shot dead by a right-wing gunman while saying mass in a nearby
church three years ago, and 31 mourners were killed in the cathedral when firing
broke out at his funeral. Now the new Archbishop, Arturo Rivera y Damas, has
received a death threat from the same political quarter, and my friend is afraid
that some morning, when the congregation is bowed in prayer, shots will ring out
again.

''Por la situacion . . . .'' That is the euphemism heard on all sides in El
Salvador today. It is the explanation of why the National University campus is
closed and its professors hold classes elsewhere; why a young man who used to
study medicine works as a clerk; why people invited to dinner leave early; why
dining rooms in former resort hotels are empty and the pools are filled with
weeds.

Twenty months after the country's peasants and city dwellers, in a mass turnout,
elected a Constituent Assembly in the first relatively fair election in more
than 50 years, the expectations that had been held of that exercise of popular
choice remain largely unfulfilled. The United States, in pushing for the
election, had hoped that it would lead to the formation of a more democratic
leadership, which would be able to rally the people behind it and undercut the
political bases of the leftist insurgency. And the Christian Democrats, the
party favored in Washington, did win the largest number of votes. But the
far-right parties remain strong enough to disrupt the democratic process by
blocking progressive legislation. The right-wing death squads, drawn from the
ranks of the army and the Government's special security forces, keep doing their
grisly work. The guerrilla rebellion keeps spreading. The civil war goes on.

Even American officials who hope to defeat the revolution with their programs of
military and economic assistance to the Salvadoran Army and Government are no
longer sure what it would take to bring about a more democratic order. They
recognize that the issues in El Salvador are not amenable to a quick fix, as in
Grenada. Nor do the recent conciliatory moves on the part of the Sandinista
Government in Nicaragua promise any quick relief for the military problems in El
Salvador, since the flow of Nicaraguan aid to the Salvadoran rebels during the
past year has been limited mostly to medical supplies, radio communications
equipment and some ammunition.

Once again, the instinct of the Americans in the Embassy and the military
advisory group is to turn to the ballot box. They are looking to follow-up
Presidential elections in El Salvador early next year, hoping that a popularly
elected President will have a stronger mandate to govern more effectively. Yet
the mood among most Salvadorans is one of deepening weariness and fatalism - of
adjusting to la situacion. And their ways of adjusting depend on where they live
and what class they belong to.

For there are, today, three separate struggles going on in El Salvador - in the
cities, in the guerrilla-free western provinces, and in the embattled east - and
each of those struggles takes a different form, eliciting a different reaction
from the populace.



 VISITOR TO SAN SALVADOR IS STRUCK by the capital's utter calm. Driving in from
the airport, he will see city people dressed in Adidas running gear jogging past
peasant women balancing jugs of water on top of their heads. Farmers, hoes swung
over their shoulders, head toward fields of corn and tangled bean vines. In the
capital, in middle-class neighborhoods, bicycles are stacked up in the
courtyards, teen-agers stroll with Sony Walkmans, and Toyota sedans stand in the
driveways. The high stone walls protecting the homes of the rich are clothed in
bougainvillea.

Without warning, the day can turn bad. An innocuous hotel parking lot will
become a body dump for right-wing death squads. A pine-shaded driveway at a
university will be the scene of a coldly executed murder. A bucolic riverbank
will become the mass grave of murdered campesinos.

The briefest stay in the capital is enough to make one aware of the general
mood. The streets are alive only during the day, and even then people tend to
move only between their homes and their places of work - the rich in bulletproof
cars with one-way windows, the poor by bus or on foot. Neighbors do not
socialize much, and when they do, politics is not discussed; an incautious
remark could taint someone as a leftist.

Among middle-class Salvadorans who can afford maids, an increasing number choose
to do their own housework. Maids talk, and they could be working for the left or
for the right. Last October, eight professors at the National University
disappeared and are presumed dead. More recently, three professors at the
University of Central America left the country in a hurry after their names
appeared on a death list left on the bodies of four Salvadorans executed by a
right-wing death squad.

Right-wing terrorism, which subsided somewhat after the 1982 elections, has
resurged. Anyone suspected of sympathies for the revolution is a potential
target. Official rank is no protection; among those who disappeared recently is
Amilcar Martinez, the third-highest official in the Foreign Ministry, who was
taken by armed civilians when he walked out of his home. In spite of protests by
human-rights and church groups, and occasionally by the American Embassy and
visiting American officials, the death squads work unimpeded. According to the
Legal Oversight Office of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of San Salvador, 3,672
Salvadoran civilians were killed by rightist terrorists during the first nine
months of this year. The number of civilian noncombatants killed by the
guerrillas during the same period, according to the same report, was 62.

The Salvadorans used to be known as a gregarious people: They are a quiet and
enigmatic people today. I remember going to San Salvador's central market one
day and seeing a group of young men, women and children dancing to American
music blasting out of loudspeakers that someone had rigged up. I wondered why I
was so taken by the scene, since, in Latin America, people have a way of
enjoying themselves in public all the time. It hit me that in eight months of
traveling about the country, this was one of the very few times I had seen
Salvadorans enjoying themselves.

A Salvadoran friend gave a bitter laugh when I told him about this; what I saw,
he said, was El Salvador as it used to be. The streets, the cafes and the parks,
he said, had always been filled with people. True, he said, the military regimes
of the 1970's had been repressive, but with the military coup of 1979 against
the Government of President Carlos Humberto Romero, repression took on a new
meaning. ''It is one thing for the death squads to go after several hundred
peasants in a decade; it is another thing to kill more than 12,000 people in one
year, as happened in 1981,'' a Salvadoran political analyst commented. After
that, no one felt safe.

Among the city's poor, and among those who are better off and constitute the
Salvadoran middle class, the general attitude seems to be that these evils are
the inevitable result of civil war, and of a governing system that has never
done much to defend their lives and interests. At the same time, few urban
residents seem to have been won over to the idea of armed rebellion; most of
them would like to see some peaceful settlement. These attitudes seem to be
shared by most of the country's intellectuals.

Increasingly, however, hope that anything good can lie ahead is wearing thin.
When I arrived in El Salvador last January, I met a middle-class Salvadoran
businessman who represents what the Reagan Administration would call the
Salvadoran center. While aware of the Government's weaknesses, he believed it
could change for the better, a belief nourished by his close ties to the highest
ministers and his entree to the home of the previous American Ambassador, Deane
R. Hinton, who left last June.

Last month, I talked to him again. Several days previously, he had received a
death threat because his views on land redistribution were regarded by the
rightists as too liberal. It was a sad evening. As he talked, he became more and
more upset. He had, he said, realized for the first time how bad things were in
El Salvador. Perhaps, he confessed, his optimism about the future had been
unwarranted. ''This is not a country,'' he said disgustedly, ''it is a
situation.''

The rich cope, as only the rich can. They import their clothes, furniture, video
cassettes and cars from the United States; they make is mentioned, it is almost
always blamed on ''international Communism'' - the Soviet Union's determination
to establish another Marxist government in Latin America - and on the
''international press.''

The condemnation of the press is typified by an allegation made to me by Hugo
Barrera Guerrero, the No. 2 man in the far-right National Republican Alliance,
known popularly by its acronym, Arena. Arena's leader, Roberto d'Aubuisson, has
been accused by some Western diplomats, including Robert E. White, the American
Ambassador to El Salvador under President Carter, of having been involved in
some of the worst terrorist acts in the past; he is now a leading contender for
the Presidency. Mr. Barrera's charge was that The New York Times and The
Washington Post were part of a Communist conspiracy to ruin Mr. d'Aubuisson's
reputation. Another example cited by Mr. Barrera of the ''misinformation
campaign of the international press'' went as follows: The guerrillas set up a
mortar outside a village; a Salvadoran Air Force plane buzzes the town; at that
precise moment, the mortar fires a shell, and ''the international press writes
how the air force has bombed the town. Even the people inside the town believe
it is the air force.''


To travel from the city to the countryside, where most of El Salvador's five
million people live, is to leave the discursive ambivalence of the city worker
and the middle- class professional - and the sheltered certainties of the rich -
for a world where the struggle is fought out in more elemental forms. In the
east, the war is between the Salvadoran Army and the Communist-led guerrillas.
The western provinces lie outside the radius of guerrilla activity; the struggle
here is of the traditional, sociological kind.

Peasant attitudes in western El Salvador cannot be understood without a little
history. Here, in the coffee plantations of the western uplands, the peasants -
who are more heavily Indian in ethnic origin than in the east - organized
themselves in 1932 and demanded higher wages from their patrons. The landowners
responded by having government troops massacre more than 10,000 peasants in
little more than a week.

The massacre has had a lasting effect. The Indians of the west withdrew en masse
from participation in national life into a secret life of their own. They ceased
to develop their culture as part of the country's heritage. They no longer wear
traditional Indian dress; there are none of the rich Indian rituals that you
see, say, in Guatemala. Nahuatl, one of the Indian languages, is only spoken out
of earshot of strangers. Intimidated and withdrawn, the peasants in the west
support the more conservative parties in the national elections, as the
landowners want them to. What they ask mainly is to be left alone. The left has
few if any strongholds here, and even the Christian Democrats have trouble
organizing support.

Yet, because the region is free of civil war, the struggle over land may be seen
here in its clearest form. When the leaders of the 1979 coup instituted an
American-backed land-distribution program, it was in the western region that the
peasants responded most vigorously and the landowning class put up the most
stubborn resistance.

On a national scale, the land-reform record is mixed. Some 20 percent of the
tillable land has been distributed to campesinos who had never had land before.
Yet more than half of these transfers are being contested by the former owners
on technical grounds. Some 10 percent of the newly landed peasants have been
evicted forcibly from their plots, and the evictions are still going on.
According to a recent study by the United States Agency for International
Development, many of these evictions have taken place in the western region. And
the struggle does not stop at that. According to the church's Legal Oversight
Office, more people disappear in the western provinces than in any other part of
the country. In most cases, church officials say, the victims are murdered by
the far right.

It is one of the ironies of El Salvador that the west, while not participating
in the civil war, has given the armed insurgency its historical hero. The
western peasant protest of 1932 was organized by a young man named Augustin
Farabundo Marti. He was arrested and executed just before the massacre of his
followers. The coalition of Communist and non-Communist groups that rose in
rebellion in the eastern provinces in the late 1970's has styled itself the
Augustin Farabundo Marti Front. Conversely, one of the more active right-wing
death squads, the Gen. Maximiliano Hernandez Martinez Anti-Communist Brigade, is
named for the officer who quashed the western peasant uprising.


The east has a poorer look than the richly planted west: The four years of
fighting have seen to that. Even in the rainy season, from May to September, the
east can look ragged and sparse. Many of the cotton fields that, in normal
times, would be dotted with white this time of the year are overgrown with
weeds.

In the east, the typical Salvadoran town - a central plaza enclosed by a church,
the mayor's office and rows of small stores - has been deformed by the war. The
plazas in these towns used to be centers of rural commerce. Migrant cotton
pickers would come through to buy provisions. Women would set up food stalls,
patting moist dough into tortillas. The stores would be well stocked; money
would change hands; people would crowd the drugstores for brand-name medicines.



 2nd jump






Today, the plazas are lifeless. In more than 100 towns with names like San
Augustin, San Lorenzo, Osicala, Tecoluca, mayors' offices have been destroyed or
riddled with bullets; priests have fled; churches are empty. Much of the
medicine in the drugstores bears dates that have expired. Many of the stores are
boarded up. The plazas are empty, except for a few people sitting on benches,
playing cards, or waiting for the fortnightly visit of the International Red
Cross. The trucks drive into town to give vaccinations and drop off sacks of
corn meal, rice and beans. The campesinos used to grow these staple foods
themselves. Now, they are afraid to till fields more than two miles from the
town's edge.

Many peasants in outlying villages have migrated to the towns to escape the
fighting; many townspeople have fled to the capital. About 250,000 refugees have
registered with the Government for food rations. Many of them have moved in with
relatives, but more than 30,000 live in refugee camps.

There are no jobs in these towns. In less than four years, the unemployment rate
has risen to 40 percent from 25 percent. Whatever the town, it is hard to find
more than a score of local residents with jobs, and they are usually employed on
road projects funded by the American aid program. The men can be seen hunched
over shovels, repairing cobblestone roads destroyed by hand grenades or mortars.

The peasant in the eastern provinces sees ''the situation'' in the simplest
terms. His view of the Government and the guerrillas is affected by what they
have done to benefit him and what they are doing to disrupt his life. Judged on
that basis, neither side scores high in the peasant's estimation. As a farmer in
the Santa Clara region told me cautiously, he would not join the guerrillas and
did not think they were ''solving the problem the right way,'' but, on the other
hand, he did not think that all the right lay with the Government, either:
''Both sides have some good and bad.''

Neither the 25,000-man Salvadoran Army nor the 7,000- strong guerrilla force
seems capable of providing peasants in areas under its control with adequate
protection against the opposing side. Many eastern towns have changed hands
several dozen times in the last three years, and, each time, more peasants die.
As for the Government's special security forces, numbering about 10,000, they
are associated in the peasant mind less with protection than with the midnight
knock at the door and the arrest of a suspected ''subversive,'' who will be seen
no more.

The Government has the greatest difficulty maintaining even the most basic
services, such as a judicial system, a transportation network and schools. The
insurgents, for their part, have never been able to hold a town long enough to
demonstrate what kind of services they would offer. The peasants must reckon on
dangers on all sides.

When they take a bus from one town to another, chances are that the bus will be
stopped either by the guerrillas or the army, and everyone will be ordered out.
If it's the guerrillas, some of the passengers will be robbed. If it's the army,
the peasants will be lined up against the bus, hands raised, and frisked for
weapons, and will have their identification cards examined. Woe to any who
arouse suspicion.

Caught in the middle, the Salvadoran peasant cultivates the skills of getting
along. He turns the same face to both antagonists. The campesinos of the eastern
countryside seem to welcome the army, when their village is retaken by
Government troops, as easily as they welcome and live under the guerrillas. The
guerrillas spent more than five months in the town of La Palma. Except for their
neck scarves and the American M-16 automatic rifles captured from Government
troops, they were indistinquishable from the population when I visited the town
several times last June. The Sunday after the army retook La Palma in July, I
drove back to see the changes. There were none.

People who had told me they were happy with the guerrillas' presence told me
they were happy to have the army back. Everything went on as before. I finally
asked the wife of a schoolteacher why everyone was so contented if just a couple
of weeks earlier people had been expressing support for the insurgency. She
looked down at the cement floor; in the silence, her child could be heard
playing in the dirt courtyard. ''We are afraid,'' she said, ''and we have to
live here.''


One feeling is shared by most Salvadorans, urban or rural, rich or poor: If
there is any hope of an early improvement in ''the situation,'' it rests on
decisions that can be made only by the United States. Those who favor a peaceful
settlement are convinced that neither their Government nor the insurgent leaders
are capable of opening meaningful negotiations, and that the political
conditions for such talks can be created only in Washington. Of course, many
Salvadorans believe that, if the United States got out altogether, the
revolution would soon triumph. But hardly anyone expects the North American
giant to turn its back on the struggle after having gone in this far.

Many Salvadorans are in such awe of the United States that they are convinced
their Government would negotiate with the rebels tomorrow if Washington wanted
it that way, that the death-squad killing would stop if Washington ordered it to
stop. A Salvadoran political analyst who could be considered left of center told
me he believed there were many army officers who ''want to make changes,'' to
end the terror and attack the country's economic and social injustices, ''but
they have to have the backing of the United States to do anything.'' An
administrator at the University of Central America expressed the same
conviction: ''We will not have a dialogue in El Salvador until the United States
decides it wants a dialogue. That would change attitudes here overnight.''

In the same way, those of a different political persuasion - Salvadorans who
hope to defeat the insurgency by rallying popular support behind the Government
- believe that the key to victory lies in decisions in Washington to maintain
and expand its programs of military and economic aid.



 3rd jump






All American civilian and military representatives who have spent any time in El
Salvador are very conscious of the hopes placed on them, and their efforts to
respond have taken the form of three broad programs. The Salvadoran reaction to
these programs has, thus far, been inconclusive.

The first program - sociological in nature and initiated in the last year of the
Carter Administration - is the plan to turn a significant proportion of the
campesinos into landholders, thus giving them a real stake in the present social
order.

The promise of land reform has been taken seriously by many of the country's
peasants, particularly in the western provinces. But the momentum of the program
has been slowing down. The landlords have mounted a counteroffensive in the
Constituent Assembly. Recently, leaders in the American- backed peasant union
have been threatened by the right wing, and several of their followers have been
murdered.

The second American-sponsored program, announced at the beginning of the year,
depends for its success on both military and economic achievements. It is the
National Plan for El Salvador - ''to win the hearts and minds of the people,''
as some of its American supporters, who administered a similar program in
Vietnam, describe its ultimate purpose.

Launched in earnest last June, the plan concentrated initially on the important
central province of San Vicente, which the guerrillas had begun to infiltrate
from their main bases to the east. The idea was for the Salvadoran Army to clear
the province of guerrilla camps, and for the Government and the American
economic aid program to follow up with massive redevelopment projects.

It looked, for a while, as though the army would do its share of the job. The
guerrillas, receiving advance word of the military sweep, withdrew from the
province, and the army troops that moved into the area remained on guard. Today,
however, the plan is floundering. The redevelopment projects that were to give
the rural population a sense of a new day coming have been slow to materialize,
mainly because of bureaucratic complications in San Salvador. About half of the
army force has been withdrawn, and the guerrillas have returned. Two towns in
San Vicente have been under attack. In one of them, a symbolic project to
reconstruct the mayor's office has been aborted by guerrilla gunfire, and the
building stands demolished once again.

Some houses are being reroofed, some roads are being rebuilt, some schools have
reopened. But it is clear, from talking to people around the province, that the
National Plan for El Salvador has made little difference in their lives. In each
of my trips to the region, I have talked to Maria, a woman with five children
who lives in San Lorenzo, a town in the northern part of the province. On my
last visit, a few weeks ago, she told me she was still afraid because she could
hear gunshots at night. ''It is the same here,'' she said. ''It will always be
the same here.''

The third American-sponsored program is political in nature: An attempt to give
the Salvadoran people in the Government-controlled areas - about 75 percent of
the country's territory - a chance to exercise a free vote and elect a
leadership more responsive to the country's economic and social needs. The
leftist insurgents have had the option of participating in the electoral process
if they laid down their arms, but few observers expect the rebels to accept that
offer. The guerrillas fear, with good reason, that their representatives would
be killed during the political campaign. The insurgent leadership insists on
power-sharing at the top as a preliminary to any future election.

Despite the boycott by the armed opposition - despite the guerrillas' efforts to
frighten voters in the Government areas into staying away from the polls - the
election of March 1982 took place in an atmosphere of some hope and excitement:
Somehow, many Salvadorans thought, this demonstration of popular sentiment could
help break the impasse and bring peace nearer.

Little of this hope remains. The Constituent Assembly, elected in 1982 to draft
a Constitution and set a date for the Presidential election, has scheduled the
balloting for March 25, 1984. But the chain of events since the previous
election has left most Salvadorans disillusioned with the electoral method of
reform.

Suppose, they say, victory goes once again to the Christian Democratic leader,
Jose Napoleon Duarte, who served as President in 1981-82. Will the Salvadoran
Army, with its powerful right-wing connections, let him take office? And what if
the winner is Roberto d'Aubuisson, the leader of the far-right Arena party?
Would the death-squad activity and other cruelties of the past four years be
likely to abate under his Presidency? And how would the United States react to
the political embarrassment - a figure of Mr. d'Aubuisson's notoriety as the
culmination of three years of American efforts to promote a Salvadoran
democratic center? What would it mean for America's continued participation in
the Salvadoran tragedy?

Even in the American Embassy, these questions are asked. And not all the answers
are optimistic. ''The Salvadoran Army officers I talked to,'' said one American
military adviser, ''have said that Duarte may get elected, but he will never be
President.''

Most Salvadorans look to the 1984 elections with apathy or gloom. Peasants whom
I, and others, have questioned about it express disinterest. ''When have
elections made a difference in El Salvador?'' a woman, a domestic, said to me. A
Salvadoran Government minister expressed a strikingly similar view. ''What does
it matter if we hold the elections tomorrow, in three months, next year, or
ever?'' he said. ''The candidates will be the same, and no matter who wins, the
war will go on. Maybe less, maybe more, but it will go on.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of private security guard manning gates of a house; photo of
inscription on the coffin of a youth killed,(p.55); photo of governmental
soldiersunder fire in countryside (p.54); photo of confessions heard in a church
(p.56); photo of women going about their chores (p.56); photo of civilians in
San Lorenzo fleeing (p.58); photo of Roberto d'Aubuisson, leader of far-right
party (p.74); photo of auto mechanic in San Salvador being arrested (p. 74);
photo of celebration of last night of guerrilla training (p.76); photo of
soldiers retreating in Chalatenango Province (p.76); map of El Salvador; photo
of farm workers lining up for their pay (p. 82); photo of victims of right-wing
death squad to be buried (p.82)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 11, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 40, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1363 words


FICTION 116

PET SEMATARY, by Stephen King. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The new family in town
discovers the horrors that lie in a neighboring cemetery.  2215

POLAND, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) Seven centuries of history
in fictional form.  3325

THE NAME OF THE ROSE, by Umberto Eco. (Helen & Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $15.95.) Unraveling the mystery of a murder in a 14th-century
Italian monastery.  41015

WHO KILLED THE ROBINS FAMILY?, created by Bill Adler and written by Thomas
Chastain. (Morrow, $9.95.) The publisher offers a $10,000 prize to the reader
who submits the best answer.  556

THE SAGA OF BABY DIVINE, by Bette Midler. (Crown, $11.95.) The entertainer
imagines what her infancy was like in a fable lushly illustrated by Todd Schorr.
6414

CHANGES, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) The crises that arise when a
television anchorwoman and a glamorous physician fall in love.  784

THE WICKED DAY, by Mary Stewart. (Morrow, $16.95.) King Arthur, fulfillng a
prophecy made by Merlin, falls into an incestuous relationship.

864

THE ROBOTS OF DAWN, by Isaac Asimov. (Doubleday, $15.95.) A human detective from
Earth investigates the murder of a robot on the planet Aurora.  91227

RETURN OF THE JEDI, adapted by Joan D. Vinge. (Random House, $6.95.) Illustrated
storybook based on the latest ''Star Wars'' film.  10114

MORETA: DRAGONLADY OF PERN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $14.95.) A
battle against ecological disaster on a faraway planet.  11719

HOLLYWOOD WIVES, by Jackie Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The struggle for
money and power in Tinsel Town.  12912

THE AUERBACH WILL, by Stephen Birmingham. (Little, Brown, $16.95.) Three
generations of a German-Jewish family in New York.  13132

THE NEVERENDING STORY, by Michael Ende. (Doubleday, $15.95.) A lonely boy meets
challenges and finds his true self in a magical land.  141418

AUGUST, by Judith Rossner. (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95.) The five-year
relationship of two women, a teen-age patient and her analyst.  151512

WINTER'S TALE, by Mark Helprin. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $14.95.) Heroic
lives in Manhattan between the late 19th century and the year 2000.  NONFICTION

1112

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession,

by Erma Bombeck. (McGraw-Hill, $12.95.) A

humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training

program ever.

2313

THE BEST OF JAMES HERRIOT.  (St. Martin's

Press, $19.95.) Selections from the writings of the

Yorkshire veterinarian.

3248

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J.

Peters and Robert H. Waterman Jr. (Harper &

Row, $19.95.) Lessons to be learned from well-run

American corporations.

4415

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Morrow,

$17.95.) The rescue of two Americans from an Iranian prison.

5557

MEGATRENDS, by John Naisbitt. (Warner,

$17.50.) Predictions about America in the next decade based on an analysis of
conditions today.

668

VIETNAM: A History, by Stanley Karnow. (Viking, $19.95.) Profusely illustrated
history of the war: tie-in with the current PBS television series.

786

TOUGH TIMES NEVER LAST, BUT TOUGH

PEOPLE DO!  by Robert H. Schuller. (Thomas

Nelson, $12.95.) Inspiration from a Protestant

preacher.

879

THE MARY KAY GUIDE TO BEAUTY.  (Addison-

Wesley, $19.95.) An illustrated guide for women

prepared by the staff of a cosmetics firm.

9910

THE BODY PRINCIPAL, by Victoria Principal.

(Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Exercises for women

by a television personality.  10133

A HERO FOR OUR TIMES, by Ralph G. Martin.

(Macmillan, $19.95.) An anecdotal account of the

Kennedy years.  11153

WHILE REAGAN SLEPT, by Art Buchwald. (Putnam, $14.95.) Seven score wry
observations on the

Washington scene by the syndicated columnist.  1228

CREATING WEALTH, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon

& Schuster, $15.95.) Making money in real estate.  131411

OUTRAGEOUS ACTS AND EVERYDAY REBELLIONS, by Gloria Steinem. (Holt, Rinehart &
Winston, $14.95.) Essays by a leading feminist writer.  141011

THE PETER PAN SYNDROME, by Dan Kiley.

(Dodd, Mead, $15.95.) A psychologist's analysis of

the plight of men who have never grown up.  15114

NO MORE HOT FLASHES AND OTHER GOOD

NEWS, by Penny W. Budoff. (Putnam, $14.95.) A

health-care handbook for women, written by a

Long Island physician.  The listings above are based on computer-processed sales
figures from about 2,000 bookstores in every region of the United States. And
Bear in Mind Other recent books that in the opinion of the Book Review staff are
of particular literary, topical or scholarly interest:

ALAN TURING: The Enigma , by Andrew Hodges. (Simon & Schuster, $22.50.) A vivid
account of the troubled life of the eccentric English mathematician who was in
large part responsible not only for the concept of computers as we know them but
also for breaking the German cipher code during World War II - a feat now widely
recognized as a key element in the Allies' triumph over the Nazi war machine.

THE DEATH OF CHE GUEVARA, by Jay Cantor. (Alfred A. Knopf, $17.95.) A powerful
first novel that mixes fact and fantasy about the Latin-American revolutionary,
seeing him not as a hero or a curiosity or a demon but as a historical riddle.

THE DISCOVERERS, by Daniel J. Boorstin. (Random House, $25.) In his latest book,
the Librarian of Congress takes his longest, widest look at ''man's search to
know his world and himself'' in science through the centuries.

FIASCO, by Jack Anderson with James Boyd. (Times Books, $17.50.) In which the
syndicated columnist and his colleague demolish the idea that worldwide supply
problems were to blame for what happened to the price of oil.

IN THE LAND OF ISRAEL, by Amos Oz. (A Helen and Kurt Wolff Book/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $12.95.) The novelist, turning reporter, traveled throughout his
country last fall, interviewing and listening to people - mostly Jews but some
Arabs - with conflicting views of what sort of place Israel should be.

LA BRAVA, by Elmore Leonard. (Arbor House, $14.95.) Unlike most thrillers, which
hold up for the first 250 pages but don't make much sense in the end, ''La
Brava'' - about a former Secret Service man probing extortion and murder in
Miami Beach - has a conclusion even more satisfying than its exposition.

MEDITATIONS IN GREEN, by Stephen Wright. (Charles Scribner's Sons, $14.95.) A
soldier escapes the pain and horror of the Vietnam War through heroin and 10
years later in a hectic, violent American city becomes addicted again, in a
brilliant, scarifying first novel by a writer who served in Vietnam.

THE MODERN POETIC SEQUENCE: The Genius of Modern Poetry, by M. L.  Rosenthal and
Sally M. Gall. (Oxford University Press, $29.95.) A survey of more than 40 works
by American, British and Irish poets that impressively consolidates a way of
reading the specifically modern in the poetry of the last century and a half.

PARALLEL LIVES: Five Victorian Marriages, by Phyllis Rose. (Alfred A.  Knopf,
$16.95.) The marriages (mostly unhappy) of five famous literary figures - John
Ruskin, Thomas Carlyle, John Stuart Mill, Charles Dickens and George Eliot, the
last free of legality - told so compellingly they spring to life all over again.


RUSSIA: Broken Idols, Solemn Dreams, by David K. Shipler. (Times Books, $17.95.)
An observant account by a Times correspondent of his tour of duty in Moscow
1975-79 that directs our attention to long-term trends in the Soviet system and
society.

SHAME, by Salman Rushdie. (Alfred A. Knopf, $13.95.) Mr. Rushdie, who writes
with enormous gusto, calls his second novel ''a sort of modern fairy tale.'' But
the link between certain bizarre happenings in the fairy tale and events in a
nation that is ''not quite Pakistan'' is inescapable.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 11, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK TALK

BYLINE: By Judith Appelbaum

SECTION: Section 7; Page 43, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 895 words


First Timers

''This is her first book.'' ''This is his first novel.'' ''This is the the
author's first appearance in print.'' Such tag lines often run in publishers'
catalogues. During good times and bad, people keep getting published who never
got published before. Here's a rundown on a few first books in various formats
that major houses are issuing.


* ''Leaving the Land'' by Douglas Unger (Harper & Row). As a student in the Iowa
Writers Workshop at the University of Iowa seven or so years ago, Douglas Unger
met the editor Theodore Solotaroff, who praised his 600-page manuscript but said
it was too long and diffuse. Five years later, Mr. Unger sent Mr. Solotaroff a
new version - three 100-page novellas, two of which became this novel.


* ''Doing Business With the Japanese'' by Mitchell F. Deutsch (NAL Books). When
Arnold Dolin, editor in chief of NAL trade books, heard that Mitchell F.
Deutsch, then marketing director for Sony, was teaching a course on how to
present a new product and was using material from the Sony Walkman campaign, he
suggested that Mr. Deutsch write a book on the subject. Mr. Deutsch said he'd
rather write about dealing with the Japanese and NAL signed him up.


* ''Bloods: An Oral History of the Vietnam War by Black Veterans'' by Wallace
Terry (Random House). Wallace Terry covered Vietnam for Time magazine, taught
journalism at Howard University and is now a columnist for USA Today. He
submitted a different book about Vietnam to Random House and Erroll McDonald, an
editor there, suggested he do this one.


* ''Places in the World a Woman Could Walk'' by Janet Kauffman (Knopf). Janet
Kauffman, who had written a book of poems, lives with her husband and their two
children on a farm in Michigan and didn't begin writing fiction until last year.
''Places in the World a Woman Could Walk'' is a collection of her stories which,
Knopf says, often centers on strong women struggling ''against erosions of the
spirit brought on by the failure of fathers, of husbands, of dreams.''


* ''Ariel: A Book of the Change'' by Steven R. Boyett (Berkley/Ace). A novel
found among the unsolicited manuscripts in the so-called slush pile, ''Ariel''
is a fantasy about a 20-year-old male virgin and his familiar, a lippy unicorn,
in a near-future Earth where technology no longer functions but magic works.


* ''The Eyewitness History of the Vietnam War, 1961-1975'' by George Esper and
the Associated Press (Ballantine). Editors at Ballantine came up with the idea
for this oversized, illustrated paperback and then approached the Associated
Press, which recruited George Esper to do the book. Mr. Esper has worked for A.
P. since 1958; he covered the war in Indochina between 1965 and 1975, until he
was expelled after the fall of South Vietnam.


* ''The Antarctica Cookbook: A Novel'' by Crispin Kitto (St. Martin's). Written
by a California chef, ''The Antarctica Cookbook'' is one of 10 first novels St.
Martin's scheduled for publication this winter. The house is also releasing five
first books of nonfiction, including ''Bobby: Breakthrough of a Special Child''
by Rachel Pinney, an autistic boy's therapist, which appears under the St.
Martin's/Marek imprint.


* ''On Rapture's Wing'' by Caroline Bourne (Zebra). A legal secretary who spent
two years in the Marines, the author of this pseudonymous historical romance
lives in Louisiana with her two children. She started writing poetry and short
stories in high school.

* ''Is That All There Is? Overcoming Disappointment'' by David Max Brandt
(S&S/Poseidon). David Max Brandt is a California clinical psychologist who
noticed that living the good life didn't prevent him or his clients from feeling
somehow shortchanged. In the proposal he sent to the publisher, he pointed out
that his book would have little competition in the marketplace since a computer
search for material about disappointment turned up only four references.

* ''The Other Side'' by Diana Henstell (Bantam). A psychological suspense story
about a woman who survives a fire but saves only one of her three children,
''The Other Side'' is the work of NAL's onetime editor in chief Diana Levine,
who submitted it under her maiden name. ''She wanted an honest assessment,''
Bantam's editor in chief, Linda Grey, says. ''I had no idea the book was by
anyone I knew.''

* ''That's Incurable! The Doctors' Guide to Common Complaints, Rare Diseases,
and the Meaning of Life'' by George Thomas, M. D., and Lee Schreiner, M. D.,
with illustrations by Jack Ziegler (Penguin). Using aliases, two Boston
physicians offer tongue-in-cheek advice about the dangers of waterskiing, sex,
and kissing animals on the lips, among other things. Their agent thought the
manual they had in mind might appeal to Amanda Vaill, a Viking editor, since she
had previously bought Delia Ephron's humor books, and so it did. Viking Penguin
eventually decided to produce the book in soft-cover.

* ''Starrigger'' by John DeChancie (Berkley/ Ace). Because it arrived with a
copy of a rejection letter from an editor at another house who thought Ace might
want it, ''Starrigger'' attracted the attention of Melissa Ann Singer, an
associate editor, who liked it immediately. A science fiction adventure story,
this first work of fiction has now spawned a trilogy.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 11, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MIKE USE THIS

SECTION: Section LATESTSection SY6Section 004649Section 11-15; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 772 words


1 DECADE AFTER UNITED States troops left Vietnam and the Watergate hearings
gripped the public, Americans are starting to show more trust in their
Government and to voice greater support for the freedoms it promises, polling by
The New York Times shows. (See selections from the poll on page 89.)

The national mood is characterized by a selective sense of patriotism that
praises the Bill of Rights more than economic strength, feels individuals should
support wars they consider wrong, and prefers, by a margin of 2 to 1, risking
national destruction to tolerating Russian domination.

Acceptance of these ideas is not uniform. Blacks value the symbols of patriotism
far less than whites do, for example, with 89 percent of whites and only 56
percent of blacks saying it is patriotic to sing the national anthem. Almost
twice as many blacks as whites could not recall anything patriotic they had
done. But as many blacks as whites think of political campaign work or jury duty
as patriotic acts, and more blacks than whites think the Government can never be
justified in suppressing a newspaper. Women honor some symbols more than men do,
with more women than men considering it harmful to the nation to criticize a
President. But far more women than men think campaign work is patriotic.

The most important differences between the sexes and the races, the polling
showed, are that women and blacks are gloomier about the state of the nation
today and less hopeful for its future than are men and whites. Fewer blacks and
women believe the Horatio Alger myth, and more think the nation has seen its
best days.

The Times initially polled on patriotism in June. But some public moods last and
others wane before the data leave the computer. Economic recovery, Beirut,
Grenada, or even 100 million Americans watching ''The Day After'' could have
changed the mood, so some key questions were asked again in November.

Nothing critical changed much; the feelings tapped in June were strong, not
flimsy. In June, for example, 47 percent said the country was going in the
''right direction,'' while 44 percent said it was on ''the wrong track.'' In
November it was 47 to 43.

There were two interesting changes, however. In November, 45 percent of
Americans answered yes when asked ''Do you think that when Americans criticize
the President - any American President - it hurts the country?'' while in June
only 39 percent said so. This shift, despite the emphasis on ''any American
President,'' appeared to result from a rise in President Reagan's popularity at
a time of controversy over foreign affairs.

The other was a decrease from 51 to 44 percent in the percent who said ''you can
trust the Government in Washington to do what is right'' either always or most
of the time. Still, 44 percent was much more than the 25 percent recorded by the
Center for Political Studies at the University of Michigan in 1980, after a
decline that began in 1964.

While 62 percent of the public said that what made them proudest about this
country was one or more of its freedoms, the theory of America was one thing and
its government in practice was another. When asked what they liked least, 16
percent mentioned government and 13 percent cited America's role in the world.

Several speculative choices were put about how major changes could affect
someone's pride in America. Repealing the Bill of Rights mattered far more than
Government taking over industry. Again, the step from theory to practice was
slippery. By 52 to 34 percent, the public rejected ever ''suppressing newspapers
that advocate overthrowing the Government.'' But by 50 to 43 percent, it opposed
letting extremist groups hold nonviolent protests. Still, when CBS News asked
the question in 1970, an overwhelming 76 percent opposed such protests.

Different population groups differ in what matters to them. The higher people's
income and education, it seemed, the more conditional the allegiance. The Bill
of Rights mattered more to their pride in country; so did keeping industry in
private hands. They were more likely than the poor and uneducated to say they
would leave the country if they could double their income.

But there was only a modest difference between rich and poor on an ultimate
question: ''Would you be willing to risk the destruction of the United States
rather than be dominated by the Russians, or not?'' Women, however, were less
ready to take that risk. The answers were not very different among watchers of
''The Day After,'' and for the nation they were constant: 55 to 29 in June and
55 to 28 in November.  - ADAM CLYMER

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 12, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

TEST CASES CHOSEN IN HERBICIDE TRIAL

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section B; Page 28, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 986 words


Five Vietnam veterans, three of whom are dead, have been chosen as test cases in
the multibillion-dollar lawsuit against the manufacturers of the wartime
herbicide Agent Orange.

Asked why the dead men had been included, a plaintiff's lawyer said: ''Because a
lot are dead. They deserve representation also.''

The first test cases in a group that will include up to 10 such cases were
submitted last week to Chief Judge Jack B. Weinstein of the Federal District
Court for the Eastern District of New York. Sitting in Brooklyn, he is hearing
the lawsuit that consolidates the claims of at least 15,000 Vietnam War veterans
and family members in the United States, Australia and New Zealand.

Companies Cite Law's Protection

The veterans say the companies knew there was dioxin, an unwanted, carcinogenic
byproduct of chemical manufacturing, in the herbicide sold to the Government in
the Vietnam War and that they suffered damaging health effects from it. Agent
Orange was the Army's code name for the herbicide, a mixture of the
plant-killers 2,4,5-T and 2,4-D, used to destroy crops and vegetation deemed
helpful to Vietcong guerrillas.  The seven companies say that there is no proof
their products caused injuries and that, as Government contractors, they are
protected under the law preventing soldiers from suing the Government. The
defendants are the Dow Chemical Company, the Monsanto Company, the Diamond
Shamrock Corporation, Uniroyal Inc., the T. H. Agriculture and Nutrition
Company, the Thompson Chemical Corporation and Hercules Inc. A jury trial is to
start May 7.

A test-case veteran, George W. Ewalt, 36 years old, a telephone company employee
in Philadelphia, said in an interview: ''I was surprised they contacted me. They
just said they had been reviewing cases and mine had been selected. It's just
great that the issue is finally being brought up in the legal system.''

Mr. Ewalt said he had developed numerous growths and suffered nerve damage since
he was an Army infantryman in Vietnam in 1967-68.

He said he had spent time in areas sprayed with herbicides and later developed
cysts and boils on his arms. He said he had been evacuated to a base camp for
treatment and rejoined his unit in two weeks.

Daughter Afflicted, He Says

Several years later, he said, his hands and feet felt numb. About 1975, he said,
a malignant growth was removed from his right temple and a nonmalignant growth
was removed from an arm. Later, he said, about eight other growths were removed
from his throat, legs and back.

In 1981, he said, he spent 30 days in a Veterans Administration hospital to have
a damaged nerve removed from his right leg. He still suffers from growths, he
said, adding, ''When they get to a certain size I get them looked at.'' Mr.
Ewalt said his 12-year-old daughter suffered from asthma and skin rashes and
''nobody knows why.''

The other living test-case veteran is Danny L. Ford, 35, of Temperance, Mich.,
who served with the Army near Pleiku in 1968-69 and is said to be suffering from
a rare form of cancer, a soft-tissue sarcoma. .

The dead veterans were:

Orville E. Blackmon of East Point, Ga., who died June 18, 1982, at the age of
35. His death was attributed to soft- tissue sarcoma in the lung. He served with
the Marines near Danang in 1966- 67.

Thomas B. Champion of Atlanta, whose death April 12, 1983, at the age of 40, was
attributed to cancer of the small intestine. He served with the Army at Danang
and Cam Ranh Bay in 1965 and 1966.

Brian Quinn of Arlington Heights, Ill., who died April 7, 1981, at the age of
35. His death was attributed to a soft- tissue sarcoma in the prostate gland. He
served with the Marines at Danang in 1966-67.

How Cases Would Be Tried

Judge Weinstein decided that certain cases would be used to test the suit's
complex issues shortly after he took over the five-year-old action in October
from Judge George C. Pratt of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second
Circuit.

The test cases would be tried individually to determine whether a jury could be
convinced that Agent Orange caused the problems. If so, the remaining cases
could be settled without further trials.

If a jury cannot be convinced that the manufacturers were culpable, all claims
can be thrown out. But a jury could rule against an individual plaintiff but
uphold other claims against the companies.

The lawsuit was brought on behalf of all veterans of United States, Australian
or New Zealand forces who served in Vietnam from 1961 to 1973 and who say they,
their spouses, parents, or children born before Jan. 1, 1984, suffered injuries
directly or derivatively from exposure to the herbicide.

 Effects of Damage Ruling

A compensatory damage ruling would ordinarily apply to all veterans except those
who tell the court before April 15 that they they do not wish to join the
action. Under a recommendation now before Judge Weinstein, all veterans who win
compensatory damages would share in any punitive damages awarded as well. c

Sol Schreiber, a lawyer appointed by the court as a special master to help sort
out pretrial issues, has said the companies together control $9 billion to $16
billion in assets and insurance coverage, more than enough, he said, to satisfy
any judgments.

The case poses some of the most difficult questions ever raised in a product
liability action, according to legal experts. Under normal liability law, anyone
claiming injury from a product bears the burden of proving that that product
caused the injury. But in the case of Agent Orange, the products of different
companies were mixed in unmarked drums, so there is no way of proving that any
veteran's injury was caused by one company.

Judge Weinstein is considering applying various ''burden-shifting'' principles
that would compel the companies to prove their product did not cause any injury.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Judge Jack Weinstein

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 12, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM VETERANS OF AMERICA GROWS IN SIZE AND LOBBYING POWER

SECTION: Section B; Page 28, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 862 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 11


It was not so long ago that the Vietnam Veterans of America was looking for
members, money and recognition. But all that has changed.

Today Vietnam Veterans of America has a surging membership, a stable budget and
legislative power. It recently held its first national convention here to elect
a board of directors and vote on issues.

The reasons for the changes in the organization are many, but, according to
Robert O. Muller, its founder and president, recent events and the passage of
time since the war have made most Americans more willing to accept Vietnam
veterans.

''The public is finally ready to acknowledge the Vietnam veteran and the Vietnam
experience, and the veterans are finally ready to join together as a catalyst,''
said Mr. Muller, a former Marine lieutenant disabled in the war. ''We have
become the vehicle to make a movement.''

The convention, attended by more than 200 members, marked a turning point for
the organization, accordng to Mr. Muller.

''I did not think we could do it,'' Mr. Muller said in an interview. ''We were
never sufficiently organized to hold a convention, but we did it and got the go-
ahead by our members to tackle some difficult issues.''

They Voted 86 Resolutions

The members, who came from around the country, approved 86 resolutions on issues
such as Agent Orange, a chemical defoliant used in the war; Amerasian children
born of American fathers; soldiers listed as missing in action, and foreign
policy questions.

The organization's staff is working on plans to address these topics.

They hope to reunite Amerasian children with families in America by traveling to
Vietnam with voluntary adoption agencies and speeding the paperwork there. An
alternative would also involve travel to Vietnam and the establishment of
reception centers where children could get medical examinations and complete the
forms necessary so they could leave.

Mr. Muller views the ''missing-in-action question'' as the organization's
''biggest hurdle.''

Speaking of Washington and Hanoi, he said, ''We were responsible for bringing
the two Governments together. and we expect to play a critical role as a
facilitator in the discussions to insure the talks continue on an aggressive
basis.''

Mr. Muller and other officials went to Hanoi in 1981 to discuss an accounting of
American soldiers listed as missing in action.

It Wants a Regional Search

The group would now like to see a region-by-region search in Vietnam and a panel
of scientists and forensic experts to work with the Vietnamese on this.

''We want these experts to work cooperatively with the Vietnamese to avoid the
political questions and to give us confidence that what can be done has been
done,'' Mr. Muller said.

Mr. Muller regards the other, larger veterans' organizations as the
''traditionals,'' more concerned about all veterans, not just the Vietnam
veteran.

The American Legion, the largest veterans' group in America, says it is working
on specific programs for the quarter of its members who are Vietnam veterans,
including a study of men who say they were exposed to Agent Orange.

''We are working on a variety of programs on a continuing basis,'' said a
spokesman for the American Legion. ''But we do not have specific ideas to return
Amerasian children to the United States nor on the prisoner of war or missing in
action issue.''

The Veterans of Foreign Wars, the second-largest organization, says it supports
programs intended for Vietnam veterans but, according to T. H. Marlow, a
spokesman, ''We have no specific programs for them.''

It Began as 9-Member Group

Vietnam Veterans of America is the largest nationwide organization solely for
Vietnam veterans. It began as a nine-member lobbying group, operating on a
shoestring. Today, dues from its nearly 17,000 members, grants from corporations
and foundations and money from the Combined Federal Campaign, a Federal employee
deduction program, enable the group to have a $1 million budget this year.

The organization has increased its role on Capitol Hill, working for veterans'
benefits in education and employment. It has also sought compensation for
veterans who suffer from a range of illnesses they attribute to Agent Orange.

''We were the prime movers on Agent Orange,'' Mr. Muller said, ''and even though
it still has a long way to go, we will continue to lobby long and hard.''



Varied Lobbying Efforts

The House Veterans Affairs Committee voted a compensation bill that is expected
to be taken up by the full House in the next Congressional session.

The organization counts among its achievements the establishing of federally
supported storefront counseling centers around the country where veterans can
get psychological, educational or vocational aid.

The group also lobbied for the Vietnam Emergency Employment Act, which
authorizes money for job training for unemployed veterans of the Vietnam era.

''Vietnam has been something that makes powerful people in this country
nervous,'' Mr. Muller said. ''But now the public and the veterans are ready to
take on a leadership role, and it will have a profound effect.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 12, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MONDALE REVISES FOREIGN STRATEGY

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section B; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1028 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 11


Aides to former Vice President Walter F. Mondale who had expected the Reagan
Administration's economic policies to dominate the 1984 Presidential campaign
are now convinced that foreign policy is emerging as a key, perhaps central,
issue.

Although such themes as the budget deficit and the impact of the
Administration's tax and social welfare policies have highlighted Mr. Mondale's
campaign in recent months, aides said events in the Middle East and the issues
of arms control and nuclear war were now pivotal in the campaign for the
Democratic Presidential nomination.

With the start of the 1984 Presidential primary season in January, Mr. Mondale
has decided he will make his first speech of the new year on the Reagan
Administration's foreign and defense policies. The address, sponsored by the
National Press Club, is to be delivered in Washington Jan. 3.

''We believe foreign policy is going to be extremely important in this campaign,
perhaps even more important than is normal for a Presidential election.'' said
one senior campaign aide to Mr. Mondale.

Another senior Mondale aide said, ''The conventional wisdom is that campaigns
are about domestic policy and the foreign policy is aberrational. That's just
not true now.''

Aides said that certainly one reason for the Mondale campaign's focus on foreign
policy is the economic expansion that has continued at a brisk pace, making
President Reagan much less vulnerable on that issue. Last week the Labor
Department announced the unemployment rate had dropped to 8.2 percent in
November, the lowest level since January 1982.

Looking for Vulnerability

According to one adviser to Mr. Mondale, there is some agreement within the
campaign organization that Mr. Reagan may be most vulnerable on foreign policy
grounds. ''I'm not sure Reagan will be able to convince people that nothing
happened on his watch,'' said the adviser and close friend of Mr. Mondale. ''On
foreign policy, Reagan can't duck his responsibility.''

James A. Johnson, Mr. Mondale's acting campaign chairman, said it was too early
to predict whether a single foreign or military issue, such as United States
policy in Lebanon or the threat of nuclear war, would emerge as a dominant
factor in the campaign if the candidate wins the Democratic nomination. Mr.
Mondale's aides attribute President Carter's defeat in 1980 to the Iranian
hostage crisis, although they concede that economic issues, as well as Mr.
Carter's ''personal qualities,'' played a role

Mr. Johnson asserted that ''nine of the last 11 Presidential elections have been
decided on foreign policy.'' He added, ''It's going to be very important.''

He said the two exceptions were 1956 when President Eisenhower defeated Adlai E.
Stevenson on domestic issues and 1976 when Jimmy Carter defeated President Ford
in the aftermath of the Watergate scandal.

Mr. Mondale himself has been criticized in recent months for his very cautious
response to the United States' invasion of Grenada and to events in Beirut.
Aides indicated he was somewhat more ''comfortable'' in attacking the Reagan
Administration's domestic budget cutbacks and policies; on Friday, he said it
was ''disgraceful'' that Edwin Meese 3d, the counselor to the President, had
told interviewers the day before that he had not seen ''authoritative'' evidence
that there were hungry children in America and that some allegations of hunger
are ''purely political.''

Mondale's Low-Key Approach

Mr. Johnson and other aides said Mr. Mondale's low-key response to Grenada and
Beirut was partly the result of the candidate's concern that he did not have
''all the facts and all the intelligence data'' available to issue a strong
criticism of Mr. Reagan's policies.

''If we lose some political points now, so be it,'' said one aide. ''We don't
want to make a statement now that comes back to haunt us later on.''

Mondale aides made it plain that, according to current strategy, foreign policy
remained part of a triangle of issues around which the campaign would evolve.

''Right now, as Mondale sees it, there are three fundamental tests of the Reagan
Presidency,'' Mr. Johnson said. ''The first is whether you've made it a safer
world. The second is whether America has a more productive economy. The third is
whether you've brought about a more just society.''

Although Mondale aides had earlier expected the impact of the $200 billion
budget deficit and the Administration's social welfare cutbacks to dominate the
campaign, the bleak, almost daily news from Beirut and even the ABC television
film ''The Day After,'' about a nuclear disaster, have focused the campaign for
the moment on noneconomic issues.

Mr. Mondale himself was surprised that, on his recent trip to New Hampshire and
Massachusetts, middle-class and blue collar voters repeatedly told him their
major concern was nuclear war, not the state of the economy.

'The War and Peace Issue'

Michael D. McCurry, the campaign press secretary for Senator John Glenn of Ohio,
a rival for the Democratic nomination, said that ''to a surprising degree, when
we're out on the stump, foreign policy issues tend to pop up at local events.''
He added, ''It's very clear that the war and peace issue is striking home.''

Mr. Mondale, who met last week with foreign policy advisers and aides on Beirut,
issued only a modestly critical statement about current policy. He said the
Reagan Administration ''has no plan except the status quo which is
unacceptable.''

One of Mr. Mondale's foreign policy advisers at the meeting, Harry C. McPherson,
Jr., a Washington lawyer and a special counsel to President Johnson, said in a
telephone interview that a delicate problem for any Presidential candidate was
attacking an incumbent on foreign policy..

''The keyboard that you can play is limited to some extent by the importance of
not being perceived as captious and harmful to the President in a particular
foreign policy matter,'' said Mr. McPherson. ''If it becomes disasterous, if it
becomes prolonged, like Vietnam or the Iranian hostages, it's O.K. to attack and
say, 'I can do better.'''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 13, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

INDIA'S TRAINING PROGRAMS SEEK TO WIN INFLUENCE

BYLINE: By SANJOY HAZARIKA

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 627 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, Dec. 12


India, despite its own problems of poverty and underdevelopment, is becoming an
important donor of economic and technical assistance to other developing
nations.

Although India's development assistance may not seem large in financial terms
when compared with Western contributions, the programs that India sponsors are
far-reaching, according to aid experts here.

These projects are intended to increase the influence of New Delhi among third
world nations. Prime Minister Indira Gandhi is now chairman of the group of
nations calling themselves the nonaligned movement.

Indian companies are setting up industrial projects and sending economic
consultants and technical experts around the world. Thousands of Asians, Middle
Easterners and Africans are receiving specialized training at a wide range of
Indian educational institutions at a fraction of what it would cost them in the
West.

Rival China for Influence

Despite its own balance of payments problem, India provided more than $1.4
billion worth of loans, credits and development assistance to other nations last
year. This assistance is smaller than that of China, which is viewed by Indian
experts and diplomats here as New Delhi's main rival for influence in the third
world.

M. S. Chaddha, an Indian aid official, said that India is stepping up training
programs for more than 1,500 technicians, administrators, trade and agriculture
officials from underdeveloped nations who attend its institutions every year.
Most of these trainees are middle-level Government employees.

An Asian diplomat said that many third world nations prefer to send their people
here for a number of reasons.

First, he said, Indian institutions are cheaper than Western ones, and the
expertise available is of high quality. He also said India is better equipped to
understand difficulties of underdevelopment because of its own experience with
poverty. Also, India portrays itself as a neutral nation, able to offer training
without political affiliation.

Only $8 Million on Training

India also has an abundance of qualified scientists, technicians and engineers
and it runs several sophisticated scientific and technical programs, including a
space project, nuclear power plants, mass communications and film institutes.

Yet, the Indian Government spends only about $8 million a year on its training
programs for foreigners. Although the budget is small, the number of trainees is
large because housing, food and other expenses are relatively cheap in India.
Trainees are given monthly allowances of about $200 under a Government
fellowship program.

In addition to consultants who are sent officially by New Delhi, there are
thousands of other Indians working in the third world who have been recruited
independently by governments and private companies. Some are working on railroad
projects, construction sites and textile factories. Others are doctors and
engineers.

Spartan Accomodations

Visitors from other third world nations attending some of the training courses
speak highly of the teaching, although some are critical of their spartan
accommodations and meager allowances. University and technical training in India
put most of their resources into equipment, and so accommodations are well below
the standards of Western or Soviet universities.

Jehan Mahmoud Abdo, a 35-year-old Jordanian, said he found his course in
international trade useful ''because it covers a lot of ground in a short
time.'' Mr. Abdo is doing postgraduate work at the Indian Institute of Foreign
Trade.

Nguyen Nguyet Kieu, a Vietnamese customs official attending the same course,
said that her training here had opened up ''a whole new subject for us in
Vietnam.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 15, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BATTLESHIP'S GUNS SHELL SYRIAN SITES IN LEBANESE WAR

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 972 words

DATELINE: BEIRUT, Lebanon, Dec. 14


The battleship New Jersey opened fire for the first time against targets in
Lebanon today, hurling 1,900-pound shells at Syrian antiaircraft positions in
the mountains east of here.

Maj. Dennis Brooks, a Marine spokesman, said the 57,335-ton New Jersey and two
other warships began firing at 3:37 P.M., five minutes after a pair of Navy F-14
reconnaissance planes were fired on from Syrian-controlled territory.

(In Washington, Pentagon officials said the tour of the New Jersey off Lebanon
would be extended until spring, when she is to be relieved by the Iowa, a sister
ship. Page A18.

(In Kuwait, American diplomats said that, after the bombing of the United States
Embassy, its six Marine guards had been instructed to shoot to incapacitate any
intruders. Page A19.)

On Station Since September

The New Jersey has been cruising off Lebanon since September. Her guns went into
action today for the first time since the Vietnam War.

Western diplomats said that, by having her join in the fighting, the United
States deepened its commitment in Lebanon, at least symbolically. The use of the
heavy guns raised new fears of increased violence.

The Damascus radio said in a commentary: ''Syria will respond to force by force
and will not be intimidated by warplanes or gun shellings and is capable of
inficting harm on the aggressors more than they expect.''

Meanwhile, the police in Tripoli said Israeli gunboats had shelled Palestinian
positions there for the third time in two days and there were reports of
fighting in the eastern and southern suburbs of Beirut.

A spokesman for Yasir Arafat, the beleaguered Palestinian leader, said the
operators of the Greek ships that have said they will evacuate his forces from
Tripoli were still insisting on guarantees of safety. The spokesman said an
Italian ship was expected in Tripoli within 24 hours to evacuate 97 wounded
Arafat men.

In another development, Israeli troops moved into the mountains southeast of
Beirut to help evacuate 2,000 Christian soldiers and some of the 10,000
Christian civilians who have been besieged by Druse in Deir al Kamar for three
months. The Druse, who have had been under pressure from the United States and
others, said they were easing the siege as a humanitarian gesture before
Christmas.

In the naval bombardment by the American warships, the New Jersey fired 11
shells and the other ships, the guided-missile destroyer Tattnall and the
guided-missile cruiser Ticonderoga fired 60 shells from their five-inch guns,
according to Major Brooks, the Marine spokesman. There was no report of damage.

Shortly after the American warships began firing, the Beirut radio said the
shells had landed near three mountain towns 16 to 18 miles east of Beirut.

Same Area Was Shelled Tuesday

On Tuesday, the Ticonderoga and the Tattnall shelled Syrian gun positions in
roughly the same area and the United States said the New Jersey was standing by,
ready to fire.

The shelling on Tuesday was the first since Dec. 4, when two Navy planes were
shot down. One American flier was killed and another was taken prisoner by the
Syrians.

Some Lebanese analysts said it appeared that the United States had decided to
employ the New Jersey as a means of responding to the Syrians without risking
further losses of planes and fliers.

The Damascus radio, in its commentary, said: ''If the Americans hope to score a
victory through the naval force after the failure of the air force, they will
discover that the Syrian position cannot be changed.''

A few hours after the naval attack, Donald Rumsfeld, the special American envoy,
arrived in Damascus for talks. There was no immediate word on his reception
there.

President Amin Gemayel of Lebanon was in London today meeting with Prime
Minister Margaret Thatcher, who said she would continue to support his efforts
for reconciliation of the warring factions in Lebanon.

In Tripoli, the police said that the Israeli gunboats began shelling the
Palestinians at 7:30 P.M. and that Arafat loyalists and Palestinian rebels
appeared to have returned the fire.

The Israeli gunboats first attacked on Dec. 9 in what was taken as retaliation
for a bombing of a Jerusalem bus.

Little damage has resulted from any of the Israeli raids and they are being
regarded more as harassment than as a concerted effort to inflict losses. They
have, however, had the effect of adding to the complications of arranging the
evacuation of Mr. Arafat and his men.

Arafat Expects Italian Ship

The Arafat forces have been in retreat almost since the beginning of a rebel
offensive that began Nov. 3. But many still consider Mr, Arafat the
Palestinians' most effective leader.

His spokesman, Abdul Rahman, said today that the wounded soldiers to be
evacuated by an Italian ship ''cannot wait anymore'' while negotiations for the
withdrawal of the warring Palestinian factions from Tripoli drag on.

In Rome, an Italian news agency said the ferry Appia would take the soldiers to
Cyprus under the direction of the International Committee of the Red Cross. An
earlier attempt to evacuate casualties was abandoned because the Syrians
insisted on having the names of the wounded men. The Palestinians refused,
saying that this might endanger the men and their families in the future. In
response, the Syrians refused to let the soldiers leave.

Mr. Rahman, asked when Mr. Arafat and his forces would leave, said:

''I don't know. All preparations for our departure are ready. We are awaiting
the Greek ships. And yesterday I was informed that they are still waiting for
guarantees.''

The Syrian-backed rebels have said that, if Mr. Arafat has not left by next
Wednesday, they will begin shelling Tripoli once again. Both factions have
generally been observing a cease-fire since Nov. 25.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Lebanon; photos of American battleships off Lebanon

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 15, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. LENGTHENS BATTLESHIP'S STAY IN MEDITERRANEAN UNTIL THE SPRING

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 745 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 14


The Navy has extended the Mediterranean tour of the battleship New Jersey, which
fired 16-inch guns at Syrian missile launchers in Lebanon today, until she is
relieved by the battleship Iowa next spring, Defense Department officials said
today.

To do that, the officials said, the Navy plans to recommission the Iowa, being
refitted now at the Ingalls shipyard in Mississippi, on April 30, which would be
60 days ahead of schedule. The Iowa would then take several weeks to reach
Lebanon.

In the action today, officials said, the New Jersey had her 16-inch guns trained
on the Russian-made antiaircraft missile launchers over which Navy
reconnaissance planes flew and fired 11 high explosive shells immediately after
the planes reported they had been attacked.

Instantaneous Response

One officer called it an ''instantaneous reponse.''

The high explosive shells can carve out craters 50 yards across and 20 feet
deep, according to a Navy publication. Officials said the New Jersey did not
fire armor-piercing shells, which weigh 2,700 pounds each and are used to attack
fortified targets.

The New Jersey's fire control system has been modernized several times since the
first analog computers were installed during World War II. The latest, according
to the Navy, is the Mark 48 shore bombardment model, which has a digital
computer.

The computer is fed information on the ship's position and the map coordinates
of the target, then continuously records all motions of the ship to keep the
guns constantly trained on the target. Officers here said they presumed each of
the 11 rounds was fired separately since the targets were relatively small
missile launchers in the open.

No Damage Assessment

A spokesman for the Pentagon said that no battle damage assessment had been
prepared for public release yet. When Navy bombers attacked similar Syrian sites
on Dec. 3, a battle damage report was issued shortly afterward.

Military officers suggested that the plan to speed up work on the Iowa
illustrated that United States naval forces were stretched thin around the
world. The New Jersey, which rejoined the fleet a year ago, has been at sea
since June.

The battleship, pulled out of mothballs at a cost of $326 million, sailed first
to the Western Pacific, but was ordered to cut that cruise short to take part in
a show of force off the west coast of Central America in late August.

The ship then went through the Panama Canal and headed toward Lebanon. The
57,335-ton vessel joined other warships in the eastern Mediterranean in
September. Most American warships are at sea for six months, then in port to
rest the crew and repair the ship.

The Iowa, the second of four battleships that are to be reactivated in the
Reagan Administration's program to build the Navy up to 600 ships, will require
a shift in Navy funds, longer hours for shipyard workers, and faster assignment
of 1,500 officers and sailors to the crew, officials said.

They also said that the Deputy Secretary of Defense, Paul Thayer, had written to
the chairman of the House Appropriations Subcommittee on Defense, Representative
Joseph P. Addabbo, Democrat of New York, to ask Congress to approve the shift in
funds.

The firing of the New Jersey's 16- inch guns today was the first in combat since
the war in Vietnam. In World War II, the battleship fired 771 rounds from those
guns and another 6,671 rounds during the Korean War and in training, according
to the Navy. In the war in Vietnam, the battleship fired 5,688 rounds from its
main battery.

The Navy said that no manufacturing plants for making the 16-inch projectiles or
charges have been in operation since the Korean War, but that 15,500 high
explosive and 3,200 armor piercing rounds are stockpiled in ammunition depots.

The decision to use the 16-inch guns, Pentagon officials said, was made by the
naval task force commander in the Mediterranean, Rear Adm. Jerry O. Tuttle.
Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger said yesterday that the commander had
no limitations on weapons he could employ for his mission.

After the initial attack on Syrian missile sites in which two Navy bombers were
shot down, one aviator killed and another captured by the Syrians, the Navy was
criticized for not having used the New Jersey to protect Americans from hostile
fire.

Mr. Weinberger and senior naval officers said the decision was ''appropriate''
for the commander on the scene to make.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 15, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THURSDAY, DECEMBER 15, 1983 International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 871 words


The battleship New Jersey fired for the first time against targets in Lebanon,
hurling 1,900-pound shells at Syrian antiaircraft sites in the mountains east of
Beirut. The battleship has been cruising offshore since September, but had not
fired her heavy guns in combat since the Vietnam War. A Marine spokesman said
the New Jersey and two other American warships began firing five minutes after a
pair of Navy reconnaissance planes were fired on from Syrian-controlled
territory. (Page A1, Col. 6.)

An extension of the New Jersey's tour in the Mediterranean was announced by
Pentagon officials. They said the battleship would remain there until she has
been relieved by the battleship Iowa next spring. (A18:3-4.)

The marines will not be withdrawn from Beirut until the Lebanese Government
takes control of its territory or there is ''such a collapse of order'' that no
peaceful resolution of the conflict is possible, President Reagan said at a news
conference. (A1:5.)

Enhanced security measures have been put into effect at the United States
Embassy in Kuwait, according to American officials. They said that the six
marines responsible for internal security had been ordered to ''shoot to
incapacitate'' intruders at the embassy compound. (A19:1.)

A withdrawal from Unesco is being considered by the Reagan Administration,
according to State Department officials and American delegates to the
organization. The action is being weighed because of the Administration's anger
over Unesco's policies and budget. (A1:3-4.)

A crackdown on death squads in El Salvador has been demanded by the United
States, according to Salvadoran political informants. They said that Washington
insists that a number of Salvadoran civilians and military officers involved in
the right- wing terrorism be exiled or expelled. In return, the informants said,
the United States has promised to increase American military aid to El Salvador
substantially. (A1:4.) National

Three present and former judges were among 10 men indicted in Chicago on charges
of corruption as a result of a three-and-a-half year Federal investigation of
the Cook County Circuit Court. The undercover operation was conducted by the
United States Attorney's office and the F.B.I. with the cooperation of local
law-enforcement officials. (A1:1.)

Huge sums of money may have been lost by Federal and state governments for
environmental damages caused by toxic waste, according to Federal officials.
Officials of the Environmental Protection Agency and other agencies said there
may be hundreds of hazardous waste sites where natural resources have been
damaged but where claims against polluters were not filed before last Sunday's
statutory deadline. (A22:1.)

President Reagan, deploring hunger, said his Administration's policy was that
even one American going hungry was ''one too many.'' House Speaker Thomas P.
O'Neill Jr. charged that Mr. Reagan's statement, made in a brief meeting with
White House reporters, ''does not square with'' Administration actions.
(B13:1-2.)

Problems that plagued the Columbia in its final hours of flight last week have
forced engineers to inaugurate the most extensive trouble-shooting operations
since the space shuttles began flying in April 1981. The specialists are not yet
sure how long this will take, what they may find or what impact their findings
could have on future flight schedules. (A1:4-6.)

A drug for heart-attack victims cut their chances of dying by two-thirds in the
first 30 days after the attack, according to researchers at 14 hospitals. They
said the clot-dissolving drug should be squirted into the victims' arteries
routinely by hospitals that can administer it. (A22:2-3.)

The heart of the Milky Way galaxy has been charted with great detail for the
first time by observations with 27 antennas strung out in a large Y pattern on a
barren plain in New Mexico. The resulting images, produced by several
researchers in recent months, reveal three curving streams of gas that some
astronomers believe are falling into a black hole in the very center. (B15:1-2.)
Metropolitan

The Shoreham plant was assailed by a special panel appointed by Governor Cuomo.
After a six-month study, the panel said the owner of the power plant, the Long
Island Lighting Company, made a mistake when it decided to build the nuclear
reactor, was not prepared to supervise its construction and is not ready to run
the nearly completed facility. (A1:2-3.)

Four out of every 10 inmates released from Manhattan jails last month to ease
overcrowding have been arrested on new charges or have missed court
appointments, according to figures released by the District Attorney's office.
Of 214 prisoners freed, the figures showed, 71 failed to appear in court.
(A1:1-2.)

Security is being tightened at the Police Department's headquarters building,
which was the target of a terrorist bombing last New Year's Eve, and at its 73
station houses throughout New York City. One of the new headquarters measures
will be regular police patrols around the 14- story building, at 1 Police Plaza
in downtown Manhattan. (B1:1-2.) Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 15, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

DEMOCRATS' IMBROGLIO: CALL IT RULE-ISHNESS

BYLINE:  ;
Martin Plissner is political director of CBS News.

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 789 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


In past Presidential campaigns, Democrats have warred among themselves over
issues that ordinary people cared about, like busing and Vietnam. Today, they
are embroiled over the burning issue of party rules. The most intractable rule
involves the date on which Iowa should be allowed to hold it caucuses.

For anyone who thinks the big argument is whether John Glenn is a closet
Reaganite or Walter F. Mondale is a tool of special interests, here is what the
real struggle is about: A national party rule that says Iowa cannot hold its
1984 caucuses until Feb. 27. But the Iowa party says that is no good, because
it's the night before the New Hampshire primary. Hold it then, and Iowa's impact
on history might be diluted - a blow to the local politicians. The national
party tells Iowa not to worry - it's fighting the New Hampshire party over its
date, too.

That brawl eventually will be settled, whatever the body count within the party.
But the episode raises a larger question: Is the vice of over- regulation that
besets so many areas of government invading Presidential politics as well?

When Hubert H. Humphrey won the 1968 Democratic nomination after winning none of
the 14 primaries, even the delegates to that year's convention thought something
might need fixing. The reform commission it created fixed a good deal. It got
rid of the unit rule (which permitted state parties to bind delegations to vote
as a unit), secret caucuses and a lot of other obstacles to popular
participation. It fixed other things that were plainly wrong: For example, only
one in six convention delegates had been women.

Since then, however, rule-making has become a Democratic habit. Successive
commissions have created layer upon layer of rules having little to do with the
original goal of a fair and open system. Many were drafted years ago for
purposes only dimly remembered today - often to serve some transitory objective
of a candidate or faction who had the votes on the commission of the moment.

For example, the Carter White House, worried about a challenge in 1980, didn't
want too many people in the act. So it introduced a rule that makes it hard for
any but the two leading candidates to get delegates. Mr. Mondale and Edward M.
Kennedy liked that rule and even tight

ened it for 1984. Now, with Senator Kennedy out of the picture, the rule
benefits Mr. Mondale and Senator Glenn. The Rev. Jesse Jackson, who got into
this game long after the rules were set, claims they work against a minority
candidate like himself.  In Wisconsin, there is deep resentment over still
another rule. The rule says says that voters must be publicly identified as
Democrats to vote in a Democratic primary. Because of the rule, the daddy of the
country's preferential primaries, Wisconsin's, has been tossed on the Democratic
scrap heap.  As for the rule about the timing of primaries and caucuses, over
which so much Democratic blood has been spilled, its advocates embrace it as a
means of ''shortening the delegate selection season.'' But, to the extent that
it does, once again it is a rule whose beneficiaries, if any, are candidates
least in need of a helping hand.  What all these rules have in common is that
they deal with matters once left to the state parties. Further, no compelling
need for national uniformity has ever been shown. What harm would there be in
turning the state parties loose, within the year of the election, to start
picking delegates at the time that suits them best?  What harm would come, for
that matter, if the Democrats eliminated their elaborate ''affirmative action''
regulations for achieving racial and sexual ''goals'' in the makeup of
convention delegations? In today's political climate, with all the Democratic
candidates competing for the organized support of blacks and women, it's safe to
predict that nobody is going to shortchange either group.  And what harm would
come if the Democrats of each state were to decide for themselves who should
vote in their primaries? Curiously, while Wisconsin's Democrats are being told
they can't vote in their own state's primary because Republicans might vote in
it, too, in Connecticut Republicans want to change state law so that anybody can
vote in their primary.  Republicans don't seem to have these problems. Year
after year, they manage to pick their Presidential candidates with only a
handful of rules for the states - most of which are waived if a state makes a
fuss. In spite of that, they have generally picked candidates who, after
nomination, have been accepted as the natural choices of the party, and more
often than not have defeated the Democrats chosen under their party's
ever-growing, ever more demanding rules.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              305 of 372 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            December 16, 1983 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

'UNCOMMON VALUE,' WITH GENE HACKMAN

BYLINE: By Janet Maslin

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Weekend Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 641 words


''UNCOMMON VALOR'' is about a Vietnam veteran, Col. Jason Rhodes. whose son has
been missing in action for more than 10 years and who returns to Southeast Asia
in hopes of rescuing the boy. Even though the colonel is played by an actor as
intelligently resourceful as Gene Hackman, and even though the plot sounds as if
it might have some psychological dimension to it, ''Uncommon Valor'' is mostly
an action movie, and not much more.

''Uncommon Valor,'' which opens today at the Embassy Twin and other theaters,
was directed by Ted Kotcheff, who has progressed from ''The Apprenticeship of
Duddy Kravitz'' and ''Fun With Dick and Jane'' to recent works (including
''North Dallas Forty'' and ''First Blood'') in a more he-man vein. If anything,
''Uncommon Valor'' bears more of the stamp of his co-producer, John Milius
(''Dillinger,'' ''Conan the Barbarian''), than it does of Mr. Kotcheff. The
characters are bold and brawny, and their conversation, while emphatically
patriotic and gung-ho, is seldom very memorable, except for its lively
euphemisms. ''What you have is instant rag doll,'' someone says, for instance,
explaining in a training session how to immobilize an enemy with one neat blow
to the brain stem.

''Uncommon Valor'' isn't exactly talky, but it does spend a lot of time in the
plotting, recruiting and training stages, before the actual caper begins.
Colonel Rhodes enlists the financial backing of an oil tycoon (Robert Stack),
who is also the father of a missing soldier. He then rounds up the former Army
buddies of Frank, his own son. We don't know much about Frank, who is seen only
briefly and who is mentioned occasionally, but hardly even described (the film
is so weak on the Rhodes family angle that Frank's mother, played by Gail
Strickland, has a total of about 30 seconds' screen time). However, Frank's pals
represent a convenient cross-section of macho America.

The movie can't wait to get the grinning blond body builder Blaster (Reb Brown),
the black executive Johnson (Harold Sylvester), the gigantic Sailor, played by
Randall (Tex) Cobb, and the unhappy husband Charts (Tim Thomerson) out of their
doldrums and into their ''Dirty Dozen'' machinations. Also in the group is a
sensitive sculptor named Wilkes, played by Fred Ward, who is smaller than his
teammates and so much more interesting an actor that he nearly steals the show.
Together, the group trains at an imitation prisoner-of-war camp stateside,
playfully staging combat maneuvers, like one in which the victim gets a sign
reading ''Wiped-out'' or ''Bye-Bye'' or ''History'' around his neck. After
enough of this, they are presumably ready for a climactic trip to Laos to rescue
the prisoners. The audience is ready by this point, that's for sure.

Action fans may well find ''Uncommon Valor'' enjoyably familiar, but for others
it will smack of war movie dej a-vu, despite the new angle provided by its
concern for American soldiers missing in action in Vietnam. Mr. Hackman and Mr.
Ward, certainly worth watching here, are much more so in their other recent
films, Mr. Hackman in ''Under Fire'' and Mr. Ward in ''The Right Stuff'' and
''Silkwood.''

They're 'Bye-Bye'
UNCOMMON VALOR , directed by Ted Kotcheff; screenplay by Joe Gayton; directors
of photography, Steven Burum and Ric Waite; edited by Mark Melnick; music by
James Horner; produced by John Milius and Buzz Feitshans; released by Paramount
Pictures. At the Guild, 33 West 50th Street; Embassy Twin, Broadway at 72d
Street; 72d Street East, First Avenue at 72d Street. Running time is 105
minutes. This film is rated R.

Jason Rhodes . . . . . Gene Hackman
Harold MacGregor . . . . . Robert Stack
Blaster . . . . . Reb Brown
Sailor . . . . . Randall (Tex) Cobb
Scott . . . . . Patrick Swayze
Wilkes . . . . . Fred Ward
Curtis Johnson . . . . . Harold Sylvester
Charts . . . . . Tim Thomerson

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              306 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S., IN NEW POLICY, MAKES AID ON ARMS A GRANT TO ISRAEL

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1073 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 15


The Reagan Administration has agreed to give Israel $1.4 billion in military aid
in the next fiscal year, none of which has to be repaid, as part of a policy
shift for military assistance worldwide, Administration officials said today.

They said Egypt would receive $1.1 billion in grants.

The officials said the program represents a break from the approach followed in
the last decade of lending money to governments at prevailing market rates to
buy American military equipment. The Administration intends to give the aid free
or at subsidized, highly concessionary rates, officials said, on the ground that
that most military aid recipients are in such precarious financial shape that
they cannot afford to repay loans for the military equipment.

''We now have to decide,'' one State Department official said, ''if a friendly
country deserves our military help, and if it does, we will give them the help
without draining their reserves.''



Dramatic Example

The most dramatic example of the shift is the case of Israel, officials and
Israeli diplomats said. In the current fiscal year, 1984, Israel is scheduled to
receive a total of $1.7 billion in military loans, of which half, or $850
million, does not have to be repaid. Israel already owes the United States more
than $10 billion in military debts alone, an embassy official said.

Now, as the result of talks on improving strategic cooperation between the two
countries, conducted when Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir was here last month, the
Israelis have been told that the Administration will ask Congress to give Israel
an outright grant of $1.4 billion in military aid in the 1985 fiscal year, which
begins next Oct. 1.

The Administration had offered $1.275 billion and the Israelis had requested
$1.7 billion, the equivalent of this fiscal year's scheduled military aid. The
two sides compromised at $1.4 billion, with the White House also saying that it
understands that Israel will need more in the future and that the United States
will make a good-faith effort to meet those needs in subsequent years.



More Attractive for Israelis

Although the $1.4 billion is less than this fiscal year's allotment of $1.7
billion, it is much more attractive for Israel because none of it has to be
repaid.

As part of the arrangement the Israeli Government pledged to the Administration
that it would not lobby in Congress for any increase in the $1.4 billion total.
In recent years, pro-Israeli groups have repeatedly persuaded Congress to
appropriate more aid than requested by the Administration.

The military aid is in addition to economic assistance, which is unchanged by
the policy switch. The Administration, in Israel's case, is prepared to ask
Congress to appropriate $850 million. Israel is asking for $1.2 billion, an
Israeli official said. ''We have agreed to disagree,'' he said. This means that
pro-Israeli groups, primarily the American Israel Public Affairs Committee, are
expected to seek the larger total from Congress.

The increase in military grants for Israel is also going to help Egypt,
officials said. Ever since the 1979 peace treaty between Egypt and Israel, the
United States has tried to keep a rough balance in aid to the two countries,
with Israel's total always slightly larger than Egypt's.

In the current fiscal year, the Egyptians are scheduled to receive $1.3 billion
in military loans, of which $450 million does not have to be repaid. Now, the
Administration is planning to ask Congress to give Egypt a total of $1.1 billion
in military grants for the 1985 fiscal year, in addition to $1 billion in
economic aid.

Officials said that except for Israel and Egypt, they could not discuss the
exact amounts to be given various countries because they are still under
discussion with the governments involved, as well as among the State Department,
the Defense Department and the Office of Management and Budget. The totals will
be announced next month as part of the President's budget message.

Budget Impact

The switch in policy, however, will have a significant impact on the budget. The
Administration will have to reflect the grants and concessionary loans in the
budget. Loans granted at regular market rates, which has been the prevailing
practice, do not appear in the budget itself, officials said.

The concessionary loan rates, officials said, were still under discussion, but
would probably be about 3 or 4 percent. The current rate is 11 1/2 percent for
such loans, they added.

It was not clear whether the increase in the total of military grants would
reduce the amount of money available for economic assistance programs. In recent
years, the foreign aid program has tended toward more direct grants in the
economic field and loans in the military. The Administration seems to be trying
to bring the two programs more closely in line.

In recent years, Israel and Egypt have been the prime recipients of military
aid. The only other countries that have received large amounts aid have been
those with American military bases. Turkey receives the largest share, more than
$900 million this fiscal year.

Other large recipients are Spain, Greece, South Korea, the Philippines and
Thailand. El Salvador has received increasing amounts in the last few years.

The worldwide total of military aid for the current fiscal year is about $9
billion. Of that total, $2.5 billion is in grants, and some $1.3 billion in
forgiven loans.

Commission Sought Switch

The decision to switch the emphasis from loans to grants and concessionary loans
was advocated by the commission headed by Frank C. Carlucci, which recently
reported to Secretary of State George P. Shultz on foreign aid.

The commission pointed out that before the Vietnam War, much of American
military aid was made in the form of grants or concessionary loans. In the
1970's, the commission said, the emphasis shifted to economic aid, with military
assistance coming increasingly in the form of loans, except for aid to Israel
and, later, Egypt.

''There are friendly countries with legitimate security needs that simply cannot
afford to borrow for necessary military equipment and services'' at present
market interest rates, the commission said.

It said that if a country is considered to be in such poor economic shape that
it deserves economic assistance, it should be given military concessions as
well.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              307 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WHEN A DEMOCRACY MAKES A MILITARY CHOICE

SECTION: Section A; Page 34, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 739 words


To the Editor:


Given the amoral, Hobbesian nature of international relations, and the
irrationality and irreformable wickedness of the human species, it is clear that
armed conflict will forever be a part of the human condition. And governments,
democratic and despotic alike, will demand participation of their citizens. The
need to kill - an activity which in any context other than military conflict or
the punishment of criminals is considered not only immoral but criminal - will
continue to present serious moral dilemmas.

However, Donald Kagan's equating of morality with a willingness to participate,
so long as the decision for war is the product of a democratic process
(''Military Service: A Moral Obligation''), is too simplistic an analysis for
this reader.

Granted that a nation has a right to preserve its existence and to defend its
''vital interests,'' Professor Kagan would elevate the ''general will'' of
democratic majorities, expressed through their elected and appointed
representatives, to a moral

ne plus ultra.

 I think he has too much faith in the goodness and wisdom of ''the people'' as
an ultimate moral arbiter.  He distinguishes between legitimate, democratically
elected governments, whose citizens ''accept the decisions that duly elected and
appointed officials arrive at, even if they are wrong,'' and despotic regimes,
which have no moral claim on the obedience of their subjects. The democratic
state is raised to Godhead, above which there is no higher moral authority!
Unstated in his article but implicit, I think, is the notion that democracies
are necessarily benign in their foreign affairs, using military force only as a
defensive measure and in accordance with the classic principles defining a just
war. Would that this were always so! As a student and teacher of history, surely
Professor Kagan knows better.  It was a democratic France and a parliamentary
Britain - not autocratic Bulgaria - that established global empires by force
over men of many colors and tongues. A democratic United States annexed large
areas of Mexico and unsuccessfully attempted the same in Canada. It repeatedly
intervened in sovereign Latin American states on behalf of United Fruit and
ruthlessly suppressed a popular turn-of-the-century movement for independence in
the Philippines. A ''democratic'' Confederacy fought itself to ruin in defense
of chattel slavery.

Would Professor Kagan participate in a modern re-enactment of these sorry
episodes? Would he counsel his students to do so?

The history of Athenian slavery, of American Jim Crow, of colonialism clearly
shows that majorities are capable of great evil. Should the ''general will'' of
such majorities, expressed through their representatives, be respected as a
means for supplying a steady stream of cannon fodder for use in any half-crocked
crusade those leaders decide to engage in, however peripheral or damaging to the
nation's interests? This may be democracy at work, but it is hardly an area for
demonstrating morality.

Professor Kagan further states that ''to enjoy the enormous advantages provided
by a free society while claiming the right to ignore or disobey the laws
selectively is plainly immoral.'' If a democratic society enacted a law calling
for the liquidation of its racial and ethnic minorities, would it be immoral to
disobey? Would Professor Kagan personally deliver a majority- approved nuclear
first strike?

The largest group of ''free riders'' during the Vietnam War were not those who
conspicuously disobeyed the law but those affluent enough to find sanctuary from
combat in college deferments. An inordinate burden fell upon those who enjoyed
the fewest advantages of the free society. That the ''freely elected
representatives'' permitted this speaks volumes as to how they viewed the
morality of their own decision to wage war.

Military activity will sometimes be necessary to protect the state and its
interests. It will sometimes be instituted for sinister reasons, and the people
will be deceived into supporting it. That a majority approves it does not make
it moral, and to knowingly participate in a clearly immoral war is clearly
immoral, no matter who approves it. Hegel notwithstanding, the nation-state is
not the moral ultimate, and the matter needs a good deal more critical thought
than Professor Kagan has given it.

JAMES H. MCHUGH Glendale, N.Y., Dec. 7, 1983

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

POLITICAL STRATEGY;
POLLSTER SEES REPEAT OF 1980 THEMES

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. FARRELL

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 837 words

DATELINE: DETROIT


Although his business is a form of prognostication, Robert M. Teeter prefaces
any political predictions with a smile and a reminder that he has fallen on his
face in the past.

That frank caveat aside, Mr. Teeter, president of Market Opinion Research, an
opinion polling company here that conducts research for President Reagan and
many other Republican candidates, agreed to give his views of the 1984 campaign
and its potential issues and peculiarities.

Mr. Teeter, who is 44 years old and has been doing research for local and
national Republican candidates since the 1960's, said voters were showing an
urge for stability in a time of technological and economic upheaval. That urge
may work well for President Reagan, he suggested, assuming the President seeks
re-election.

A primary reason Mr. Reagan was elected, Mr. Teeter said, was that there was a
kind of national exhaustion from the challenges to American institutions in the
previous 15 years. He said Mr. Reagan benefited from the desire of voters to
return to more traditional values. If that desire carries over into next year's
election, he added, Mr. Reagan could return to the Presidency.



No Sweeping Changes

Such standard issues as the economy and foreign policy will figure prominently
in the 1984 campaign, Mr. Teeter predicted. But a successful campaign based on a
strategy of sweeping change in these areas, he continued, will not be feasible
before 1992. ''There's a real desire for straight common sense, not grandiose
ideas,'' he said.

''We are not ready as a country to debate the social issues and the domestic
agenda,'' he said. ''It takes a while to decide where we want to go as a
society.''

Television and computers have become important tools in the political trade, Mr.
Teeter noted, but he cautioned that the fundamentals of old- time politics were
still vital to politicians. Candidates, he said, must still go to the
rubber-chicken banquets, make the speeches and press the flesh of contributors
and voters.

''You still have to communicate the candidates and the candidates' ideas to the
voters,'' he said, ''and the tactics are how you deliver that message. Obviously
television is the dominant way, so there is a lot of emphasis on how you use
television.''

Mr. Teeter said it was essential for a candidate ''to convey you are something
different from the stereotypical politician.'' In most assessments of a
candidate, he said, there is ''a tremendous desire on the part of voters to know
about the candidate,'' a gossip factor that no good campaign strategist should
ignore. ''People are trying to get any piece of information on what is this bird
really like,'' Mr. Teeter added.



Political Labels Rejected

It is Mr. Teeter's view that terms like ''conservative'' and ''liberal'' have
lost a good deal of their meaning. A major question for him is whether American
society is heading, albeit slowly, toward the formation of some kind of new
ideology.

He said he felt that only one-third of the voters could be labeled ''true
ideologues,'' whether liberal or conservative. Enterprising candidates and
strategists, he suggested, will go all out for the crucial bloc of Americans who
will head for the polls next year resisting labels.

The economy will be the No. 1 issue nationally, he said, although he said he
doubted that it will have the intensity of the Presidential campaign of 1980.

Also, he said, the country is entering what he called ''a unique foreign policy
period.'' In the past, he observed, foreign policy issues generally focused on a
single issue, such as Korea, Vietnam or Iran. Now the complex field of American
foreign policy has become a kind of recycling process, he said, with certain
issues coming up, receding and sometimes resurfacing. He gave as examples El
Salvador, Nicaragua, Lebanon, Israel, Syria and Grenada.

Intricately involved with foreign policy are other issues ''that are not going
to go away,'' he said, citing missile deployment and military spending.



The Race Heats Up

Polling will intensify in the coming months as candidates seek to put themselves
across to the voters, Mr. Teeter said.

Underlying Mr. Teeter's approach to polling and strategy, he said, is a healthy
respect for the voters, who he said ''have a pretty good grasp of reality and
are not going to buy a lot of stuff outside it.'' He said a savvy campaigner
will use the new political tools without forgetting the basic canons of
politics. He noted that many candidates today grew up with television and thus
are good at dealing with a medium that made many of their predecessors look like
windbags or appear nervous and stilted.

''What the candidates choose to talk about is very important,'' Mr. Teeter said,
but it is also important how they convey personal characteristics to an
undecided voter.

The role of the strategist, who can use everything from microchips to
arm-around-the-shoulder persuasion, is ''to get them to know more about your
guy,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Robert M. Teeter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              309 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BROADWAY

BYLINE: By Mel Gussow

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1215 words

DATELINE: TWO years ago, a two


-character play titled ''Open Admissions,'' presented in the Ensemble Studio
Theater's annual marathon of one-acters, arrested audiences with a dynamic
picture of the perils of urban education. On Jan. 29, a full-length version of
that play opens at the Music Box Theater, representing the Broadway debut of its
playwright, Shirley Lauro. After the Ensemble Studio success, an expanded
version was staged at the Long Wharf Theater in New Haven. For the Broadway
production, Mrs. Lauro has rewritten the play and has reunited with her original
collaborators, the actors Marilyn Rockafellow and Calvin Levels (who was also in
the Long Wharf production) and the director Elinor Renfield. She wants to make
it clear that ''Open Admissions,'' which now has two acts and 10 characters, is
a full-length play ''

based on the one-act; it's not an extended version.''

A native of Iowa, Mrs. Lauro studied acting with Alvina Krause at Northwestern
University and then did graduate work at the University of Wisconsin, where
Elizabeth Bowen became her mentor and edited her first novel. As Mrs. Lauro
says, ''I wouldn't be writing if it weren't for her.'' She moved to New York,
and in order to make a living, she taught speech at city colleges. ''Open
Admissions,'' which deals with the conflict between a teacher and a black
student who insists on being taught, derives ''from a very deep personal
experience.''

While pursuing her doctorate at Columbia University, Mrs. Lauro started writing
a second novel, and her instructor, Richard Elman, encouraged her to turn the
work into a play. The result was ''The Contest,'' presented at the Ensemble
Studio Theater in 1976. Explaining her initial hesitation about writing for the
theater, she said, ''I always thought of playwrights as men, so when I started
as a writer I began with fiction.''

Since then, she has written a number of one-acts along with another full-length
play, ''Margaret and Kit,'' which is, she says, ''based on the life of Elizabeth
Bowen,'' and deals with the novelist's relationship with a hopeful American
writer from the Middle West.


Sifting the many offers that came his way after his Tony-winning performance as
Salieri in Peter Shaffer's ''Amadeus,'' Ian McKellen has decided to return to
Broadway in a virtuosic show of his own devising, ''Ian McKellen Acting
Shakespeare.'' The one-man celebration of Shakespeare is now at the Westwood
Playhouse in Los Angeles and is scheduled to open at the Ritz Theater on Jan. 19
for a five-week engagement.

The English actor has performed his show from Lisbon to Jerusalem, at benefits
in New York and on public television. Once, he said, he played it in a dinner
theater, ''weaving in and out of tables while doing Henry V.'' This is, however,
the first time he is acting ''Acting Shakespeare'' for an extended period.
Arthur Cantor, the show's co-producer, is resolved to keep ticket prices low:
$22.50 top for weekends, $20 for other days and all 66 balcony seats at $10.

''Everything I say about Shakespeare is in relation to my own attempt to
understand why he is the greatest writer who ever lived,'' Mr. McKellen said.
''My role is as a working actor rather than as a scholar or critic.'' The theme
is ''theater as a metaphor for life,'' and the first words he speaks are, ''All
the world's a stage.'' This leads him into a series of lightning performances as
Prince Hal and Falstaff, Romeo and Juliet. He also tells amusing backstage tales
and offers eloquent textual analyses. For the New York production, he will make
his Broadway musical debut singing Shakespeare - from ''Love's Labour,'' a
musical he performed at Cambridge University. The song is titled - and he
spelled it out - ''Honorifcabilitudinatibus.'' It will, he said, ''show why I
should not do a musical.''


For her performances in such plays as ''The Effect of Gamma Rays on
Man-in-the-Moon Marigolds'' and ''Twigs,'' Sada Thompson clearly deserved to be
called one of New York's favorite actresses. Then she went to Hollywood to do
the series ''Family.'' Though she toured in plays and acted at regional
theaters, she came back to the New York theater only once, in the short-lived
''Saturday, Sunday and Monday'' in 1974.

Now Miss Thompson has returned home - in Julia Kearsley's ''Wednesday'' at the
Hudson Guild Theater, playing an English widow trying to raise herself out of a
depressing family situation. What drew her to the character was ''the size of
her spirit'' and the fact that she's an indomitable woman ''fighting a losing
battle'' - in common with other Sada Thompson roles. Looking back on her years
on television, she said: ''It was like acting on a riverboat. We would have a
huddle, and then you would fly by the seat of your pants. If I didn't have the
theater to go back to, I don't think I would have enjoyed it as much as I did.''


While Hollywood is raking in intergalactic gold with stellar wars and treks, the
Broadway stage has been earthbound in its voyages to outer space. Two efforts
met with apocalyptical fates - the musical ''Via Galactica'' and ''Warp,'' the
short- running space serial. '' Barry Keating, a composer, lyricist and
playwright, hopes to reclaim the fantasy-fiction genre with ''Starmites,'' an
Off Off Broadway hit several seasons ago and now reconceived as a lavish
Broadway musical. As directed by Tony Tanner, ''Starmites'' is headed for a
spring liftoff.

Camille Saviola (''Nine'') will recreate her original role as a dragon lady who
leads a villainous tribe of Amazons. Her nemesis is a Peter Pannish earthling,
who is adopted by a band of otherworldly punk rockers. A dedicated fan of
fantasy, Mr. Keating in inspired by the works of J. R. R. Tolkien, C. S. Lewis,
Frank Herbert and Walt Disney (''I consider his early movies mythological'').
When the show was first presented at the Ark Theater, it cost about $1,000. For
Broadway, the budget is soaring to $2.2 million. However, Mr.  Keating vows that
the new laser-beamed show will remain true to its mitey origins.


Titles of Broadway musicals have become shorter and snappier - ''Nine,''
'Cats,'' ''Baby'' and ''Peg'' - easy names for marquees and T-shirts. While
''Grind,'' ''Rags,'' and ''Smile'' are warming up, ''Kicks'' is at the starting
gate. ''Kicks,'' subtitled ''The Showgirl Musical,'' is Tom Eyen's first since
''Dreamgirls,'' and it is a long road from his earlier Off Broadway ''The
Dirtiest Show in Town.'' With book, lyrics and direction by Mr. Eyen and with
music by Alan Menken, composer of ''Little Shop of Horrors'' (on Broadway it
might have been called ''Horrors''), ''Kicks'' is in workshop at Michael
Bennett's studio. It is preparing for an airing on Broadway next spring or fall.

''It follows the lives of four showgirls from World War II to Vietnam,'' Mr.
Eyen said. ''The intermission is the Korean War. It's more romantic than
political. It's about an old theater being ripped down: architecture and war as
seen through the eyes of showgirls. There's nothing hostile in it.'' Recalling
his days writing ''Mary Hartman, Mary Hartman,'' he said: ''There were two
schools in Hollywood: 'Mary Hartman,' which was outrageous and wild, and 'Mary
Tyler Moore,' which was warm and wonderful. 'Kicks' is my 'warm and wonderful.'
''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: caricature of Sada Thompson in ''Wednesday''

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              310 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 17, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEW CEASE-FIRE GOES INTO EFFECT IN LEBANON WAR

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1247 words

DATELINE: BEIRUT, Lebanon, Dec. 16


A new cease-fire went into effect in Lebanon today.

It was announced in Damascus, the Syrian capital, by representatives of the
Lebanese Army and Moslem militia forces, who have been fighting with renewed
intensity over the last three weeks. The representatives said they hoped the
cease-fire would lead to a reconvening of the talks among the warring factions
that ended inconclusively on Nov. 4 in Geneva.

As the battlefields fell quiet, the Beirut International Airport reopened after
a 16-day shutdown ordered because of heavy shelling.

In another development, the state- controlled Beirut radio reported tonight that
the Lebanese President, Amin Gemayel, on his way back to Lebanon from two days
of meetings with British officials, had spent five hours in ''very positive
talks'' with Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader.



Suspension of Relations

Two weeks ago Lebanon suspended diplomatic relations with Libya after the
Libyans refused to withdraw the 450 soldiers operating in the Bekaa region east
of Beirut along with Syrian troops.

Before leaving London, Mr. Gemayel said at a news conference that the Foreign
Ministers of Lebanon, Syria and Saudi Arabia planned to meet Sunday in Damascus
to discuss a resumption of the reconciliation talks.

Mr. Gemayel indicated he was optimistic about a new peace conference and said he
thought it might get under way as early as next week.

Wadi Haddad, President Gemayel's national affairs adviser, met separately today
with two former Lebanese Presidents, Camille Chamoun and Suleiman Franjieh, in
what Beirut newspapers said appeared to be preparations for a second round of
talks in Geneva.



Evacuation of Wounded

In Tripoli, meanwhile, aides to Yasir Arafat said that about 100 wounded
Palestinian soldiers would be evacuated by sea Saturday by the International
Committee of the Red Cross and that preparations were being made for the
evacuation of Mr. Arafat and several thousand of his soldiers, possibly as early
as next Monday.

In Athens, Dimitris Maroudas, a spokesman for the Greek Government, said five
Greek ships were getting ready to leave for Tripoli and were expected to arrive
on Monday.

Mr. Maroudas said the ships would stop at Larnaca, Cyprus, where they would be
joined by an escort of five French warships.  In the last seven days, Israeli
gunboats have harassed Mr. Arafat's men along the coast and in the port of
Tripoli with four light shelling attacks.

The United Nations Security Council agreed to permit the ships transporting Mr.
Arafat and his men to fly the United Nations flag. But after the first Israeli
gunboat attack, the Greek Government demanded further guarantees for the safety
of its ships from the four- nation force in Lebanon, drawn from the United
States, France, Italy and Britain. The escort of French warships was in response
to this demand.

So far, Israel has refused to give assurances that it will allow the safe
passage of Mr. Arafat and his men.

Michel Amiguet, the chief of the International Committee of the Red Cross in
Lebanon, said his organization had received ''all assurances of security'' for
the medical evacuation Saturday. Those being evacuated are from the rival
Palestinian factions in Tripoli and the Syrian forces that are backing Mr.
Arafat's Palestinian opponents.

Mr. Amiguet said the Israelis had received a ''clear notification'' of the Red
Cross plans but had not replied.

Evacuation of Christians

He said the evacuation of Christians from the mountain town of Deir al Qamar,
which had been under siege by Druse militiamen for three months, was continuing
''quite smoothly.'' He said that another 500 people were taken out of the town
in a bus convoy today and that in the next few days two convoys of perhaps 250
civilian cars each were expected to leave.

Operations at the Beirut International Airport resumed at 5:30 P.M. with the
departure of a Middle East Airlines Boeing 707 bound for Dhahran, Saudi Arabia,
with 28 passengers.

Workers at the airport, some of whom had taken cuts in pay during the shutdown,
cheered as the airliner lifted off in a heavy rain.

An hour and a half before the flight left, six artillery shells landed near the
main runway, but the police said word of the cease-fire had not reached the
soldiers involved. No further incidents were reported.

Barometer of Military Situation

The airport, which is regarded by many here as a barometer of the military
situation, was closed on Nov. 30 after artillery shells had landed on and near
the main runway for three days in a row.

Heavy outbreaks of shelling and some infantry fighting continued until today in
the mountains east and south of the capital, in the mainly Christian eastern
suburbs of Beirut and in the poor, southern suburbs occupied by Shiite Moslem
militiamen.

As the fighting worsened, United States involvement in Lebanon deepened
significantly.

Twelve days ago the United States carried out its first air attacks in Lebanon,
and two days ago the battleship New Jersey fired its 16-inch guns for the first
time since the Vietnam War, at Syrian antiaircraft emplacements in the mountains
east of Beirut. Two smaller United States ships shelled Syrian positions then
and again Thursday, when the New Jersey fired its guns against similar targets.

Attacks on Navy Planes

All of the United States air and naval attacks have been in retaliation for
antiaircraft attacks on United States Navy fighters over Syrian-controlled
territory in Lebanon. In the air raid, which has not been repeated, 2 of the 28
attacking planes were shot down. One crewman was killed, one was taken prisoner
by the Syrians and a third bailed out and was rescued from the Mediterranean Sea
by a Lebanese Navy patrol boat.

Some Lebanese officials said fighting in the country flared three weeks ago
because the various factions had become frustrated by a lack of progress in
finding a political solution to the war.

''They wanted to put some pressure on the negotiators to take some action,'' one
analyst said. ''And now it looks like the negotiators have responded. The
fighting here has a very direct cause and effect.

''I don't know if the reconciliation talks will get started next week as the
President says,'' he continued, ''maybe they won't actually start until next
month. But the ball is rolling again.''

Cease-Fire Negotiators

The negotiations for the latest cease- fire were conducted by two colonels of
the Lebanese Army, two aides to Walid Jumblat, the leader of the mainly Druse
Progressive Socialist Party, and the Syrian Foreign Minister, Abdel Halim
Khaddam. Lebanese close to the negotiations said the Druse negotiators were in
contact with the Shiite Moslem Amal Movement, whose militia has been active in
the southern suburbs of Beirut, and acted in Damascus with the concurrence of
Amal.

The Lebanese officials said the negotiations were apparently held in Damascus
because the Druse have their headquarters there and because the Syrians
constitute the strongest Arab force in Lebanon. After several months of
bitterness, relations between Lebanon and Syria have improved markedly in the
last month.

To some, the cease-fire today appeared to be a sequel to the cease-fire of Sept.
26, which followed three weeks of heavy fighting in the Shuf Mountains and led
to first national reconciliation talks in Geneva. These negotiations started on
Oct. 31.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              311 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 17, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ANSWERS TO QUIZ

SECTION: Section 1; Page 40, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 322 words


Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week. Answers appear on
page 17.

1. She presided in her inaugural parade as the first woman Governor in
Kentucky's history and the only woman currently serving as a governor.

2. Pope John Paul II joined in the Lutheran service, the first time since the
Reformation that a Pope had done so.

3. Chicago.

4. Nela Rubinstein.

5. The translation of a Lebanese newspaper account of a meeting between
Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger and the Saudi Defense Minister.
Federal officials contend that the article was ''disinformatiion,'' a false
story planted in the foreign press to damage a nation in the eyes of readers.

6. The Pistons beat the Nuggets, 186-184, in triple overtime. A number of
scoring records were set, including the combined total for both teams, 370
points, which eclipsed the old mark of 337.

7. The counterattack, from the battleship New Jersey, marked the first time guns
aboard the vessel opened fire since the Vietnam War.

8. Middle-class, poor.

9. Galileo.

10. Western Electric.

11. President Reagan strongly defended the remark by his counselor, Edwin Meese
3d, saying it had been quoted ''totally out of context'' in some accounts.

12. Unesco.

13. A holding penalty nullified a 10- yard touchdown pass that could have given
the Giants a victory over Seattle.

14. 4.

15. Secretary of State George P. Shultz made the remark in Tunis after being
rebuked publicly and privately by Arab leaders over the plans for increased
American cooperation with Israel.

16. He earned $135,750 in honorariums, more than any member of the Senate.

17. Divorced.

18. Would not be needed for at least 10 years.

19. City Center.

20. Bangladesh. Argentina.

21. Former Vice President Walter F. Mondale.

22. Lawrence A. Wien, a lawyer and philanthropist, pledged $1 million to
Columbia for a new soccer stadium.

23. The Legal Aid Society.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: question

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 17, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

PENTAGON TO CLOSE OFF TUNNELS

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 279 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 16


New antiterrorist security measures being imposed at United States Government
facilities around the world include the closing of traffic tunnels under the
Pentagon, according to a building circular.

A Defense Department spokesman, Michael Burch, declined Thursday to go into
details about precautions to be taken in the next several weeks to add
protection for the sprawling 42-year- old building across the Potomac from most
Government offices, although he said bomb threats to the Pentagon ''were not
infrequent.'' Security personnel also declined to comment.

However, the circular said the three tunnels under the building, used by
commuter carriers and military buses, taxis, and vans, would be closed Tuesday.
The tunnels are next to a public subway station. Vehicles will then have to pick
up and discharge passengers at parking lots outside the building, the circular
said.

Concrete barriers have been installed at entrances to the White House and State
Department to prevent being struck by vehicles with bombs set up in them.
Similar devices may be erected at the major River and Mall gateways to the
Pentagon.

Security at the Pentagon has been increased in recent weeks in response to
undisclosed threats. The number of guards were doubled at the entrances,
briefcases and handbags were opened and checked, and police cars, their red roof
lights winking, were positioned at access roads.  Entry to the building is
prohibited without a pass bearing the individual's photograph. Free public
access was allowed before May 20, 1972, when a bomb went off in a fourth-floor
washroom. The explosion came at the height of protests against the Vietnam War.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              313 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 18, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. PILOT PROGRAM IN SALVADORAN AREA IN DANGER OF FAILING

BYLINE: By LYDIA CHAVEZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 816 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, Dec. 17


A six- month-old American-planned military and civic pilot program to bring
peace to a key eastern province in El Salvador is in danger of failing, American
officials said this week.

The project, which United States officials said last spring was ''the make it or
break it'' test for the Salvadoran military, has been damaged by a guerrilla
counteroffensive and by unwillingness of the Government army to pursue
insurgents who have returned to the province, San Vicente.

''The plan is at a stage where it needs reinvigoration after the guerrilla
counteroffensive,'' Ambassador Thomas R. Pickering said in an interview Friday.
''The army has not shown the capacity to deal with the counteroffensive and the
area of the plan. We had said that was a key test.''

The plan was designed to clear San Vicente, a farming area, of guerrilla camps
and begin civic reconstruction. The object was to show that the army was ''part
of the solution and not part of the problem,'' according to American military
advisers.

One Western military analyst said the army's inability to render San Vicente
safe raised questions about its ability to defeat the guerrillas or even reduce
their area of control.

After months of prodding by Americans, the so-called National Plan, which
Salvadoran and United States officials likened in March to the ''rural
pacification'' program in Vietnam, began in San Vicente in June.

Once the strategy had proven successful in San Vicente, it was to be used in
other provinces in the war zone. Salvadoran officials hoped that some of the
17,000 refugees would return to their villages. In the final phase, the security
of villages was to be turned over to a civil defense force.

After six months, only one island of security has been established. The rebels
are back at their bases and roam freely. A recent visitor to the province found
guerrillas collecting tolls from passing vehicles less than a quarter of a mile
from Government troops.

Few refugees feel confident enough to return to their villages, and almost none
of the towns have received a new civil defense force.

To be sure, there have been some successes, and American officials said the
Salvadoran Government was being encouraged to continue with the plan. Some
schools have reopened, new roads have been paved and a couple of mayors' offices
have been rebuilt.

The army has also been able to repel at least three attacks against towns.
During a fourth attack, the guerrillas were able to enter a town and burned down
a mayor's office that had just been rebuilt.

Some of the town residents who had remained feel slightly better about their
security and have started to plant crops on the outskirts. Most of the rich land
in the northern part of the province has been left uncultivated, and even the
army has not been to the far northeastern area in three months.

Marxism Taught in Rebuilt School

The guerrillas have managed to tarnish even some of the successes. A Western
military official said that, in one northern San Vicente town, the guerrillas
were taking credit for projects financed with American aid. Some schools that
have been reopened are being used to teach Marxism.

American officials said the plan had foundered in the last few months because of
problems with both the military and civilian aspects.

Many of the specially trained forces that were in San Vicente when the plan got
under way have left to reinforce troops in other areas. The troops that have
stayed seem unwilling or incapable of pursuing the insurgents. Salvadoran
officers said they knew where the rebels were, but they could not explain why
their men had not attacked because it was ''a military secret.''

A Western military analyst said the army is ''not supposed to be static, but I
haven't seen it move.''

Most discouraging to Americans is that the San Vicente troops are not pursuing
the rebels even after additional training.  In the summer the 1,000 troops were
broken up into 350-man battalions and each received six weeks of American
training.

The lack of progress has been compounded by problems in the civic projects.
While some redevelopment projects began in June, most have been stalled by
bureaucratic problems.

''Integration and cooperation has been a problem,'' a Western diplomat said.
''Civilians in this Government are not used to working in the field.''

One issue that has aroused ill will among the San Vicente residents is the food
distribution program. Before the plan began, the International Committee of the
Red Cross made regular trips to villages to drop off basic grains that could not
be grown locally.

When the plan began, a Salvadoran civic commission took over the program and
dropped off food only for refugees. The problem is that many of the residents
who are not refugees had become dependent on the Red Cross, and are no longer
receiving food.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              314 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 18, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIA'S REBELS GROW CONFIDENT

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 654 words

DATELINE: ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand


Sometimes it is easy to walk into Cambodia to visit an encampment of guerrillas
loyal to Pol Pot, the Prime Minister who was deposed by Vietnamese troops five
years ago.

At the Thai border village of Klong Nam Sai, eight miles south of here, a dirt
road leads eastward into the woods. It is daybreak and the sound of Vietnamese
artillery can be heard in the distance. A Thai policeman makes no move, as he
usually does, to check on anyone heading for the border.

Three guerrillas are encountered just before crossing into Cambodia. They are
standing unarmed outside a general store waiting for the proprietor's wife to
cook noodles in a wok. When asked what her Cambodian customers use for money,
the woman points nervously at some big sacks of charcoal.

The walk from there into Cambodia is up a path and across a brook, past an
abandoned temple, across a narrow river over a rickety foot bridge and into a
quiet village of scattered bamboo houses and a few larger buildings, of tall
weeds and towering coconut palms. It is called Camp No. 1, and the approach to
it is unguarded. The border area just south of Aranyaprathet is one of the
strongholds of the Pol Pot guerrillas.



Allegiance to Pol Pot

The people of the village pay allegiance to Pol Pot, whose rule over Cambodia is
said to have resulted in the deaths of at least a million people before its
overthrow five years ago. Today his 30,000 or more guerrillas are by far the
strongest force opposing the Vietnamese-backed Government.

Some Thais who have visited Camp No. 1 say it is a staging area from which
guerrillas, based in nearby camps, move out to harry the Vietnamese. It is off
limits to the United Nations Border Relief Operation, which supplies food and
other necessities to the civilians of the other Pol Pot camps.

One guerrilla, who wore a black T-shirt bearing the words ''Japan Medical
Team,'' appeared to have some authority and was willing, as were some friends,
to accept cigarettes and answer questions. His name was Sa Vuth, and he looked
younger than the 24 years he said he was.

Asked how many people live in Camp No. 1, he said, ''We have 15,000 soldiers
between here and Nong Pru.''

Nong Pru is a camp opposite the Thai border village of the same name. It lies 13
miles away, and there are several similar camps in between.

Sa Vuth said his camp had no school for children. ''They go to Nong Pru,'' he
said. ''It's safer.''



Banana and Papaya Trees

Sa Vuth also said Camp No. 1 grew its own food. There were banana and papaya
trees as well as coconuts all over the village, and the guerrillas looked well
fed.

''When there isn't enough food,'' he said, ''the government sends us food.''

By ''government'' he meant the leadership of the Communist Pol Pot forces and
not the coalition of rebel groups to which they belong and which is headed by
Prince Sihanouk.  Sa Vuth said the camp had medical problems as a result of the
swamps that stretch for several miles.

''This area,'' he said, ''is a dangerous place because of the malaria. We came
with medicine, but now we have too little medicine.''



'We Will Push Them Back'

What did they hope to gain from their war against the Vietnamese? Sa Vuth
conferred briefly with a friend and said: ''We will push them back, stage by
stage, in small battles. Vietnam does not have enough soldiers to stop us.''

Later, Sa Vuth put on his army jacket and black sandals and led the way through
the village. More guerrillas were visible than earlier. A group of half a dozen
armed men in a wooden pavilion looked as if they had just come in from the
forest.

Cambodia's non-Communist insurgents have been warning that the Pol Pot forces,
their allies in their common fight against the Vietnamese, are growing in
strength and may already number 40,000.

Asked about their guns and ammunition, Sa Vuth said, ''We have enough.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Cambodian guerrillas near Thai border; map of
Thailand-Cambodia border

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              315 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 18, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

2 CANADIAN PARTIES AGREE ON MEDICARE BILL

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS MARTIN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 655 words

DATELINE: TORONTO, Dec. 17


A new consensus has emerged over Canada's system of universal public medical
insurance, which has been threatened by underf inancing and growing use of
private fees.

The consensus will apparently insure the continuation of a system that is
basically a public insurance monopoly. It is similar to proposals advanced in
the United States in the late 1960's and early 1970's and then abandoned, partly
because of inflation related to the Vietnam War. In later years, the Canadian-
style system has again been rejected as a model for the United States, despite
the urgings of Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts and other liberal
Democrats.

On Monday the Liberal Party Government of Pierre Elliott Trudeau introduced
tough new legislation to withhold federal Medicare funds from provinces that
allow doctors and hospitals to charge more than stipulated fees. Then, in a
surprise move, the opposition Progressive Conservative Party endorsed the
legislation.

''I don't think there is any great dispute with us about the goals,'' said Jake
Epp, the Tory health critic, adding that his party accepted the Liberal
legislation without qualifications but might offer technical amendments.

'Not Negotiable'

''The rule of the game I would offer is that basic principles like universality
and equal access for all are not negotiable,'' said Monique Begin, Canada's
Health Minister. ''Other than that, there is room for negotiation.''

By Friday, the Canadian Medical Association, which had first described the
legislation as constitutional ''rape,'' and threatened strikes, said it would
cooperate. ''We wish to take a nonconfrontational approach,'' Dr. Marcel
Baltzan, former president of the doctors' group, said Friday.

Medicare proponents say the system's cost controls are the main reason Canadians
spend about 8 percent of their gross national product on health care, compared
to 10 percent in the United States.

Opponents of the plan counter that Canada pays a price in hospital overcrowding,
waiting time for operations and less advanced technology. In strikes over the
last decade, Canadian physicians - who earn, on the average, about $30,000 less
than the $100,000 average income of American doctors - have pushed these
arguments.

A Political Masterstroke

Many politicians hailed the Conservatives' endorsement as something of a
masterstroke. Some four-fifths of Canadians have voiced support of the current
system, and the Liberals had made a move to strengthen it a key of their
strategy for narrowing a 2-to-1 Tory lead in national Gallup polls.

The move was unexpected because it puts the Conservatives' new federal leader,
Brian Mulroney, at odds with provincial Tory governments, which hold power in 8
of Canada's 10 provinces. The provinces have chosen to allow doctors to pass on
some of increasing costs to patients.  Eight of 10 provinces now permit doctors
to charge fees exceeding those negotiated between the physicians and the
provincial Government. A different group of eight require hospital patients to
pay supplementary ''user fees.''

The supplements' costs have so far averaged less than 5 percent of the nation's
total health bill. But critics say they threaten the universality of a system
that became national in 1971.

Each province runs its own Medicare system under guidelines from the federal
Government, which provides part of the money. Since 1977, the provinces say, the
federal share has dropped to about 40 percent from 50 percent; the only
solution, they say, is to increase taxes or allow extra charges. The federal
Government says its contribution has never slipped below 50 percent.

One feature of the proposed legislation would make it mandatory that 100 percent
of a province's inhabitants be covered, rather than 95 percent as at present.
This could make the premiums collected by Alberta, British Columbia and Ontario
illegal.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              316 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 18, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV VIEW;
THE LOW ROAD ISN'T THE ONLY PATH TO SUCCESS

BYLINE: By John J. O'Connor

SECTION: Section 2; Page 37, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1071 words


Looking at NBC's schedule these days purely from the point of view of content,
even the most sympathetic observer is likely to conclude that the network's
programming department has been afflicted with a peculiar strain of
entertainment schizophrenia. While taking the high road and winning deserved
applause for series such as ''Hill Street Blues'' and ''Cheers,'' the network
has also taken the low road this season and stumbled badly on dreadful
concoctions like ''Manimal'' and ''Mr. Smith,'' starring an orangutan in what
the producers desperately hoped would be a ''contemporary fable.''
Unfortunately, ''Mr. Smith'' is merely dumb. One week the Monday TV movie is a
ridiculous piece of racist ''yellow peril'' trash entitled ''Girls of the White
Orchid.'' The next, in ''Choices of the Heart,'' it's a moving and important
account of the four churchwomen who were murdered three years ago in El
Salvador.

Admittedly, NBC is in an unenviable bind. The network has been in last place in
the revenue-producing ratings for several years. Following a blaze of awesome
but unproductive publicity, Fred Silverman was unable to create ratings miracles
and finally departed a couple of years ago for his own production pastures. He
was replaced by Grant Tinker, the former head of MTM Productions, a company with
a good track record for quality television, encompassing everything from ''The
Mary Tyler Moore Show'' to, as it happens, ''Hill Street Blues'' and ''Cheers.''
Mr. Tinker, now the chairman of NBC and clearly a man of some taste, keeps a
much lower profile than his predecessor, but the pressures on him to boost those
ratings are obviously no less intense.


The result is, to say the least, disorienting. The fact is that the network's
most successful new show is an exercise in pointless violence called ''The
A-Team,'' a Stephen Cannell creation whose roots are mired in films along the
lines of ''The Dirty Dozen.'' Constructed around the escapades of a group of
former Vietnam War veterans who have escaped from an American military prison,
the weekly installments feature several car chases and at least two vividly
choreographed brawls. Especially popular with viewers, reportedly, is the
character of B.A., played with ongoing sullenness by Mr. T., a heavyset black
actor partial to wearing a ransom in gold chains and rings, and having his hair
styled like an Indian's. Occasionally, the dialogue threatens to be drowned out
by the clanking of the jewelry. B.A. specializes in ominous glowering and
calling people ''Fool!'' The show is nothing if not simple-minded in its
escapist machinations.

Yet, a week or two ago, ''The A-Team'' and a one- time special called ''Greatest
Practical Jokes'' were the only NBC shows to make the Top 10. In a ratings list
of 66 programs, ''Hill Street Blues'' was 17th and ''Cheers'' 30th. Some of the
network's other laudable efforts were faring even worse. ''St. Elsewhere'' was
No. 56, while ''Remington Steele'' sank to 59. What, then, is the obvious,
decades-old message being delivered to programmers, no matter how sensitive or
enlightened they may be? On the most superficial level, it is simply this:
Quality may reap the Emmy Awards, but junk could save your job. When ''The
A-Team'' slugs its way to such undisputed success, it is inevitable that
imitations will be hustled into readiness. ABC and CBS have already announced
future series bearing more than passing resemblances to ''The A-Team'' formula.


Meanwhile, at NBC, there are unfortunate signs of artistic compromise, if not
downright panic, setting into the overall programming pattern. ''St.
Elsewhere,'' once on the verge of being canceled, has already undergone
extensive overhauling. With Mark Tinker, the NBC chairman's son, as supervising
producer, the weekly series has been gussied up with several romantic
relationships that have nudged the program considerably closer to the
traditional territory of soap opera. In fact, the changes may have effectively
killed the series. What had been an offbeat exploration of a busy and somehat
run-down city hospital, done in the quirkily roving style of ''Hill Street
Blues,'' has become more of an ordinary M.D. exercise in the manner of ''Trapper
John.'' The ratings have continued to decline steadily. One senses the sad
spectacle of an opportunity lost.  Being last in the ratings race creates
another serious problem for NBC, and that involves the allegiance of the
network's affiliates. When the ratings are sagging, an affiliate is more likely
to pre-empt a network program in order to run a local or syndicated production
that might prove more popular. This has a pronounced effect on the network's
national ratings. For one significant instance, ''Choices of the Heart'' chalked
up a national rating that delivered 25 percent of the audience watching
television at the time. But the overnight ratings in major cities showed larger
shares: 27 percent in New York, 28 percent in Chicago and 30 percent in Los
Angeles. One reason for the difference: The movie was preempted or delayed by at
least five stations - in Hartford, Pittsburgh, Milwaukee, Buffalo and, evidently
on a decision that it wouldn't play well there, Peoria. Furthermore, major NBC
affiliates in Philadelphia and Boston decided to carry the film only at the last
minute, when reviews indicated that the network had come up with something
special.

So, where does all of this leave NBC's beleaguered executives? Undoubtedly,
between the proverbial rock and a hard place. But certain generalizations might
not be out of order. There is no pressing need on television today for situation
comedies starring orangutans. When a good series is foundering in the ratings,
as was the case of ''St. Elsewhere,'' the solution might be to make it better,
not cheaper. As it did admirably with ''Hill Street Blues,'' the network should
support series that, despite initially poor ratings, clearly have potential.
And, finally, everything on television needn't sink to the level of ''The
A-Team.'' There was a time, only within the past decade, when the ratings were
dominated by CBS shows that were arguably the best fare that television had to
offer. Among them were ''All in the Family'' and, direct from Mr. Tinker's MTM
Productions, ''The Bob Newhart Show'' and ''The Mary Tyler Moore Show.'' More
often than is sometimes remembered, quality does survive.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              317 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 18, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ESSAY;
WHO IS ON 'OUR' SIDE?

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 839 words


Yogi Berra, upon appointment to his second term as manager of the New York
Yankees, flashed his familiar lopsided grin and waggled a finger at his friends
in the press: ''You guys ain't gonna get too much from me.''

The Berra System of Leak Control is in the highest traditions of American
jurisprudence. To prevent disclosure of information that would abet an adversary
- whether the name of a starting pitcher, or time of a troop movement - the
proper way is to stop the leak at the source.

That requires the people at the top to keep their mouths shut when secrecy
serves the public interest. The time-tested way to do this is to hire
trustworthy people, trust them, and fire them if and when trust is lost.

The opposite method, in which a leader misuses the F.B.I. or employs less formal
''plumbers'' to intimidate officials who engage in the necessary intercourse
between government and press, or requires oaths that seek to turn public
information into government property, is the way now being pursued by Mr.
Reagan.

It is modeled on the British system. In Great Britain this week, a court ordered
a newspaper to help reveal a source by returning a document showing how
Government press agents planned to counter criticism of missile deployment.
Under that same system, the British ran a war with such tight control of
coverage that its navy's scandalous vulnerability to missiles was kept from
public scrutiny.

President Reagan likes that system. He has adopted the view late in life that
dissent borders on disloyalty; accordingly, a new requirement of
''our-sidedness'' is now applied to press coverage. This was first promulgated
by Dean Rusk when he turned aside an embarrassing question during the Vietnam
War: ''I'm the Secretary of State and I'm on our side.''

George Shultz took that line last week explaining why reporters were banned from
our Grenadian invasion: In World War II, he said, reporters ''were on our side.
These days, in the adversary journalism tradition that's been developed, it
seems as though the reporters are always against us. They're always seeking to
report something that's going to screw things up.''

In suggesting that anyone who reports information not helpful to the
Administration is not on ''our side,'' the ordinarily gutsy Secretary Shultz
follows Secretary Weinberger in pandering to the most dangerous I-am- the-State
instincts of his boss.

Far be it from me to seek to screw things up, but I consider myself on ''our
side''; so is the Secretary of State when he does not question my patriotism.

With the confused acquiesence of Attorney General William French Smith, and the
fawning of his White House counsel, Fred Fielding, Mr. Reagan indulged his
secrecy paranoia in a directive requiring 128,000 Federal officials to sign a
paper promising to submit all future writing to a review board for the rest of
their lives. History will remember National Security Decision Directive 84 as
Ronald Reagan's greatest betrayal of conservative principle.  The hypocrisy at
the top was exposed the other day by Stuart Taylor Jr., a New York Times
reporter: Not one top Reagan official - including our fearless Attorney General
and White House counsel - has signed the censorship agreement they have all had
in their desks since August. The excuses mumbled are that the Congress is
blocking the program, or that - get this - the censorship only applies
prospectively, to new guys coming in, not to the appointees already in office.
(I'm all right, Jack - it's the next fellow who will have to submit his memoirs
for vetting by the political opposition.)

At his winter press conference next week, perhaps the President will be asked
why he has been unwilling to set an example for his appointees by signing such a
censorship document himself. As an elected official, the President is exempt,
but how can he in conscience demand all his appointees do what he personally
finds repugnant?

Laws and regulations that are not enforced breed disrespect for all law. Mr.
Reagan has struck fear in the hearts of employees with threats that the
discredited polygraph machine may be attached to any of them at any time. But in
the recent three- month scurrying-about looking for a White House leak on
Lebanon, the F.B.I. closed its investigation without finding a culprit - and
none of the high-level ''suspects'' were asked to submit to the
nervousness-detector indignity they are so willing to inflict on subordinates.

True conservatives inside and outside the Administration - like other people on
''our side'' - are urged to save Mr. Reagan from himself by mailing evidence of
abusive surveillance, questionable demands made on the F.B.I., wiretapping or
surreptitious taping to their local right-wing columnist. By screwing things up,
we can show this un-American system to be counterproductive.

Mr. Reagan's leakomania may win points with Agnevian red-meat- eaters and the
self-hating media, but to repeat Mr. Berra's great aphorism, ''the game ain't
over till it's over.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              318 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 18, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEIRUT GIVES CONGRESS SOME ECND THOUGHTS

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 916 words


WASHINGTON REPRESENTATIVE Lee H. Hamilton was back home in Indiana recently,
chatting amiably with a constituent, when the conversation suddenly shifted to
Lebanon. ''She turned to me and said, 'Get those marines out of there, they have
to come home,' '' the Democratic lawmaker recalled. ''And I think other members
are encountering that sentiment very, very frequently.''

The rising concern across the country helped prompt Mr. Hamilton and
Representative Les Aspin, a Wisconsin Democrat, to write a letter to President
Reagan last week, warning him that popular support for his Middle East policy
was rapidly eroding. In blunt terms, they told the President that he should
limit the country's objectives in the region and find a way to remove the
Marines as soon as possible.

''We want to make clear our view that our commitment in Lebanon should not be
open-ended,'' the two wrote. ''The American people have little tolerance for
further sacrifice of their young men to the hatred and ambitions of others.''

Some people on Capitol Hill believe the letter could mark a turning point in the
debate over American troops in the Middle East. Mr. Hamilton and Mr. Aspin are
two of the most respected and influential members of Congress on foreign and
military matters, and both supported the compromise resolution last fall that
applied the War Powers Act to Lebanon and authorized the President to keep the
Marines there for an extra 18 months, through the spring of 1985.

While they continue to oppose immediate withdrawal of the troops, the
legislators said the President's policy has to change. Mr. Hamilton added: ''I
think we're reflecting the views of a good many members on this thing.'' One who
has already been influenced is Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., who also backed
the original war powers compromise and is now having second thoughts. The
Speaker's aides said last week that ''he identifies with the letter and hopes
the Administration gets the message.''

Republicans Also Uneasy

This uneasiness is not limited to Democrats. Representative Lawrence Coughlin, a
Pennsylvania Republican and former marine, said that as casualties mount, his
constituents are growing more restive, ''particularly as they see no resolution
in sight.'' Representative Ed Zschau, a California Republican who also voted for
the 18- month mandate, said he was increasingly convinced that American troops
had become a ''negative factor'' in the search for peace, because their mere
presence incites violence.

Many lawmakers continue to support the President in the belief he is defending
vital interests in Lebanon. Some doubters are unwilling to go public on a matter
of national security.

The consensus on Capitol Hill is that if the President can show progress toward
a peaceful solution in Lebanon, Congress will stick by its 18- month
authorization. But if the situation continues to deteriorate and the violence
continues to mount, he could face a new challenge to his authority when Congress
returns on Jan. 23.

The Hamilton-Aspin letter suggested three specific changes in policy. The most
important was that the Administration should reduce the American stakes in
Lebanon. Ever since Secretary of State George P. Shultz first testified that the
Adminsitration was seeking a peaceful and united Lebanon, free of foreign
troops, many lawmakers have been convinced that those goals were overstated and
unachieveable, particularly with only 1,600 marines encamped in a defensive and
vulnerable position.  Moreover, many in Congress agree with the two Democrats
when they say that American vital interests are simply not threatened by the
fate of Lebanon. No matter what the White House says, they maintain, Lebanon
does not hold the key to Middle East oil supplies or even to the security of
Israel. ''A Lebanon that's stable, even if partitioned, meets America's national
interest,'' Mr. Hamilton argued. ''We can live with a de facto arrangement.''

In addition, the Hamilton-Aspin letter urges the Administration to put more
pressure on the Government of President Amin Gemayel to include Moslems in a
more equitable power-sharing arrangement. And it encourages policy makers to
''resist the temptation to resort to military solutions.''

In response to such criticism, President Reagan has been sending mixed signals.
In a report to Congress last week that was required by the war powers
legislation, Mr. Reagan repeated his belief that ''the international credibility
of the United States and its partners'' was at stake in Lebanon. But after the
President's news conference on Wednesday, his aides called reporters to say that
Mr. Reagan had been trying to warn Mr. Gemayel that American patience was not
limitless, and that he should increase efforts to broaden his base.

Some Congressional Democrats are convinced that the President's advisers now see
the need to revise America's commitment in Lebanon and find a way to bring the
troops home. ''I don't know whether that's penetrated the President,'' Mr.
Hamilton noted, ''but I'm quite sure it has those around him.''

These advisers are responding to political reality, and the growing fear that
Lebanon could do to President Reagan what Vietnam did to Lyndon Johnson and Iran
did to Jimmy Carter. ''There are people in the Reagan camp who see this as
potentially their most damaging issue,'' said an aide to Senate Republican
leaders. ''They don't want to go into an election year and have this explode on
him.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of the battleship New Jerey off the coast of Lebanon

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              319 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 18, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'WHO ARE THESE SMILING KILLERES?'

BYLINE: By RICHARD D. LYONS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 668 words


THE outbreak of terrorism worrying American leaders is likely to worsen because
the world has entered a period of fundamentalism that spawns acts of fanaticism,
according to researchers into violence and its causes. These students of
terrorism agree that it is virtually impossible to prevent killings by fanatics
who are themselves willing to die.

Readiness to die for a political belief is so alien to Occidental thought as to
baffle most Americans, and indeed the classic cases in recent times have been
Oriental: The Japanese kamikaze pilots who dove to their deaths; the Buddhist
monks in Vietnam who set themselves on fire, and now the truck drivers in the
Middle East who have killed hundreds of people as well as themselves.

''A lot of people are suddenly asking such questions as: 'Who are these smiling
killers?' 'Why are they acting the way they are?' and 'Is there any way to stop
them other than putting up more sandbags?' '' said Dr. Lawrence Z. Freedman,
professor of psychiatry at the University of Chicago and chairman of its
Institute for Social and Behavioral Pathology.

According to Dr. Freedman and other experts, the answers can be both simple and
complex. ''It's easy to simply say you're giving your life for your country,''
he said. Yet being part of a religious terrorist group energizes and reinforces
the mysticism of it. You are extending yourself to a degree that makes the risks
involved, up to and including the loss of your life, secondary to the ultimate
gain of the messianic force that is driving you and those around you.''

There is general agreement that the actions of the present group of terrorists
stem from religious conditioning inculcated by extremist Shiite imams for
hundreds of years. The current conduct of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini and the
lesser fundamentalist religious leaders of an extremist sect calling itself the
Islamic Holy War derives from feuds that started with the formation in Persia at
the end of the 11th century of the original Assassins.

When Suicide Enhances Life

Dr. Paul Wilkinson, professor of international relations at the University of
Aberdeen, Scotland, said the minority Shiite fundamentalists were challenging
the Sunni orthodoxy. He decribed the situation in the Middle East as
''particularly dangerous because the alliance of Persian Gulf states favoring
Iraq is viewed by the religious fundamentalists as the embodiment of the
anti-Moslem movement, and the existence of ties between moderate Arab states and
the Western nations is high in the Iranian Book of Devils.''

Dr. Robert Lifton, a professor of psychiatry at Yale who has written extensively
on the psychology of extremism, said that terrorists ''resort to violence
paradoxically in order to affirm their own vitality.'' He added, ''Expressions
of terror, even if they are suicidal, can be seen as life-enhancing because the
terrorist may see himself sacrificing his life in order to affirm the life of
his group. That's why its so hard to suppress terror along traditional lines.''

''We're in the middle of a worldwide epidemic of religious and political
fundamentalism,'' he continued. ''We know from the history of Protestant
fundamentalism in this country that it is likely to arise where there is fear of
the loss of fundamentals, of basic life- affirming beliefs and experiences,
indeed of life itself. Hence we have fertile soil everywhere for the emergence
of fundamentalism and the invoking of sacred scripture, religious or political,
for solutions of all conflicts or problems, not only moral but also political,
military and economic.''

Brian M. Jenkins, a Rand Corporation analyst, noted that ''Americans tend to
underestimate the power of religious commitment and turn to psychiatrists for
explanations of abhorrent behavior. Western society may find it inconceivable
that people are willing to blow themselves up in the name of Allah, but the
bewilderment is as much a reflection of our society as that of the extremist
Shiite.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              320 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 18, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MAJOR NEWS IN SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 455 words


Another SliverOf Hope forThe LebanesePressure for reconciliation in Lebanon
mounted last week amid hints the warring parties might be ready for another try
at compromise. There was talk in Beirut of reviving the intra-Lebanese talks in
Geneva. After 16 days of heavy shelling between factions, a cease-fire was
announced. The airport, where American marines are encamped, was reopened to
civilian planes.

Any respite was welcome. Earlier in the week, the battleship New Jersey shook
Beirut to its foundations by using its heavy 16-inch guns for the first time
against Syrian antiaircraft positions inland, which had fired at (and missed)
Navy reconnaissance F-14's. It was the first time since the Vietnam war that the
New Jersey had gone into action. Navy guns also silenced leftist artillery
harassing the Marines.

Despite the hostile exchanges, Presidential envoy Donald H. Rumsfeld conferred
twice in Damascus with Foreign Minister Abdel Khalim Khaddam. The
Syrian-supported National Salvation Front, perhaps coincidentally, agreed to
stop shelling Christian areas of Beirut. Christian militias in turn promised to
stop shelling Druse mountain villages.  Leftist and Druse gunmen lifted the
seige of Christians trapped in Deir al-Qamar since September; Israeli trucks and
Red Cross buses evacuated 2,500 militamen and several thousand refugees.

For those concerned over the Marines and their role in Lebanon, President Reagan
offered little comfort. He said at his news conference that the Marines could be
withdrawn ''if there was such a collapse of order that it was absolutely certain
there was no solution to the problem.'' An aide added that this was a warning to
President Amin Gemayel to redouble his efforts at reconciliation. Mr. Gemayel
heard much the same from the British in London. Then he made a surprise visit to
Libya to see Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, who supports the Lebanese leftists with
troops, weapons and money.

In the northern city of Tripoli, the first Palestinians to be evacuated - 93
wounded men - left yesterday for Cyprus on an Italian ship. Yasir Arafat
prepared to follow with 4,000 Palestinian troops aboard five Greek ships flying
the United Nations flag. Impatient for his departure, Syrian- backed Palestinian
dissidents rained rocket and artillery fire on Arafat's men. Israeli gunboats
also harassed his positions. Mr. Arafat has demanded international guarantees of
his safety.

In Washington, meanwhile, the Administration acknowledged the inability of
Israel, Egypt and several other important clients to repay huge loans for
military aid. In a policy switch, they will get outright military grants - $1.4
billion for Israel and $1.1 billion for Egypt in the next fiscal year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              321 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 18, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE DEMOCRATS AND FOREIGN POLICY

BYLINE: By Leslie H. GelbLeslie H. Gelb is The Times's national security
correspondent based in Washington.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 50, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5367 words


FOR ALMOST TWO DECADES, the Democratic Party has been tearing itself apart over
foreign and defense policy, first over Vietnam and later over detente with the
Soviet Union. Now, to listen to the Democrats tell it, their views are more
compatible than at any time in the last two decades and they are offering more
cohesive ''Democratic alternatives'' to President Reagan's policies. The
candidates and their advisers think President Reagan's style of conservatism and
his policy flip-flops have made the world a more dangerous place, that the bulk
of the American public is worried and that the peace issue will be at the top of
voter concerns, along with the economy, in the 1984 elections.

The reality, however, seems more mixed, complex and uncertain. Democrats are
more in agreement now, even after the recent events in Lebanon, Grenada and
Central America, the kinds of events that used to tear the Democratic Party as
well as the country apart. But that togetherness probably has more to do with
their being out of power and free from having to give details of their
alternatives than with their having achieved a genuine new consensus. True, the
foreign-policy idea men in the party appear more unified - and centrist - now,
but Congressional Democrats remain polarized, with a heavy orientation toward
the liberal- left. True, as well, that Presidential hopefuls are sounding
like-minded themes critical of Ronald Reagan's foreign policies, but they are
also jockeying for position in the primaries in ways that could put them at each
other's throats. Grenada showed President Reagan's power to keep Democratic
contenders off balance and on the defensive. Despite private misgivings on the
part of a number of these Democrats, the leading figures, including Walter F.
Mondale and John Glenn, felt they could not oppose the invasion and remain
viable candidates.

The point is that what is happening right now - the intertwined struggles among
the party intellectuals, Congressional Democrats and Presidential candidates
readying themselves for the primaries - is shaping the future foreign policy of
the Democratic Party, and maybe for the country.

However, Mr. Reagan may not be an easy target. For all his failure to produce
concrete successes in foreign affairs and for all the public anxiety about his
handling of these issues, the President can do a great deal abroad to keep the
political initiative in his hands at home. He did just that in late October when
he ordered troops into Grenada. It offered him the opportunity for a popular,
quick and decisive success. But events can also throw him off stride, as
happened when the Marine compound at the Beirut airport was blown up, causing
hundreds of deaths, and continued American casualties in Lebanon are tending to
unite the Democrats in their criticism of Mr. Reagan..

Richard Nixon kept Democrats off balance, mixing tough talk and peace
initiatives in Vietnam and with Moscow. But Democrats feel that Mr. Reagan has
helped them. He has succeeded in moving the whole spectrum of debate to the
right, particularly among foreign-policy intellectuals, and made almost everyone
a little less liberal than before. He also has moved so far to the right himself
that it was easy for Democrats to find a common home almost anywhere on his
left. It is a center-liberal alternative, anti-interventionist but in favor of
continued modest increases in military spending.

It also would appear that those on the right and left who did most to damage
Democratic Party unity in the past have been weakened. The main candidate on the
left, the Rev. Jesse L. Jackson, appears to be concentrating almost entirely on
domestic policy. And the other candidates on the left, Senator Alan M. Cranston
of California and former Senator George McGovern, are drawing little support.
Few Democrats seem to want to chance repeating the McGovern disaster of 1972 and
run another candidate perceived as left-wing. As for the Democratic right wing,
its standard-bearer was Senator Henry M. (Scoop) Jackson, who died unexpectedly
a few months ago.

Senator Jackson's passing could be an event of decisive political importance. He
was the one man in the party who could legitimize and make acceptable other
Democrats who took a tough anti-Soviet, anti-arms-control stance, something all
the present Presidential contenders want to avoid. He was also the only one who
could have provided re-entry into party ranks for all those key conservative
Democrats who bolted from Jimmy Carter's foreign policy and joined the ranks of
the Reagan Administration. To listen to the candidates and their advisers talk
privately, it is clear they would not welcome back such people as Jeane J.
Kirkpatrick, ambassador to the United Nations, or Paul H. Nitze, the
arms-control negotiator, except to embarrass the President. ''If Scoop were
still around,'' said one adviser to a Presidential hopeful, ''we'd have no
choice but to take them back.''

As James A. Johnson, Mr. Mondale's top strategist, put it: ''In more than 15
years, I have never seen less factionalism, less rancor and more consensus about
central foreign-policy questions, and I am confident that we won't split apart
in the primaries or lose support in the general election.'' Mr. Johnson and many
other Democrats insist that party unity is here to stay, that they are closer to
the views of the general public and more united than the Republicans, that they
are offering real alternatives to the Reagan policies and that foreign policy
can be used as a battering ram against the President in 1984.

But is it all so? Have the Democrats stopped their almost two decades of
blood-letting over foreign policy? Will the Democratic candidate be able to turn
foreign policy into a major campaign issue against Mr. Reagan?

RESIDENT JOHN F. KENnedy was the last Democrat to manage a strong consensus in
the Democratic Party, and much of the battle in the party since then has been
over who has the right to the Kennedy legacy.  Was it to be the liberal wing
symbolized by the President's brothers, Robert F. Kennedy and Senator Edward M.
Kennedy, or was it the conservatives led by Senator Jackson?

John Kennedy offered something for almost everyone: Massive increases in
military spending and talking tough to the Russians, on the one side, and
undertaking arms control with Moscow and identifying with change in the third
world, on the other. He took the country ever more deeply into Vietnam, but
stayed out of a formal combat role without losing. He told some he was going to
get out of Vietnam after the 1964 election, and others that he would stay the
course. Edward Kennedy and Senator Jackson each had enough to point to in the
Kennedy policy to justify his claim to be the real legatee.

Hubert H. Humphrey, President Johnson's Vice President, tried to hold the pieces
together in the 1968 campaign, but the two camps had already drawn too much
blood from each other. And the blood-letting became a torrent in the early
1970's over relations with Moscow.

The fight between the two camps flowed into three interlocking fronts: In the
world of ideas among intellectuals in op-ed pages, magazines and conferences; in
Congress, largely between the older and more conservative leadership and the
younger, ''Vietnam generation''; and in the Democratic Presidential primaries
where more leftward-oriented activists predominated.

For almost two decades, liberal intellectuals have been attacking conservatives
in magazines such as Foreign Policy, and conservatives have been hitting back
sharply in outlets like Commentary. The liberals argued that their adversaries
did not understand change in the third world, Soviet paranoia and the limits of
American power. The conservatives responded that the liberals were naive about
power and dangerously misunderstood Soviet motives. Privately, the language was
far nastier - slashes that would never heal.

Now it seems that this group of foreign-policy intellectuals - minus the
conservatives who are either in the Reagan Administration or support it - has
come close to a centrist consensus: in favor of arms control and modest military
spending increases and against interventionism in principle but also against
simply abandoning Central America or Lebanon to anti- American forces.

This group of intellectuals, numbering perhaps in the hundreds, includes people
such as the following: Barry M. Blechman, formerly a high official in the Arms
Control and Disarmament Agency and now at the Georgetown Center for Strategic
and International Studies.  Robert Hunter, a member of the National Security
Council staff in the Carter Administration and now also at Georgetown.  R. James
Woolsey Jr., Under Secretary of the Navy under Mr. Carter and now a Washington
lawyer who is also on the Reagan arms-control delegation.  David Aaron, Mr.
Carter's deputy national security adviser and now a New York investment banker.
Walter B. Slocombe, a high Pentagon official under Mr. Carter and now a
Washington attorney.  Richard C. Holbrooke, a senior State Department official
in the Carter Administration and now a New York investment banking adviser.
Anthony Lake, head of State Department policy planning under Cyrus R. Vance and
now a professor at Amherst College.

The liberal Presidential camps are not very happy with some of these men, such
as Mr. Woolsey, who, along with several key Democratic legislators and
intellectuals such as Les Aspin of Wisconsin and Albert Gore Jr. of Tennessee,
helped to shape and naturally endorsed the new Reagan approach to the strategic
arms reductions talks with Moscow. Their feeling is that these men have played
into Mr. Reagan's hands by lending their important Democratic names to a
proposal that is not going to produce an agreement with the Soviet Union, but
will make it much harder for Democratic candidates to criticize Mr. Reagan as
not being serious about arms control. Of equal importance, the feeling in the
liberal Presidential camps is that a number of these intellectuals were
essential to Mr. Reagan's gaining Congressional approval of the MX missile.

An aide to one of the leading candidates characterized ''the intellectual policy
establishment'' as being ''far out of step with the party.'' He added: ''It's
more of a commentary on the politics of advising and covering their right flanks
for future jobs in a future administration than good politics.'' Messrs.
Woolsey, Aspin and Gore, on the contrary, believe they are trying to save the
party from a leftist image.

Whatever the motives, this group of idea men now feels much more comfortable at
or near the ideological center. This tends to get reinforced by the essentially
centrist positions of the more senior foreign policy figures in the party such
as former cabinet-level officials (Mr. Vance, Robert S. Strauss and Harold R.
Brown) and others who were just below that rank such as former Deputy Secretary
of State Warren M. Christopher, former Middle East negotiator Sol M. Linowitz
and party stalwarts such as the Washington attorney Max M. Kampelman, who now
leads the Reagan negotiating team on European security issues.

The striking thing about this list of policy intellectuals and former senior
officials is who is not there - the names that used to be given out to the press
by Democratic Presidential hopefuls to show they were getting good conservative
advice. Mr. Nitze and Mrs. Kirkpatrick, along with Richard N. Perle, who was a
key aide to Scoop Jackson, are in the Reagan Administration. Eugene V. Rostow,
who was Mr. Reagan's Director of the Arms Control and Disarmanent Agency until
removed almost a year ago, is not mentioned as an adviser to any of the
candidates. Neither is Zbigniew Brzezinski, Mr. Carter's national security
adviser. Most of all, Henry Jackson is not there, and he was always a force that
had to be reckoned with. With the exception of Mr. Brzezinski, these people were
all opposed to the unratified SALT II treaty, which was the dividing line
between right and left in the party.

Their absence at strategy sessions with Democratic Presidential contenders will
make a difference. Even one of them can have some effect, as the following story
told by several advisers to Mr. Mondale indicates. Several months ago, Mr.
Mondale held what aides called a ''foreign policy retreat'' so that he could
hear the latest wisdom from the policy thinkers. As Mr. Mondale went around the
table, everyone was very critical of the Reagan policies until it came the turn
of Ben J. Wattenberg, who still proudly refers to himself as a ''Scoop Jackson
Democrat.'' Mr. Wattenberg argued that Mr. Mondale should be tough and not
whiny, and that he should be prepared to support a number of Mr. Reagan's
national security initiatives. The former Vice President, according to the
sources, then went on at length about how pro-defense he was and how bad the
Russians were. ''From that point on, the mood of the meeting shifted
rightward,'' said one source, and others confirmed this.

The one major conservative foreign policy figure remaining on the Democratic
scene is Lane Kirkland, president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. Mr. Kirkland has endorsed
Mr. Mondale, but whoever gets the nomination will have to take his views into
account heavily.

The situation among Congressional Democrats continues to be polarized between a
substantial majority of liberals and a small but influential body of
conservatives. By majorities of 2-to-1, 3-to-1 or more over their conservative
colleagues, the liberals voted against the new MX missile, production of new
nerve gas weapons, covert aid to anti- Government forces in Nicaragua and the
18-month extension of Marine presence in Lebanon and for a nuclear freeze.

The vote on the Marines gives a good picture of where Congressional Democrats
stand on the general issue of intervention. In the Senate, the overall vote was
54 to 46, with only two Democrats siding with the majority - George J. Mitchell
of Maine and Edward Zorinsky of Nebraska. The House Democrats divided 130 in
favor and 134 against, with the pro vote heavily influenced by the House
Speaker, Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., backing the President.

Patrick H. Caddell, president of Cambridge Survey Research, feels that the party
rank and file ''don't like the House vote at all and feel the leadership made a
mistake getting into bed with Reagan on this.'' To Mr. Caddell and many other
Democrats, Lebanon and not Central America is the truer analogy to Vietnam. ''We
sent in the Marines to do one mission, bringing about foreign withdrawal, that
couldn't be done,'' said the former public-opinion adviser to Jimmy Carter.
''Then the mission was changed to something not originally envisioned - propping
up the Lebanese Government. And now Marines are being killed and wounded in
increasing numbers.'' He said this even before the tremendous loss of Marine
lives in late October and the subsequent downing of American aircraft by the
Syrians.

Traditionally, this anti-interventionism and a whole series of Democratic
majority votes against new weapons would have been identified as liberal- left
or ''soft.'' But Representative Leon E. Panetta of California argues this is no
longer so. Mr. Panetta, seen as a centrist himself, maintained that ''By virtue
of Reagan's rhetoric and action, he gave us the opportunity to take the center.
Our House leaders who are not radicals ended up leading the fight against covert
intervention in Nicaragua, and the public backs this. And on defense we're not
talking about cutting the Administration's 10 percent spending increase to
nothing, but to a 5 percent increase, and the public backs this too.''

Most of Mr. Panetta's Democratic comrades-in-arms are betting the public will
see their moves as centrist. Recent public-opinion polls have tended to back
this up. Majorities and pluralities of the public do appear to be on the same
side of most of these issues as the bulk of Democratic legislators. Most of the
party's Presidential hopefuls are also banking that their critiques of President
Reagan's foreign policy will be good politics.

But with the primaries being the first order of business, most of these hopefuls
are looking at their own colleague, Senator Cranston, every bit as much as they
are attacking Mr. Reagan. Most of them are playing the game of sticking close,
but not too close, to the Californian. Other candidates - Senators Gary Hart of
Colorado, Ernest F. Hollings of South Carolina, John Glenn of Ohio and Mr.
Mondale - have climbed on the Cranston nuclear-freeze bandwagon. (At this point,
former Florida Gov. Reubin Askew is the exception in this bandwagon approach and
Jesse Jackson, it would seem, is not going to have much impact on the course of
foreign-policy debate.) They do not want Mr. Cranston to use the freeze issue to
catapult himself to the top the way George McGovern used Vietnam to get the
nomination in 1972.

Whatever the general profile of the Democratic voter, candidates continue to go
on the assumption that most of those who give money, passion and time in the
primaries are liberal and left.

Even with this edge, it does not look bright for Mr. Cranston's strategy of
running as a peace candidate. Nonetheless, everyone is watching to see exactly
how well he will do in the primaries. This will tell a lot about where the
''soul'' of the party really lies. If he does well, the Cranston outlook will be
reflected in the party platform and in the rhetoric of the Democratic candidate.

By all accounts, however, the main event is taking place between former Vice
President Mondale and Mr. Glenn, and the moves they are making now will be
critical to where the party's choice stands later. Their strategies, as
described by their aides, are potentially very divisive. For Mr. Mondale, it is
to paint Mr. Glenn as a closet Reaganite, too hawkish. For Mr. Glenn, it is to
tar Mr. Mondale with the soft feathers of the Carter Administration.

At the end of September, Governor Cuomo of New York asked Mr. Mondale to explain
how he differed from Senator Glenn. The former Vice President shot back that he
was for SALT II and the former astronaut was against; and that the Ohio Democrat
voted in favor of - and thus the wrong way - on the B-l bomber, nerve gas and
high levels of defense spending. Mr. Mondale has also stressed that Mr. Glenn
supported President Reagan's tax cut.

Four of the five issues Mr. Mondale picked were on national security. That is
where he chose to make his stand. It is hard to find important differences among
these men or the others on domestic issues.

While Mr. Mondale can attack Mr. Glenn's conservatism, the Ohioan's problem is
more complicated. More so than the Minnesotan, who has to prove his centrist
credentials, Mr. Glenn has both to demonstrate how his own centrist position
differs from Mr. Reagan's and to show acceptability to the liberal wing of the
Democratic Party. Thus, he votes for nerve gas weapons because the existing
weapons are old and unsafe, but says he favors negotiations to eliminate all
such weapons. Thus, he contrasts his desire for a 5.5 percent increase in
military spending to Mr. Mondale's 4 percent. And to balance some tough
statements he recently made about Moscow, he jumped to Mr. Mondale's left and
proposed dropping plans to deploy new cruise missiles in Europe. He also
attacked the former Vice President for having supported the sale of F-15
fighters to Saudi Arabia in Mr. Carter's days, a decision Mr. Mondale has said
he opposed privately. But Mr. Glenn will have to travel much further to please
Democratic supporters of Israel, given his past statements favoring talking to
the Palestine Liberation Organization.

Mr. Mondale, of course, wants it both ways too. But he seems more comfortable
with his liberal image, and in any event cannot escape it. And the Mondale
people are stressing party consensus, even as they assert that Mr. Glenn is
somewhat beyond the pale.

The Glenn camp apparently felt that it was making too little progress in
painting Mr. Mondale into a left-wing corner. So in mid-November, Mr. Glenn took
his hardest shot at the frontrunner, charging him with a ''fundamental lack of
support for an adequate defense.'' It is doubtful that such charges will help
the former astronaut very much in the primaries, but they could wound Mr.
Mondale deeply in the general election.

Mr. Glenn is trying to give off a different basic signal from Mr. Mondale. Here
is how a key Glenn aide explains it: ''There is more party unity than in the
past, but not a consensus. At least, we're communicating across ideological
lines, but that process has only begun. There still are major philosophical
differences.

''Elements of the party are soft-headed about the dangers of an adversary like
the Soviet Union. That attitude impacts on military programs. Glenn recognizes
the threat, but says he doesn't agree with what Reagan is doing about it; others
don't recognize the threat.''

Both camps are concerned about possible defections on the left during the
general elections. Their common nightmare is another John Anderson-type
candidacy, backed by the Democratic left, as in 1980. In this regard, Mr. Glenn
has more to worry about than Mr. Mondale.

But conservative-leaning Democrats may be worrying most of all about the
leftward tendencies in primary campaigning. Peter R. Rosenblatt, president of
the conservative- oriented Coalition for a Democratic Majority, said that his
''primary fear'' is that foreign policy ''won't become an issue in the
primaries.'' On Central America, for example, he argues that ''everyone is
falling into line'' saying that what Mr. Reagan is doing is ''terrible,'' but
not offering a ''rational alternative.''

Senator Daniel P. Moynihan also is concerned that the candidates are not
striking the right balance. ''As long as toughness abroad and progress at home
are thought to be incompatible,'' said the New Yorker, ''we're on our way to
becoming a minority party.''

Over matters such as the Russians shooting down a Korean airliner, Mr. Moynihan
said that ''Democrats are saying that Reagan has brought us to the brink of
confrontation, when they should be saying he hasn't been tough enough.''

''Yes,'' he added, ''foreign policy will be an issue in the campaign, but we'll
make exactly the wrong points.''

As all of these comments indicate, the new unity in the Democratic Party could
be little more than election-time deep. The left is ever on its guard against
apostasy and ready to chew up its own. A strong liberal such as Representative
Aspin votes for the MX missile and gets attacked in newspaper and radio
advertisements by the Committee for a SANE Nuclear Policy and by Citizens for a
Nuclear Freeze in Wisconsin. Conservatives are still going around damaging
reputations of their Democratic colleagues by calling them ''soft on Moscow,''
without showing how toughness might produce better results than the Reagan hard
line.

Democratic Party unity could become almost as tenuous as it was in 1976 after
Jimmy Carter got the nomination. It seemed as if the Georgian had harnessed
divergent advisers like Paul Nitze and Zbigniew Brzezinski on the right and Paul
C. Warnke and Andrew Young on the left. But when Mr. Carter brought most of
these men and others into his Administration, they started pulling every which
way but together. This was true even though most of the Carter team were
liberal. It did not take many people with different views to shake the whole
house down, especially with a vacillating President on top.

But here is where the sad passing of Henry Jackson could become crucial. However
few the number of conservatives in the Carter Administration, he was there to
give them support from the outside. He could get enough press attention and
carry enough Democratic votes with him in Congress to block the will of a
liberal Democratic President.

No one on the scene now is either willing or able to play that role. Senator Sam
Nunn of Georgia is more of an inside man than was Senator Jackson, less inclined
to do open political battle, and he has no national constituency. Lane Kirkland
is positioned to do public jousting, but he seems thoroughly disinclined to drag
the party through another internecine war.

Mr. Jackson was in the primaries in 1972 against Mr. McGovern and in 1976
against Mr. Carter. His absence, plus the fact that so many conservative
Democrats moved into the Reagan camp, has allowed for a greater measure of party
unity. The result seems to be an overall liberal-left, or, as Democrats prefer
to call it, centrist position.

This explains why neither Mr. Mondale nor Mr. Glenn, for all their jockeying
against each other, has been able to create much real daylight between them on
national security issues. The differences between them are sometimes subtle, as
on arms control, where Mr. Glenn is not as enthusiastic as Mr. Mondale,
sometimes evident, as to whether the Russians are militarily superior to the
United States, which Mr. Glenn seems to believe and Mr. Mondale does not. But
these differences are not profound and not nearly as divisive as primary feuds
of the recent past.

It follows that if either of these men is nominated, the outlines of a
Democratic foreign policy can now be seen in current rhetoric. Nor should this
rhetoric be dismissed as simply campaign confetti. The best single index to how
our post-World War II Presidents behaved once on the job has been their rhetoric
in trying to get the job. For the most part they often actually did what they
promised - at least in their first two years.


Thus, the Democratic alternative looks like this:

SOVIET-AMERICAN RELATIONS. Painting the Russians as a threat to be countered,
but not as Mr. Reagan's ''evil empire'' to be shunned. Probably, summitry aimed
at immediate reduction of tensions. No economic sanctions or grain embargoes,
but Mr. Reagan has dropped these as well. Negotiations on a broad front about
Afghanistan, Poland, etc., but no new ideas on how to reconcile the major
differences with Moscow. Less challenging rhetoric over all, but Mr. Reagan has
already moved in this direction.

ARMS CONTROL. Starting all over again and dropping Mr. Reagan's efforts to bring
about big reductions in Soviet heavy missiles. Proposing instead a freeze on the
production, testing and deployment of some, but not all, nuclear weapons. Not
likely to be the whole freeze idea, since many Democrats favor deploying the new
Trident submarine, and the B-l bomber and MX decisions may be too far along to
stop. A push on other arms limits including antisatellite weapons and
underground nuclear testing. Much less division than in the Reagan team about
the value of arms control, but no hard thinking evident yet on how to resolve
some knotty, built-in negotiating problems even with good intentions.

MILITARY SPENDING. A 3 percent to 5 percent increase as against the 10 percent
increase proposed by Mr. Reagan. But Reagan is likely to get his cut further
trimmed to about 5 percent by Congress anyway. A significant cutback in Navy
ships, if there is still time to do it. Slightly more emphasis on conventional
forces. No fundamental reforms of the services to mitigate the problem of each
service's buying its own planes, missiles, etc.

ALLIED RELATIONS AND CHINA. Better relations with Western Europe likely because
of renewed efforts to lower tension with Moscow. But no ideas yet on how to
manage structural differences with them over economic policy or defense
cooperation in the third world. Perhaps less of a free- trade orientation than
Mr. Reagan, with some very tough discussions looming with Japan. Less irritating
of Peking over the American connection to Taiwan, and basically moving slowly
with military and economic relationships, just as Mr. Reagan is doing.

CENTRAL AMERICA. Perhaps a willingness to propose power-sharing with the
Salvadoran guerrillas, but hesitation to impose this on the Salvadoran
Government. A muddy and messy situation that could lead to rapid deterioration
of the Salvadoran Government rather than the slow deterioration taking place
under Mr. Reagan. Cessation of covert operations against the Nicaraguan
Government and efforts to reach an understanding with the Sandinistas, but no
program to combat them if they continue to spread revolution. More economic aid
for the region, which Mr. Reagan seems about to do as well.  Negotiations with
Cuba. It is not clear yet whether the decisive action taken in Grenada will
strengthen Mr. Reagan's hand in Central America or give Cuba the propaganda
edge.

MIDDLE EAST. A return to the Camp David process between Egypt and Israel, but
basically moving in the same direction as Mr. Reagan's peace plan - West Bank
autonomy for the Palestinians in association with Jordan. No ideas on how to do
this any better than the President has proposed. A huge fight among Democrats
about taking the Marines out of Lebanon, with their staying in unless suitable
international forces are found to take their place. More emphasis on a
reconciliation process among Lebanese factions, but no magical formula for doing
this.

SOUTHERN AFRICA. A sharp break with Mr. Reagan's policy of ''constructive
engagement'' with South Africa. Legislation to place stringent limits on
economic relations with Pretoria. But it is far from clear how this will make
Pretoria more willing to get out of Namibia or Angola. Perhaps recognition of
the Marxist Government in Angola, but not much headway in gaining Cuban
withdrawal from that country, torn by civil war.


Is this kind of Democratic alternative going to be enough to capture the
imagination of the American people in the next election and launch the next
Democratic candidate into the White House?

A Republican pollster who did not want to be identified says that he believes
the President is so vulnerable here that ''I would rather have an arms treaty
with the Soviets than a drop of three percentage points in unemployment.''

Patrick Caddell, the Democratic pollster, also thinks foreign policy is a
winner. ''Domestic issues are the most important, but the outcome of elections
turns mostly on the candidate himself. And foreign policy is ultimately the most
Presidential issue. People ask themselves, 'Can this man deal with the outside
world and keep the peace?' '' His advice for the Democratic contender is to
stress the fears that people already have about Mr. Reagan's hawkishness. ''Run
the campaign on the prospect of what he'll do. Paint a picture of Reagan as a
man who needed the restraints of a re- election fight'' to keep him from going
to war.

Peter Hart, another Democratic pollster and a Mondale adviser, says that foreign
policy ranks second as an issue only to the economy, ''and I wouldn't be
surprised if by election time it becomes No. 1.'' Elections come down to ''peace
and prosperity,'' he said. If peace becomes No. 1, ''this will be bad news for
Reagan because that can only happen if things are going bad for the
Administration in the world.'' The last point seems to be the key one. If things
stay much as they are in the world - no successes, no arms control, mounting
tensions with Moscow, American servicemen being killed in Lebanon, and slow
deterioration in Central America - the public will be unhappy with Mr. Reagan,
but probably not enough to turn him out of office, especially if the economy
continues to recover. And Democrats also have to keep in mind that a good number
of Americans might also believe Mr. Reagan's contention that the United States
has far more respect in the world now, under him, than it did under Mr. Carter.

Democrats have evolved a new, if fragile, kind of unity on foreign affairs and
they are offering real alternatives. And chances are that foreign policy will
hurt Mr. Reagan in the elections, but not enough to defeat him unless he is in
the midst of catastrophe - as Democrats were over Vietnam in 1968 and as Mr.
Carter was over the Americans held hostage by Iran in 1980 and as Reagan may be
if the situation deteriorates further in Lebanon.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Walter Mondale; photo of John Glenn

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              322 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 18, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT BOOKS AND AUTHORS

BYLINE: By Edwin McDowell

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30, Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 665 words


True Story

BRUCE LEE, a senior editor at William Morrow, was deeply moved by Rick Eilert's
novel about a Marine wounded in Vietnam, but he just didn't think the fictional
approach rang true. Mr. Lee asked the author why he hadn't written the book as
nonfiction.

''He said because it was too painful,'' Mr. Lee recalled recently. But when the
editor suggested that the author and he work together to cut the manuscript and
change it to nonfiction, Mr. Eilert agreed to try. The result is ''For Self and
Country,'' one of the many recent books about Vietnam.

Recasting the book required Mr. Eilert to relive in greater detail the agony of
having his legs crushed by a grenade in 1967 while on patrol in Vietnam - and
the 40 operations he underwent afterward. ''What this kid went through was so
incredible I could edit only about 10 pages at a time. I'd start to cry,'' Mr.
Lee said. ''My assistant who was typing the manuscript behind my editing also
would cry. The copy editors cried.''

Mr. Lee pared the 950-page manuscript down to 400 pages; working on the book, he
said, was the most emotionally draining experience of his editing career. But
the finished product, he points out, is the author's. ''When you're editing down
so many pages, you try to use the author's words, not insert your own,'' he
said. ''All I did is shape the book; the writing is Rick's.'' What's in a Name?

ONE recent tradition inspired by the annual Frankfurt Book Fair is the prize
awarded by The Bookseller, the British magazine of the publishing industry, for
the oddest title on display there. As reported here previously, past winners
have included ''The Joy of Chickens'' and ''Proceedings of the Second
International Workshop on Nude Mice.'' This year the competition was as odd as
ever, as witness such runner-up titles as ''Practical Infectious Diseases,''
''Wife Battering: A Systems Theory Approach'' and ''The Care and Feeding of
Stuffed Animals.'' But the title that really bowled over the judges to win the
first prize belonged to the Soviet book, ''The Theory of Lengthwise Rolling.''
The Indian Pictured

THE American West continues to cast a spell over publishers, as was evident from
the roundup of cowboy books in The Book Review last week. Indians also continue
to interest publishers - not so much the portrayals of contemporary Indians that
were in vogue a decade or so ago but studies of Indian art and history, as
evidenced from the recent publication of the following: ''The Pueblo Children of
the Earth Mother'' by Thomas E. Mails, a two- volume work about the Hopi, Zuni,
Acoma, Laguna and Rio Grande Indians; ''North American Indian Art'' by Peter T.
Furst and Jill Furst; ''Hopi'' by Susanne and Jake Page; ''North American Indian
Wars'' by Richard H. Dillon; and ''Arts of the Indian America'' by Jamake
Highwater. All these books are richly illustrated with full-color pictures.

In a somewhat different category is ''Hopi Photographers / Hopi Images,''
compiled by Victor Masayesva Jr. and Erin Younger. Most of the photographs are
black and white, and all were taken, beginning in the 1940's, by seven Hopi
photographers. The photographs have been widely shown in Arizona and will be
exhibited across the country in the next two years.

Officials at the University of Arizona Press, which co-published the Hopi book
with Sun Tracks, an American Indian publisher, say they believe it to be the
first collection in book form of photographs by American Indians. To get it
between covers, several obstacles had to be overcome. Some tribal elders whose
pictures would appear in the book were opposed to being photographed until they
were convinced that it would be a means of handing down their heritage to future
generations. And a condition of publication was that royalties from the book be
assigned to a fund established at the community school in Hotevilla, a pueblo on
the Hopi reservation in Northeast Arizona, to interest Hopi students in
photography.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              323 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 18, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1354 words


FICTION 117

PET SEMATARY, by Stephen King. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The new family in town
discovers the horrors that lie in a neighboring cemetery.  2216

POLAND, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) Seven centuries of history
in fictional form.  3416

WHO KILLED THE ROBINS FAMILY?, created by Bill Adler and written by Thomas
Chastain. (Morrow, $9.95.) The publisher offers a $10,000 prize to the reader
who submits the best answer.  4326

THE NAME OF THE ROSE, by Umberto Eco. (Helen & Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $15.95.) Unraveling the mystery of a murder in a 14th-century
Italian monastery.  557

THE SAGA OF BABY DIVINE, by Bette Midler. (Crown, $11.95.) The entertainer
imagines what her infancy was like in a fable lushly illustrated by Todd Schorr.
6105

MORETA: DRAGONLADY OF PERN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $14.95.) A
battle against ecological disaster on a faraway planet.  7615

CHANGES, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) The crises that arise when a
television anchorwoman and a glamorous physician fall in love.  885

THE ROBOTS OF DAWN, by Isaac Asimov. (Doubleday, $15.95.) A human detective from
Earth investigates the murder of a robot on the planet Aurora.  975

THE WICKED DAY, by Mary Stewart. (Morrow, $16.95.) King Arthur, fulfillng a
prophecy made by Merlin, falls into an incestuous relationship.

10928

RETURN OF THE JEDI, adapted by Joan D. Vinge. (Random House, $6.95.) Illustrated
storybook based on the latest ''Star Wars'' film.  111120

HOLLYWOOD WIVES, by Jackie Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The struggle for
money and power in Tinsel Town.  121213

THE AUERBACH WILL, by Stephen Birmingham. (Little, Brown, $16.95.) Three
generations of a German-Jewish family in New York.  13133

THE NEVERENDING STORY, by Michael Ende. (Doubleday, $15.95.) A lonely boy meets
challenges and finds his true self in a magical land.

141513

WINTER'S TALE, by Mark Helprin. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $14.95.) Heroic
lives in Manhattan between the late 19th century and the year 2000.  15 12

MONIMBO, by Robert Moss and Arnaud de Borchgrave. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.)
What happens after Castro unveils a plan to stir racial tension in the United
States.



 NONFICTION 1113

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck.  (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  2214

THE BEST OF JAMES HERRIOT.  (St. Martin's Press, $19.95.) Selections from the
writings of the Yorkshire veterinarian.  3349

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J. Peters and Robert H.  Waterman Jr. (Harper
& Row, $19.95.) Lessons to be learned from well-run American corporations.  4114


WHILE REAGAN SLEPT, by Art Buchwald. (Putnam, $14.95.) Seven score wry
observations on the Washington scene by the syndicated columnist.  5416

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $17.95.) The rescue of two
Americans from an Iranian prison.  6558

MEGATRENDS, by John Naisbitt. (Warner, $17.50.) Predictions about America in the
next decade based on an analysis of conditions today.

769

VIETNAM: A History, by Stanley Karnow. (Viking, $19.95.) Profusely illustrated
history of the war: tie-in with the current PBS television series.  877

TOUGH TIMES NEVER LAST, BUT TOUGH PEOPLE DO!  by Robert H.  Schuller. (Thomas
Nelson, $12.95.) Inspiration from a Protestant preacher.  9 1

THE HUMAN BODY, by Jonathan Miller. (Viking, $16.95.) A pop-up book illustrating
the workings of the human body.  10911

THE BODY PRINCIPAL, by Victoria Principal. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Exercises
for women by a television personality.  11104

A HERO FOR OUR TIMES, by Ralph G. Martin. (Macmillan, $19.95.) An anecdotal
account of the Kennedy years.  12 1

ONE BRIEF SHINING MOMENT, by William Manchester. (Little, Brown, $25.) A
profusely illustrated tribute to John F. Kennedy.  13810

THE MARY KAY GUIDE TO BEAUTY.  (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) An illustrated guide
for women prepared by the staff of a cosmetics firm.  14 71

A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein. (Harper & Row, $12.45.) Humor in
cartoons and verse.  15 35

BLUE HIGHWAYS, by William Least Heat Moon. (Atlantic/Little, Brown, $17.50.) A
report on a trip through the back roads of America.  The listings above are
based on computer-processed sales figures from about 2,000 bookstores in every
region of the United States. And Bear in Mind Other recent books that in the
opinion of the Book Review staff are of particular literary, topical or
scholarly interest:

THE DEATH OF CHE GUEVARA, by Jay Cantor. (Alfred A. Knopf, $17.95.) A powerful
first novel that mixes fact and fantasy about the Latin-American revolutionary,
seeing him not as a hero or a curiosity or a demon but as a historical riddle.

THE DISCOVERERS, by Daniel J. Boorstin. (Random House, $25.) In his latest book,
the Librarian of Congress takes his longest, widest look at ''man's search to
know his world and himself'' in science through the centuries.

FIASCO, by Jack Anderson with James Boyd. (Times Books, $17.50.) In which the
syndicated columnist and his colleague demolish the idea that worldwide supply
problems were to blame for what happened to the price of oil.

THE FILE, by Penn Kimball. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $14.95.) An eloquent and
troubling book in which the author, a former editor who is now a professor of
journalism, tells of his discovery that for more than 30 years he has been
listed in secret Government files as ''a definite security risk,'' on the basis
of hearsay.

THE ISLAND OF CRIMEA, by Vassily Aksyonov. (Random House, $16.95.) This novel by
a Russian emigre, in which Crimea is a bustling, Western-style democracy right
off the shores of the Soviet Union, reads for much of its length like a bizarre
yet joyous collaboration between Dostoyevsky and Thomas Pynchon.

JOSEPH CONRAD: A Chronicle, by Zdzislaw Najder. (Rutgers University Press.
Cloth, $30; paper, $14.95.) A major work of literary scholarship that succeeds
by avoiding fanciful theorizing about Conrad, showing us instead what a
biographer well equipped with the facts can do.

LA BRAVA, by Elmore Leonard. (Arbor House, $14.95.) Unlike most thrillers, which
hold up for the first 250 pages but don't make much sense in the end, ''La
Brava'' - about a former Secret Service man probing extortion and murder in
Miami Beach - has a conclusion even more satisfying than its exposition.

LIFE & TIMES OF MICHAEL K, by J. M. Coetzee. (The Viking Press, $13.95.) The new
novel by the South African author of ''Waiting for the Barbarians'' is a parable
of a repressive country at war in which an unexpectedly intelligent simpleton -
a mote in the dustheap of society - nobly endures.

THE MODERN POETIC SEQUENCE: The Genius of Modern Poetry, by M. L.  Rosenthal and
Sally M. Gall. (Oxford University Press, $29.95.) A survey of more than 40 works
by American, British and Irish poets that impressively consolidates a way of
reading the specifically modern in the poetry of the last century and a half.

PARALLEL LIVES: Five Victorian Marriages, by Phyllis Rose. (Alfred A.  Knopf,
$16.95.) The marriages (mostly unhappy) of five famous literary figures - John
Ruskin, Thomas Carlyle, John Stuart Mill, Charles Dickens and George Eliot, the
last free of legality - told so compellingly they spring to life all over again.


RUSSIA: Broken Idols, Solemn Dreams, by David K. Shipler. (Times Books, $17.95.)
An observant account by a Times correspondent of his tour of duty in Moscow
1975-79 that directs our attention to long-term trends in the Soviet system and
society.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              324 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 18, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AT BURN CENTER, PAINSTAKING VICTORIES

BYLINE: By SUZANNE DeCHILLO

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 1, Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1701 words


VALHALLA THE nurses and visitors in the isolation room come and go dressed in
sterile gowns and masks. Here a mother cannot kiss or even touch her burned son
- a precaution against infection, which the patient's body cannot fight. In the
sunlighted rooms of the Burn Center at Westchester County Medical Center here,
patients are immobilized in splints or in traction to protect their skin grafts,
to prevent contractures and to speed a slow healing process.

Patients and burn team - the doctors, nurses, dietician, students, therapists
and housekeepers - fight a daily life-and-death struggle against infection,
pain, deformity and disfigurement. Sometimes, the race is won.

The patient on the operating table spoke of searching for narwhals off Baffin
Island, above the Arctic Circle. Explaining that the narwhal is often called the
''unicorn whale'' because of its long, spiral tusk, Dr. Jay Hyman, the patient,
who is also a veterinarian, described his summer whale expedition as a victory.

Awake through this one-in-a-series surgical procedure, he joked, ''this is
hardly an operation.'' He had stopped counting operations for this burn injury
at No. 14.

Working to restore mobility to Dr. Hyman's right arm, Dr. Roger Salisbury, the
surgeon, called it a ''long journey.'' On July 9, 1981, a plane crash left the
Pearl River veterinarian severely burned and comatose. Two months before the
crash, Dr. Hyman had captured the public's interest when he saved Physty, a
sperm whale stranded on a Long Island beach.

When the veterinarian was taken to the Burn Center at the Westchester County
Medical Center on that July 9 he was not expected to live.

For the general burn patient, recovery is spoken about in terms of years -
nobody mentions weeks or months, according to Dr. Salisbury, director of the
Burn Center and professor of surgery and chief of plastic and reconstructive
surgery at the New York Medical School. From this world circumscribed by pain,
skin grafts and reconstructive surgery that only leads to more operations and
endless rounds of physical therapy and exercise, Dr. Jay Hyman went back and
picked up living his life. He returns occasionally for operations.

One of about 100 burn units in the country, the Burn Center at Westchester
Medical Center, with an operating budget of $2,770,743, has a staff of almost
50. Located near the emergency room, the 10-bed unit includes two operating
rooms, offices, a hydrotherapy room, an outpatient clinic and a day room.
Patients' rooms are equipped with respirators, heat shields, intravenous
apparatus and other lifesaving equipment.

The burn-care facility, which opened four years ago, serves Westchester, Putnam,
Rockland, Orange, Dutchess, Sullivan and Ulster Counties. Of the 180 patients
admitted last year, about 50 percent were from Westchester; 45 percent came from
the other six Hudson River counties served by the Medical Center and the rest
from New Jersey, New York City or Connecticut.

''Burn care is something that is not done well except in a burn center or
unit,'' said Edward Stolzenberg, associate hospital director at the medical
center. ''It can't be. The average burn patient requires anywhere from 18 to 22
hours of professional nursing care a day.'' The price for burn care runs high;
it costs $1,022.04 a day to treat a patient at the Valhalla facility. On an
average, the unit runs at about 75 percent patient capacity.

An estimated two million people in the United States suffer burns each year,
according to Dr. Salisbury. The Burn Center treats second- and third- degree
burns, many caused by chemical and radiation mishaps, automobile fires and auto
radiator explosions. The most common burn treated, according to Dr. Salisbury,
is scald injury, mostly among the very young and the elderly.

In addition to treating burn patients, the Burn Center conducts
community-education programs in fire and burn prevention, and it is a teaching
facility for the New York Medical School. It is also a research facility, whose
staff conducts studies on wound healing and artificial skin substitutes, as well
as working on a national study on factors that influence a burn patient's
ability to return to work.

''Even in the early 1970's, when we got a burn patient, we would ship him out as
fast as we could,'' said Mr. Stolzenberg, who worked at Bellevue Hospital at the
time. ''The children would go to Shriners Hospital in Boston and the adults
would be sent to Brooke Army Hospital in Texas. Most hospitals were not in a
position to adequately manage a patient with burns on 60 percent of his body.
They were once considered lost causes. You would put them in the back of the
ward and hope they would die as soon as possible. That's not said in a callous
way, but there was just nothing you could do. Now we handle those cases
routinely here.'' Of the 180 burn patients treated in the county facility last
year, 11 died.  ''Very little good comes out of war, except that we seem to
improve our trauma care,'' Dr. Salisbury said. ''We learn a lot about taking
care of casualties, and whatever we learn is translated into civilian
experience. It was true after World War I and II and Korea. Following the
Vietnam War there was an increase in the number of burn units set up around the
country.

''Patients who are critically injured really do better at a burn center,'' he
continued. ''You put together a dedicated team of professionals: surgeons,
doctors, nurses, physical and occupational therapists, dieticians, social
workers and rehabilitation counselors, and the patient doesn't die early from
his acute injury, and he stands a better chance of getting out the hospital
sooner. Also the burn team does a better job of getting these people back to
work and school.''

Ten years ago, when two children rescued from a fire in Yonkers died, Jack
Williams, a New Rochelle firefighter, asked why there wasn't a burn center in
the county to save them. The Fifth District, New York State Professional
Firefighters Association, led by Officer Williams and Lieut. Robert Bogart, a
White Plains firefighter, began a six-year campaign for a burn unit in the
county. The resultant center, which cost $2.5 million, opened in November 1979.

Working with the hand therapist in the outpatient clinic at the Burn Center,
Walter Finch, a firefighter who was burned in a chemical explosion and fire in
Stamford, Conn., last January, described burns as the ''worst injury you could
imagine.'' Slowly picking up small bolts with skin-grafted hands, he said,
''things go so slowly. There were times when I'd get up in the morning and I'd
say, what's the use.''

The burn team that deals with this ''worst injury'' consists of two surgeons, a
physical medicine and rehabilitation doctor, 26 nurses, a liaison psychiatrist,
a psychiatric nurse, a dietician, physical and occupational therapists, a
research fellow, social worker and resident doctors and students. ''Everyone
from the surgeon to the housekeepers play a role on the team,'' said Maureen
Burke, head nurse at the unit.

In the beginning of burn care, surgeons work to cover and close the wound. Burns
are treated with topical antibiotic creams, and dead tissue is removed. Skin
grafting begins 48 to 72 hours after the dead skin is removed. Later comes
reconstructive and plastic surgery.

Working with the doctor and nurses, Nancy DelSavio, a dietician, determines the
nutritional needs of the patients and monitors their caloric and protein intake.
Just lying in a bed, a burn patient can require 5,000 calories a day. To achieve
that goal, hospital meal trays are supplemented with milkshakes. To tempt those
who won't eat, the dietician concocts some odd menus. A 72-year-old cancer
patient who had scalded herself loved beer, so her breakfast tray held a can of
beer, a milkshake and an egg. ''She never ate the egg,'' said Mrs. DelSavio.
''But her weight went from 88 to 105 pounds.

Burn therapists start working with patients from the first day of admission.
''Every patient is a potential rehabilitation candidate. Rehabilitation can't
wait until a person is feeling better,'' said Judith Carr, an occupational
therapist. ''If a person isn't positioned properly, if they're not moved or
exercised, contractures begin and that is going to be a disability later.
Primarily, my role here is exercising, positioning and splinting the patient to
prevent deformities.'' While normal skin is elastic, burn tissue is tight and
contracts. Without exercise, bad scar contractures develop that can result in
abnormal postures and positions.

Needless to say the exercise is painful for patients. ''Three days after they
did the skin graft on my hand, the physical therapist came in and said that they
were going to start exercising my hand,'' said Peter Accumanno, a Greenburgh
resident, who was burned on 25 percent of his body when gasoline from a gas leak
in his car caught fire, igniting his clothing. ''I couldn't believe it. I was
sure she had the wrong room. I said, 'My name is Accumanno. I was just grafted.
Leave me alone!'

''Yet these dedicated people get in there. They will not leave you alone. Even
though you tell them to get lost and you swear at them, they persist. They know
that if you don't get moving now, you're never going to move.''

''In a burn center you don't just have one patient,'' said Patricia Reddish, the
psychiatric nurse for the unit. ''One patient turns into a community of people
you have to treat psychologically. We see every patient and family no matter
what the size of the burn. An injury to the patient is also an injury to the
family. The family must adjust to the prolonged hospitalization and the
possibility of losing someone. They have to cope with returning that disabled
and sometimes disfigured person back to the family.''

On the way to recovery, patient, family and burn team often become friends.
''They're like my family: They took us in; they nurtured us; they healed us;
they loved us,'' said Emily LaVier, whose 14-year-old son Raymond suffered
third-degree burns on 50 percent of his body in a camping accident more than a
year ago. Last month, Raymond LaVier returned to school.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of therapist Judith Carr examining patient at burn center; photo
of Dr. Donovan Holder and Dr. Roger Salisbury performing; operation; photo of
firefighter Walter Finch

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              325 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 18, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

UNEQUAL PARTNERS

BYLINE: By Daniel Yergin

SECTION: Section 7; Page 6, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1502 words


THE ALLIANCE

America, Europe, Japan, Makers of the Postwar World.  By Richard J. Barnet.
Illustrated. 511 pp. New York: Simon & Schuster. $19.95.

THINGS that go right, even relatively so, are easily taken for granted. Such has
been the fate of the ''alliance,'' that set of political, military and economic
relationships that tie the United States with Western Europe, Japan and, though
it is often forgotten, Canada. Yet neither the alliance's creation, nor its
survival, was ever a sure thing. Now is a most appropriate time to take a long
view of the alliance - a task undertaken by Richard J. Barnet in his valuable
book. With considerable skill, he explains how the world of the alliance ''was
created and how it is coming apart.'' His outlook has decidedly shifted, from
that of a radical critic of United States foreign policy to one of measured
respect and judicious admiration for the alliance at a time when this view is
hardly fashionable.

Today, the existence of the alliance is being challenged by peace groups in
Europe (many though by no means all of whose members are on the left) that are
vociferously campaigning against the United States' deployment of Pershing II
missiles in Europe. In the United States, critics (many but not all of them on
the right) attack Western Europe for having become ''Finlandized'' - too
acquiescent to the Soviet Union - when actually it's just that the Europeans
have somewhat different interests and viewpoints from Americans. Such critics
call for a divorce in the strategic relationship between the United States and
Europe, though they say the two sides should stay in touch. They urge the United
States to embark on a unilateralist foreign policy and military strategy - a
sort of super-Gaullism. Meanwhile, the United States' relationship with Japan is
made more and more strained and bitter by trade disputes and protectionism.

The alliance has always been a troubled partnership, continually afflicted by
episodes of strain and conflict, each one usually pronounced ''the worst crisis
in the history of the alliance.'' And yet it persists

Daniel Yergin , the author of ''Shattered Peace'' and the co-author of ''Energy
Future'' and ''Global Insecurity,'' is at work on a history of the international
oil business.  today, into its fourth decade. Still, today's debates are over
basic issues, and the debates themselves are very raw - and likely to get rawer.


''THE ALLIANCE'' is not based on extensive primary research, but is a synthesis,
drawing upon a wide range of memoirs and specialized studies. Mr. Barnet does
this very well, and he combines lively narrative history with deft political
analysis and vivid, psychologically acute portraits of the men who created and
have led the alliance.

He tells the story of how the alliance was created. The most striking part of
the story involves the rehabilitation of Germany and Japan and their integration
into the West - initially, as important a goal for the United States as the
containment of the Soviet Union. It was simply too costly - and too dangerous -
for the Allies to keep Germany and Japan in ruins. The history of the rebuilding
of Western Europe after World War II is well known, but what happened in Japan
is less familiar. And one of the virtues of Mr. Barnet's book is that it
illuminates what has been the almost invisible development of the postwar
relationship between the United States and Japan.

The members of the alliance have consistently found themselves at odds. ''The
Alliance was in 'disarray' of one sort or another from the day the NATO Treaty
was signed,'' Mr. Barnet writes, ''because the partners always had different
expectations and different visions of what they were doing.'' The top secret
''Basic National Security Policy,'' produced by the Eisenhower Administration in
1954, with its warnings that the alliance was under strain ''resulting from
growing fears of nuclear war . . . and greater receptivity by the Allies to
Soviet overtures,'' could well have been written in the Reagan Administration in
1983. In the 1960's, an exasperated President John F. Kennedy quoted Winston
Churchill to the effect that ''the history of any alliance is the history of
mutual recrimination.''

The East-West trade issues (the Soviet/Western European pipeline, Western
technology exports) now causing such a lather involve the same arguments going
on since the late 1940's. Mr. Barnet observes that President Eisenhower saw
political value in East-West trade - not because of what Henry Kissinger would
later call linkage (the idea that trade incentives offered by the United States
could make the Soviets modify their foreign policy), but because dependency
works both ways. Just a year after the Korean War, when China was still the
ultimate devil to many Americans, President Eisenhower suggested that Japan be
encouraged to trade ''with the neighboring Red areas in Asia. . . . If China,
for example, finds that it can buy cheap straw hats, cheap cotton shirts,
sneakers, bicycles, and all the rest of that sort of stuff from Japan, it would
seem to me that would set up the need within China for dependence upon Japan. .
. . Anyone who says that to trade with a Red country is in effect advocating a
traitorous act just doesn't know what he is talking about.''


THE alliance has been continually torn by differences over events outside the
sphere of its relations - Suez, the Vietnam War, the 1973 Mideast War - and this
no doubt will continue. Economic problems have also aggravated the relationship.
But Mr. Barnet goes too far when he asserts that ''management of economic
rivalry'' among the partners in the alliance became the paramount controversy in
the 1970's. After all, as he himself so well demonstrates, the first part of
that decade was just as much dominated by the bitter rivalry of the two
Ostpolotiks - West German Chancellor Willy Brandt's and President Richard M.
Nixon's competing detente policies.

Yet, more than anything else, the continuing conflict in the alliance has been
over nuclear weapons. What say would the Europeans have over their use? Would
the United States resort to nuclear weapons to defend the sovereignty of Western
Europe and Japan? The answers were clear in the 1950's, when the United States
was the world's paramount power. But those answers have become more obscure
since the Soviets achieved nuclear parity. This change in the East-West balance
of power has led to a more basic question - would an American President risk
Chicago - or Kansas City - to save, say, Cologne?

Ironically, any test of strength between the United States and the Soviet Union
that emerges could end up being triggered not by a Soviet invasion of Western
Europe but by a crisis in Eastern Europe that tested Soviet authority. The other
side of the question is the effort by some Europeans in the peace movement to
remove themselves from East-West confrontation. These are the issues that are at
the heart of the battle over the deployment of the Pershing II missiles, and Mr.
Barnet provides the context for readers to make sense of them.


THE balance of power within the alliance has shifted, but not so much as is
generally thought. The United States is still the predominant power. ''The
United States created its alliance with Europe and Japan as an international
experiment in a politically divided world,'' Mr. Barnet writes. ''It was, and it
remains, a protectorate not an empire. The weaker parties, though they have paid
heavily at times in the currency of pride, have scarcely been exploited. But
from the beginning it has always been a highly unequal relationship in which the
protector arrogated to itself the sole responsibility to make crucial decisions
for the protected.'' He goes on to say, ''In a world of soverign states, such
solicitude is never appreciated. Thus the aging alliance created for the United
States the problems of empire with few of its obvious benefits.''

Here one must differ with Mr. Barnet - and with those (though Mr. Barnet is not
among them) in both the United States and Europe who, for very different
reasons, wish the dissolution of the strategic part of the alliance. The
alliance is a powerful force for stability and a deterrent the Russians have no
choice but to respect. Troubled and troublesome as it has been, the alliance has
nevertheless rested upon common interests and, yes, common values (even if, in
Germany and Japan, those values were partly imposed by American proconsuls). The
alliance should not so easily be taken for granted; one can well imagine much
worse results from World War II. In fact, it deserves to be pronounced a
success, not only because it has survived but also because there has been a
common will among the partners to see it survive. Its troubles continually seem
to becloud its benefits. But then it is always difficult to put a price on what
has not happened and what has been prevented.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              326 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 19, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
LEBANON AND VIETNAM

BYLINE: By Tony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 817 words


Lebanon is not Vietnam: So we are told by those who support the deepening U.S.
military involvement. They are right. The geography, the society, the interests
at stake are all very different in Lebanon.

But some things are the same, and they send ominous signals. They are the very
attitudes, the official obsessions that led us down the road to disaster in
Vietnam. So skepticism is in order when we are told that we must not be
distracted from our duty in Lebanon by a Vietnam syndrome.

One similarity is the tendency to see everything in terms of East-West
confrontation. John Foster Dulles, Richard Nixon and others said we had to fight
in Vietnam to draw a line against Communist China. The political idiocy of that
argument, its ignorance of the ancient antipathy between China and Vietnam, is
obvious now. Yet here again in Lebanon we are being offered political
simplicities.

Nothing could be more complicated than the politics of Lebanon. There are
centuries-old conflicts between Moslems and Christians, and bloody rivalries
within each of the religions. There is the fact that Lebanon was carved out of
Syria only 50 years ago, and that Syria has not only a political interest but an
acute military interest in territory that opens the way to Damascus.

Another familiar note is the argument that we will lose our credibility in the
world if we do not stand fast in a quagmire. That was Henry Kissinger's theme on
Vietnam: that even if we should not have gone in originally, once there we could
not afford to lose face by leaving precipitately. Similarly in Lebanon now the
Marines have to stay in their impossible position so the U.S. does not lose
face.

Did it impress our European allies that we stayed in Vietnam four more years
before Kissinger and Nixon settled with Hanoi? Was our credibility enhanced by
pursuing an obsession and losing 20,492 more American lives? The notion defies
reason, and it is just as crazy to believe that U.S. credibility depends on
keeping marines in an exposed position to no political end in Lebanon.

Unilateral Presidential decision- making is another common element. Presidents
sent American forces to Vietnam without asking Congress or telling the public
the truth. Once they were fighting, it was much harder to have an honest debate
about whether they should be there. And the same is true in Lebanon.

President Reagan has insisted that he alone must decide on the deployment or
withdrawal of U.S. forces. Congress agreed to the Marine presence when its
purpose was defined as peacekeeping. Now the mission has been utterly
transformed, to making Lebanon safe for democracy and excluding Soviet influence
from the region. Those goals are out of reach for 2,000 or 200,000 marines. But
it is awkward for Congress to debate the fact when the marines are under fire.
Then there is the inability of American officials to see events from the
viewpoint of the other side. Knowing nothing of Vietnamese culture or history,
we never did understand the fanatical determination of the North Vietnamese to
reunite their country. And we seem equally unable to appreciate how the Syrians
feel now.  When American reconnaissance planes flew over Syrian positions and
two were shot down, U.S. officials called that ''unprovoked aggression.'' If
Syrian planes had flown over the U.S. fleet, would our antiaircraft guns have
remained silent? Can any sensible analyst expect Syria to be comfortable with
the idea of a Lebanon dominated by the Maronite Christian minority supported by
Israel and the U.S.? That aim is one way of reading U.S. military activity in
Lebanon.  Finally, there is the tendency to rush into the use of military force
when there may be other options. The United States eschewed diplomacy at the
crucial early period in Vietnam; when the French gave up in 1954, Dulles refused
to play a constructive role at the Geneva Conference. And we waited far too long
to talk to Syria and the opposition in Lebanon.  The use of American force in
Lebanon carries great dangers. The country's Shiite Moslems, the largest and
most deprived population group, are already seething with the fervor of the
Khomeini revolution. They have been provoked by Israeli occupation, and American
military intervention may intensify the religious and communal feelings.  It is
also a fact that American bombs and shells have fallen less than 50 miles from
Soviet troops in Syria. Any time that superpower forces come that close to each
other in a byzantine local conflict, it is dangerous. Accidents happen.  The
history of American involvement in Vietnam has been evoked with extraordinary
power in the public television series that ends this week. Watching those 13
programs, the most impressive piece of broadcast journalism in memory, one feels
the heartache of what might have been avoided. There is still a chance to avoid
disaster in Lebanon.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              327 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 19, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THE CITY;
 Fire Breaks Out On the Intrepid



BYLINE:
By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 159 words


A fire aboard the Intrepid at a Hudson River pier yesterday forced about 50
visitors to leave the retired aircraft carrier that is now a museum, city fire
officials said.

They said the one-alarm blaze began about 1 P.M. in the officers' room between
the flight and hangar decks. The officers' room is the only room on the Intrepid
that has any wood that could burn, they said, noting that the rest of the
carrier is metal, except for the flight deck.

Workers were using acetylene torches to cut metal near the room when the wood
was set ablaze by the heat, the fire officials said. There were no injuries in
the fire, which was declared under control at 1:34 P.M.

The Intrepid, which is berthed at Pier 86 at West 46th Street, was opened as a
museum in the summer of 1982 after being refitted at a cost of $20 million. The
40-year-old carrier remained in action in World War II after being bombed and
torpedoed and also served in the Vietnam War.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              328 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 19, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THE COACHING ROLE IS CHANGING WITH THE TIMES

BYLINE: By PETER ALFANO

SECTION: Section C; Page 4, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 3093 words


FOOTBALL as war is a popular metaphor among the players and coaches and even
many of the television and newspaper reporters who cover the games. The head
coach is depicted as the commander-in-chief with unquestioned authority. The
players are troops being sent into battle on the football field. Linemen engage
in hand-to- hand combat in the trenches and quarterbacks are field generals.
Running backs are the infantry.

When the Washington Redskins arrived in Dallas 10 days ago to resume what might
be professional football's fiercest rivalry, many of the players were dressed in
combat fatigues. The game, we were reminded in the buildup, would be a war.

Many coaches do not try to discourage the analogy. On those oversized desks that
symbolize a coach's seat of power, there often is a book or placard inscribed
with an inspirational saying uttered by a famous general during wartime. For
example, Woody Hayes, the former Ohio State coach, was a student of military
history and saw himself as a gridiron Patton.

But it is the football as war metaphor that was a major reason why the game was
unpopular with many students on college campuses during the 1960's and early
1970's. This was the period of the Vietnam War, a time of great unrest and
social change in America. If young men were questioning the need to fight for
their country, then others who wore football uniforms were beginning to question
some of the harsh methods and the autocratic manners of the coaches.

''I think coaches got that aura from the time when Gen. Robert Neyland was at
Tennessee and Red Blaik was at Army,'' said Ron Meyer the coach of the New
England Patriots. ''With the onset of the peace movement and civil rights
movement in the 1960's, a lot of coaches felt that the basic fundamental axioms
our country was founded on were being attacked. There was a whole new culture
for coaches to deal with. It was a time for self-evaluation.

''For the first time, the question 'Why?' was addressed and answered during the
1960's. James Meredith went to the Mississippi campus and asked, 'Why not?', and
college players were asking their coaches why they couldn't run a pass pattern
another way.''

Now, 20 years later, there are still a number of coaches on the high school,
collegiate and professional level whose methods are based on a philosophy that
seems to have its origin in boot camps and military academies. Some of these
coaches who berate, belittle, intimidate and, occasionally, physically abuse
players, also are successful and highly publicized. This, they argue, justifies
their methods.

But there are many more coaches, some of whom were students or young assistants
during the 1960's, who were influenced by that period and have become more
sensitive to the needs and feelings of athletes. Coaches have learned to be more
flexible regarding issues that do not undermine their authority; they are more
receptive to change as long as it does not compromise their basic principles.

''We hired a sports psychologist this year,'' said Mike White, the University of
Illinois football coach whose team won the Big Ten Conference championship and
will play in the Rose Bowl Jan. 2. ''The psychologist was able to do things that
I couldn't. He was an ear for the players to talk to. He was someone they could
trust. And I think I was mature enough to hire him and not think of him as a
threat to the team.''

Before he came to the Midwest, to a part of the country where football is
equated with an honest day's labor in the steel mills or on the assembly lines,
White had been the head coach at the University of California from 1972-77. He
was raised in Berkeley, was a student at the university and thus was exposed to
a liberal viewpoint that pervades the community.

But as the head football coach at California, White did not feel that the
program had the support of the student body or faculty. ''I don't know if there
was a hostile feeling,'' he said, ''but it was a lonely existence for the
players, my staff and me.''

White, however, said he did not try to isolate himself or his players from the
liberal mainstream. They were exposed to the drug culture and the militancy of
blacks and so-called hippies who populated the campus.

''When I came to Illinois, the environment was natural for a hardline
disciplinarian,'' White said. ''The kids here have more old time values and you
can do things that weren't possible in California. But what I went through in
California gave me insight. Even if we seem to be going back a little to the old
days, I'm aware that you have to have empathy and understanding for a kid. I
have been able to keep the sensitivity.''


White and Meyer may be perceived as enlightened, but it should be noted that
they have different public images. White, whose Berkeley upbringing paints him
as liberal, says: ''I'm a perfectionist. We're real picky with the players in
practice. The players like to say that the games are easy compared to
practice.''

At Southern Methodist University, Meyer was considered a hardliner. When he
became the Patriots' head coach last season, he ran into resistance from
experienced professional players who resented what they considered his excessive
authority. Last summer, the all-pro guard John Hannah insisted he would retire
rather than play for the Patriots. He later returned to the team.

''I was a college coach thrust upon a veteran team,'' Meyer said, ''and changes
had to be made. I knew this would produce anxiety and animosity.

''So I tried not to get close to the players. I was standoffish and was
reluctant to let them get to know me. I made some mistakes. But you know I'm
generally low key and not very vocal. I don't grab face masks and curse
players.''

Hannah, a lineman who is regarded as one of the best ever to play his position,
is reluctant to discuss his disagreement with Meyer, who is his fourth
professional head coach in 11 years. But talking in general terms about coaches,
he said: ''They can't change everything or change you overnight. A player should
be open- minded enough to listen but a coach should know you, too.

''I've made all-pro, but one coach on another team in the mid-1970's told me
that I could never play for him. It's tough to please some guys.''

Hannah is 32 years old, and while experience has helped him to be able to
understand a coach's style and manner, it also tends to make him less agreeable
to some of the changes that occur when a team hires a new coach.

''I try to let a coach do his own thing,'' Hannah said, ''but I'm strict on
myself, so I tend not to like to have a guy breathing down my neck. In college,
Coach Bryant put more restrictions on our daily lives because we were younger,
but I don't think everyone needs that in the pros.'' Hannah played for the late
Bear Bryant at the University of Alabama.

''I think players, more than coaches, are different now,'' Hannah added.
''Younger players are more aware and alert to the situation in the pros. That's
why it's so hard to be a head coach. You have 48 players, and they all have to
be treated differently.''

A coach might be admired for some of his methods and criticized for others. What
most athletes acknowledge, however, is that all head coaches have the last word
even if it goes against the advice of the assistants. This is similar to the way
most corporate leaders run their businesses.

''I may grab a player by the uniform and say, 'Now, look here,' '' said Eddie
Sutton, the University of Arkansas basketball coach. ''Nobody is a bigger
shouter than me. But it's like I tell my assistants, treat them as you would
your own children. I treat the players like I do my sons.''

''Parents,'' said Mike Ornato, the football coach at Greenwich High School in
Connecticut, which has won the state championship the last two years, ''have
lowered their expectations. I don't think young people have changed that much
over the years but the supervision of them has. Parents have backed off.''

Studies conducted by sports psychologists support the theory that young athletes
want their coaches to be strong authority figures. ''Our research shows that
youths want structure and discipline,'' said Prof. Ronald E. Smith, a sports
pyschologist at the University of Washington who specializes in youth sports
studies.

''In fact, now the pendulum is swinging back toward the 1950's from the ferment
of the 60's,'' Smith added. ''But the pendulum won't swing back all the way. The
players are not willing to do everything the coach says.''

Robert Gurland, a professor of sports philosophy and psychology at New York
University, said that parents rely too much on teachers and coaches to set
standards of behavior for their children. Given the fact that people have
different morals and ethics, he added, raising other people's children is
something that teachers or coaches are not really equipped to do.

And even if there is supervision at home and on the playing field, who or what
guides an athlete's actions when he is among his peers in social situations? The
biggest problem facing coaches at all levels today is the drug culture. Some
coaches warn their athletes about the physical harm drugs can cause, and the
criminal penalties that can result from drug use, but are reluctant to police or
spy on them. They contend that this is the parents' job. Other coaches care only
that the player can function on the day of the game.

''I think there is more pressure to succeed on young people today,'' said
Charley Pell, the football coach at the University of Florida. ''There is peer
group pressure, too, and that involves drugs. That's why they need more
communication with us. Our players participate in making decisions about curfews
and other things that will affect their life styles.''

White said that he makes a point of speaking to his team four times a week to
keep open the lines of communication. ''Consistency and accuracy are the two
things I learned that you have to have with players,'' he said.


But the nature of the head coach's job has evolved to a point where he has
become the chairman of the board of a sports program and less directly involved
with the athletes. Pell said he was shocked to learn that some of the violations
that resulted in Clemson's being placed on probation for the last two years
occurred when he was the head coach in 1977 and 1978. The implication is that he
did not know what was going on within his own program.

White has had his share of problems, too. While at California, there were
charges that several of his players, most notably the running back Chuck Muncie,
were not regularly attending classes. White said that this was the
responsibility of the athlete although he acknowledged that he probably should
have taken a bigger interest in their attendance.

''I delegated too much authority at Berkeley,'' he said. ''It was my first
head-coaching job and I wasn't sure of who I was.''

But most coaches have learned that delegation of authority is a necessity now,
especially in football. ''I'm a fund-raiser, a salesman and a coach,'' said
Jackie Sherrill, the Texas A&M football coach.

Despite the fact that coaches such as White may regularly address their teams,
they basically are aloof, relying on their assistants to be troubleshooters.
Ornato of Greenwich High School defends this approach. ''I intimidate the
kids,'' he said. ''They have reservations about talking to me. They'd rather go
to an assistant like a child might go to his mother before seeing the father.''

So in the eyes of many athletes, the coach really isn't overly accessible. His
concessions are those of a benevolent despot. The coaches, meanwhile, wonder
where the line should be drawn in reference to players' rights. At what point
does the coach who believes in being flexible become too permissive and lose the
respect of the players?

''I base everything on what I would have liked as a player,'' said Jim Valvano,
the basketball coach at North Carolina State, the defending national collegiate
champion. ''Why, when we become coaches, do many of us impose a higher standard
than we had as players? We expect kids to eat, sleep and dream about the sport.
In college, I also was trying to get a degree. I was trying to have some fun in
school.'' One of the first concessions made by coaches in the 1960's concerned
the players' appearance. Long hair was viewed as a symbol of rebellion and being
less than manly. Mustaches and beards further threatened team uniformity and the
clean-cut military image a player was supposed to present. But as coaches
discovered, longer hair did not necessarily promote individuality at the expense
of teamwork.

''You look back now and it seemed so silly,'' said Pell, who was noted as a
disciplinarian and who played under Bryant at Kentucky. ''But the 1960's were a
tough time. I remember being at Kentucky as an assistant and we had a hair
coach, usually the guy who was the most liberal on the staff. He checked the
players to make sure their hair wasn't getting too long. That seems like the
dark ages now.''

The evolution of sports medicine also curbed the abusive tendencies of some
coaches. For example, many coaches did not allow players to take water breaks
during practice until physicians advised them to do so, warning a significant
loss of body fluids could result in dehydration and, possibly, heat stroke.


But the biggest concession for coaches was providing athletes with an
explanation for their actions. As the unquestioned authority, many coaches did
not feel they owed their athletes any explanations. Others, though, sensed that
it might ultimately make their job easier.

Pell said that for all its faults, television is a young person's ticket to the
outside world. Even those who grow up in small towns or rural areas can cross
the county line with the turn of a dial. ''They are so much more aware of what's
going on,'' he said. ''They have a perception that those in my generation didn't
have. They can't identify with the ignorance we had.''

White, however, said that coaches might have swung too far in the other
direction. ''We may be giving the athletes too much credit,'' he said. ''As
college sports have become big business with increasing pressure to win at any
cost, it is sometimes overlooked that many of the athletes are teen-agers.''

Winning at all costs presents still another potential conflict for coaches. Most
of them who hold major college jobs were hired to win, not to graduate students.
The findings of Smith, the psychologist, however, suggest that an athlete's
mental well-being depends on a coach's stressing effort over winning. ''Success
is the effort put forth, not outcome,'' he said. ''Peaking under pressure should
be a challenge, not a threat. We need to look beyond winning. At the college
level, sports should be an experience.''

Even if coaches stressed effort rather than winning, there are different ways of
achieving this end. Some use positive reinforcement - encouragement, a pat on
the back - the method advised by sports psycholgists. Others, however, use the
fear of failure or oral abuse to motivate players. Most coaches today, however,
do not believe in using physical force.

''To belittle a youngster is wrong,'' Valvano said. ''Teaching is not yelling
and screaming. That isn't discipline or macho.''

''I think positive reinforcement is a good teaching point,'' said Dick Harter,
the former basketball coach at Pennsylvania, Oregon and Penn State who is now an
assistant with the Detroit Pistons. ''But when someone doesn't do it right, get
it corrected. It's only bad when criticism gets sarcastic.''

Harter left Penn State following last season. He has been a taskmaster during
his coaching career and sources close to the Penn State basketball program say
that some of the players objected to the fact that Harter would criticize them
publicly on occasion.

There are coaches like Lou Holtz, who resigned yesterday as Arkansas football
coach, who temper their dictatorial style with humor. Others, for instance,
Gerry Faust of Notre Dame rely on school tradition and impassioned pep talks to
motivate the players.

Notre Dame officials were embarrassed early this season when the Fighting Irish
lost to Miami and Faust brought a fan who is confined to a wheelchair into the
Orange Bowl locker room and then made one of his speeches about conquering
adversity.

It was a spontaneous act on Faust's part, said one Notre Dame official who added
that it was not seen as being contrived or insincere. But it came across as
heavy handed to school officials.

''I know today's athlete is different,'' Faust said, ''but the closest we come
to the athlete of 20 years ago are those here at Notre Dame.''

Bob Crable of the Jets, who played for Faust in high school and for one year at
Notre Dame, said that he thought his former coach was using tradition to bridge
the transition from coaching in high school, where he had extraordinary success,
to college, where Faust has struggled.

''There has been a change in Faust,'' Crable said. ''In high school, he was more
of a 'my-way-or-the- highway' coach. No one asked questions. Now, he has to
explain himself more. And it's always easier when you're winning.''

There are coaches such as Valvano who come across as older brothers, and
grandfather types such as Ray Meyer of DePaul. Then, there are Bobby Knight and
Frank Kush, who use intimidation and have changed very little with the times.

''I've talked to players who played for Knight and Kush who said that they
thought those coaches cared,'' the psychologist Smith said. ''In the final
analysis, the punitive authority was seen as an attempt to make them as good as
they can be.

''And in the case of Knight, a college coach, there is the self-selection
factor. Athletes are not stupid. No one goes to Indiana not knowing what Bobby
Knight is like.''

Ultimately, coaches say, they must do what is most comfortable for them. There
are too many gray areas in coaching, Ron Meyer added, to offer a right and wrong
way.

''A couple of years ago, Bill Walsh, the 49ers' coach, dressed up like a doorman
when he met his team in Pontiac for the Super Bowl,'' Meyer said. ''Forrest
Gregg of the Bengals, meanwhile, was considered stern and disciplined like
Lombardi.

''The 49ers won and everyone thought what Walsh did was great. If they had lost,
people would have said he was too relaxed. Unfortunately, the bottom line is the
scoreboard, and it justifies the things done prior to the game.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: The Coaches; Methods and Motivation; Second of a series

GRAPHIC: Photo of John Hannah; photo of Red Blaik; photo of Mike White

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              329 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 20, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

R. R. - FOUND IN 'ERROR'

BYLINE: By Mark Green and Gail McColl

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 796 words


Did you know that Trident missiles are recallable, that Leonid I. Brezhnev
invented the nuclear freeze idea, that sex education leads to veneral disease
and that there's more oil in Alaska than Saudi Arabia? You didn't. Good for you.
Because all these statements are untrue, yet were made by Ronald Reagan.

Mr. Reagan is hardly the first President to confuse facts, but he is the Babe
Ruth of misstatements: In the past two decades, he has made more than 300
documented errors. So what, say Reaganites, who dismiss the mistakes as trivial:
After admitting that the President had used a misleading anecdote, his press
secretary, Larry Speakes, remarked, ''but it made the point, didn't it?''

Trivial? It is hardly a typographical error for Mr. Reagan to say that he wasn't
funding anti-Sandinista rebels when he was, that South Africa stood beside us in
World War II when nearly all its heads of state sympathized with the Nazis, that
his Environmental Protection Agency had settled 23 cases involving toxic waste
dumps - 21 more than the agency knew of. What are we to make of his admission
that he hadn't realized until two months ago that the bulk of Soviet nuclear
warheads are on land- based missiles? Where did he think they were?  Mr.
Reagan's dissimulating would be amusing if the consequences weren't so serious.
His inaccurate claim that Calvin Coolidge's tax cut increased tax revenues
surely helped him enact his own tax cut, just as his false charge that American
military spending declined in real dollars in the 1970's helped push through his
arms buildup.  But perhaps the most dangerous consequence is that, after a
while, we learn not to trust him. He may be right when he tells us with
sincerity that the conterrevolutionaries in Nicaragua are ''freedom fighters'' -
but how can we possibly be sure?

How can we tell when he is telling the truth and when he is not? Here is a list
of eight telltale categories of misspeaking that could help us decode his press
conference tonight - help us concentrate on what he says, not how he says it.

1. Exaggeration. Mr. Reagan is a master of what Huck Finn called ''stretchers.''
Yes, taxes (measured as a percentage of gross national product) rose from 1960
to 1981, but they did not double, as he claimed. (In fact, they rose from 10.4
percent to 12 percent.) As in many of his statements, there was a kernel of
truth in his comment, but not much more.  2. Omission. Mr. Reagan brings to mind
Franz Kafka's remark about the theologian Martin Buber: ''No matter what he
says, something is missing.'' In 1982, he said that the poor wouldn't suffer
from budget cuts because the Federal budget was increasing by $32 billion: He
neglected to point out that all of the increase was for military spending.  3.
Anecdotage. Mr. Reagan is apparently unfamiliar with the Talmudic observation
that ''for example is not evidence.'' Thus, he would have us believe that one
bizarre example of a ''welfare queen'' using aliases to collect multiple
benefits is typical of all welfare recipients. Is this a telling story, or is he
telling stories? 4. Repeat offenders. ''As I have said before . . .'' is a
Reagan perennial. Most of the time, he really has said it before, though it's no
more true the 20th time than the first. Other times, he has never said it
before.

5. Voodoo statistics. Remember when he said that it costs the Department of
Health and Human Services $3 to deliver $1 of services, when in fact it costs 12
cents?

6. Historical clincher. His invocation of past events is often historical
revisionism. History does not show, for instance, that Vietnam was two countries
for centuries.

7. Stonewalling. When you hear him say, ''Well, that's just not true,'' in a
tone of pained innocence, the odds are good that in fact it is true. For
example, he denied that his civil rights program hurts blacks and that his tax
program favors the rich.

8. Rhetorical question. Often used as a substitute for genuine evidence, his
questions frequently contain unproved assumptions and illogical leaps. Trying to
defend our Marines' presence - and Marine casualties - in Lebanon, he said,
''Didn't we assume a moral obligation to the continued existence of Israel as a
nation back in 1948?'' (In fact, propping up the fragile Government of President
Amin Gemayel has very little to do with the existence of Israel, which has
withdrawn its troops from Beirut.)

Is Mr. Reagan the ''Great Communicator'' or the Great Prevaricator? His factual
performance brings to mind Abraham Lincoln's remark about an opponent - that he
had such a high regard for the truth that he used it sparingly. So far, Ronald
Reagan appears to have gotten away with it. But in the long run, a President
can't lead by misleading.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: cartoon

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              330 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 20, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Laos to Allow a U.S. Group To Look for American Dead

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 92 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 19


Laos has agreed to allow a United States Government team into the country to
examine the site of an air crash for the bodies of American servicemen, the
State Department said today.

The department spokesman, John Hughes, said a delegation from the Honolulu-based
Joint Casualty Resolution Center would visit Laos this week.

American relations with Laos were jolted almost a year ago when James G. (Bo)
Gritz, a former Army Special Forces officer, led an unsuccessful mission into
Laos to rescue Americans he said were being held prisoner.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              331 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 20, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. KEPT AS DEFENDANT IN AGENT ORANGE SUIT

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 670 words


A Federal district judge in Brooklyn refused to exempt the Government yesterday
from being a party in the lawsuit by Vietnam War veterans against makers of the
herbicide Agent Orange.

''You're in,'' Chief Judge Jack B. Weinstein told Justice Department lawyers in
rejecting their motion to drop the Government from the case. The lawyers,
Gretchen Witt and Arvin Maskin, had based their motion on a longstanding
doctrine that a person cannot sue the Government for injuries received in the
course of military service.

Judge Weinstein, who is hearing the case in the Eastern District of New York,
indicated that the Government in any event might still be held liable for claims
by nonmilitary wives, parents and children of the veterans.

''Certainly,'' he said, ''you wouldn't fault the wife for having intercourse
with the husband, or the children for being born?''

The veterans say they suffered internal and genetic injuries from a potent
contaminant, dioxin, that they say the companies knew was in the plant-killer
when they sold it to the Army. The military used it to clear covering vegetation
and destroy food crops deemed vital to Vietcong and North Vietnamese troops.

The judge set further arguments for next month. For now, he said, the Government
will continue to face claims for a share of any damages found against the seven
chemical manufacturers that are the defendants in the veterans' lawsuit. The
suit is a class action brought in the name of all veterans in American,
Australian and New Zealand forces who served in Vietnam from 1961 to 1972. All
will be bound by the outcome except those who request exclusion by May 1.

The judge's action yesterday was viewed by lawyers on both sides as having a
potentially significant impact on the outcome of the complex, five-year- old
litigation that involves claims in the billions of dollars. It could, for
example, promote a goal stated earlier by Judge Weinstein: a negotiated
settlement involving the companies and the Veterans Administration that would
provide veterans and their families with the extensive medical tests and
treatment they have sought.

Trial Is Set for May 7

Barring a settlement, Judge Weinstein has set May 7 as the starting date for a
jury trial. The jury would decide whether dioxin in the herbicide caused
injuries and genetic damage to 10 or so representative veterans and whether the
companies failed to properly warn of the danger. The companies deny any
connection to the health problems and contend that the Government was properly
informed about the products, thus insulating them from liability.

Judge Weinstein, commenting from the bench in recent pretrial hearings, has made
it clear that he found it difficult to conceive of the case without the
participation of the Government. It was the Pentagon that commissioned the
companies to produce Agent Orange, a mixture of the chemicals 2,4,5-T and 2,4-D,
and it was the Air Force that sprayed it on an estimated 20 percent of Vietnam's
jungles where American troops were fighting.

Devil's Advocate Considered

At one point in a hearing Dec. 12 Judge Weinstein said that if there was no way
under the law to keep the Government in the case he might reach back to a
medieval Roman Catholic Church procedure and appoint ''a devil's disciple.'' He
was apparently referring to a devil's advocate appointed to bring arguments
against a canonization as a way of testing the church's case for it.

The prohibition against suing the Government for service-related injuries was
set forth in a 1950 Supreme Court decision known as Feres v. United States. It
was extended in another case, Stencel Aero Engineering Corp. v. United States,
in which the Court held that an aviation manufacturer could not countersue the
Government in an accident in which a National Guardsmen was injured.

Philip D. Pakula, a lawyer representing the Monsanto Company, one of the
defendants, argued that recent court rulings had nibbled away at the
prohibition.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              332 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 20, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TV: FINAL INSTALLMENT OF 'VIETNAM'

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 19, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 519 words


''Vietnam: a Television History'' presents its 13th and final installment
tonight. It is called ''Legacies,'' the title suggesting, one supposes, the
series's unwillingness to abandon neutrality and take a partisan point of view.
Therefore, it is ''Legacies,'' not ''Lessons'' or ''Conclusions,'' and the
suggestion that Vietnam is still too much with us for a neat summing up. The
program will be seen on PBS.

''Legacies,'' in fact, offers many points of view, a few of them unassailable.
In an interview, Gen. William C. Westmoreland says, for example, that the lesson
of Vietnam is that ''young men should not be sent to the battlefield unless the
country is willing to suppport them.'' Presumably, this is a truth acceptable to
both hawks and doves.


The evidence of ''Legacies,'' however, is that every truth about Vietnam
generates a countertruth. The truth one chooses to accept depends on political
persuasion. The 1976 Democratic platform, for instance, said the folly of
Vietnam was United States involvement in a place where it had no vital
interests; the Republican platform said that South Vietnam fell after Congress
restricted aid to Saigon.

Similarly, ''Legacies'' indicates that after Vietnam the United States grew
increasingly reluctant to use force, or the threat of force, in foreign
intervention. This is a truth, although how one regards it - as the beginning of
wisdom, or a paralysis of will - again depends on political persuasion.

The political position of ''Legacies,'' meanwhile, is consistent with the
political position that ''Vietnam: A Television History'' has taken throughout
the series. Its position is that it has no position, but must simply report the
story. The series, produced for public television by WGBH in Boston, has been
praised as a landmark in television, thorough and fair.


On the other hand, the series has also been criticized for the same reasons it
has been praised; the fairness has been called a cloak for a hidden agenda. For
not indicting the Johnson Administration, say, the series was said to be a
defense of American imperialism. For not alleging that the United States
eventually sold out Saigon, it was said to be a defense of liberal, no-win
policymakers. Either way, the criticism sprang from political persuasions. The
truth of Vietnam was in the predilection of the critic.

Nonetheless, it is hard to escape the feeling that ''Legacies,'' in its caution,
leaves something unsaid. We are almost compelled to feel that. Vietnam was big,
tragic and divisive; we expect that it had to have meant something, that there
had to have been a lesson, a moral. ''Legacies,'' however, shows us mostly what
it can measure and define - genocide in Cambodia, ''boat people,'' resentment
among Americans who fought in Vietnam.  Whatever the other truths, ''Legacies''
says correctly, they are more difficult to arrive at than we may like to think.
''This and all future generations,'' the program concludes, ''will have to turn
to this long, dark and hard chapter of history to define the meaning and
determine the lesson of Vietnam.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              333 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 21, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AS EUPHORIC GRENADIANS RECOVER, THE MOOD IS 'YANKEES, DON'T GO'

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 862 words

DATELINE: ST. GEORGE'S, Grenada, Dec. 20


Like President Reagan, the owner of Mama's Restaurant on a dirt road outside
town likes to refer to the American landing two months ago not as an invasion
but as a rescue mission.

Like other islanders who use the term, she is not referring to the American
students at the St. George's Medical School, but to Grenada itself.

''We call it the rescue, the rescue of Grenada,'' said Mama, a large woman in a
voluminous red dress. ''The Americans rescue us from death. They rescue us from
trial and tribulation. They rescue us from hunger and thirst. I am very glad
they are here and I hope they never go back.''

Let Us Be the 51st State'

A man in a bright yellow T-shirt walks over from Mama's bar with a bottle of
Carib beer in his hand.

''This country is a beautiful country,'' he said. ''I hope it coming back into
its own now. But I want America to control the island. Let us be the 51st state.
If America stay in Grenada, everything is going to be O.K.''

And Mama rejoined: ''God save us, America help us. Thanks be to America. Thanks
be to the President.''

A mood of euphoria has swept this island of 100,000 people, where fishermen
standing by their boats, school girls in their crisp white shirts and blue
skirts, and road repairmen with their picks and shovels wave and smile at the
American military policemen who patrol in their jeeps, and the Americans wave
and smile back at them.

Many of the old slogans on the walls around town have been painted over with
such mottos as ''1983 year of liberation,'' ''We welcome Americans,'' and ''Long
live Grenada.''

When a new weekly paper asked people on the street who they felt about a
coalition government, Michael Salfarlie, a businessman, said, ''I prefer to be
ruled by the Government of the United States of America.''

At a recent ''day of thanksgiving and prayer'' at the Roman Catholic Cathedral,
Bishop Sidney Charles told his worshipers, ''Grenadians have long been praying
for deliverance and at last it has come.''

He then began to quote a local saying, ''When God can't come . . .'' at which
point, the congregation chanted the conclusion, ''. . . he does send.''

Americans here are astonished at the warmth of the welcome.

''The reception we have received has been exceptional,'' said Robert Minutillo,
a United States Information Service officer from Salem, Mass., who has served in
Latin America and the Middle East. ''It is certainly unusual in respect to the
kind of receptions we have got in other parts of the world.''

Sgt. 1st Class Jose Perez of New York said, ''It sure isn't like Vietnam.''

American officials are aware that Grenadians are still coming out of a period of
shock and that the intensity of their warmth may dim.

A Grenadian journalist, Alister Hughes, who was a political prisoner under the
Government of Prime Minister Maurice Bishop, which was ousted before the Oct. 25
invasion, likes to stop American soldiers on the street and thank them for
coming.

''At the moment we don't see them intruding on our lives at all,'' he said. But
I don't know what it's going to be like a year from now.''

Roger Gabriel, an unemployed 17- year-old who spends his days sitting in the sun
with his friends, represents one of the problems that is facing Grenada.

''For now, it's all long live the Americans,'' he said. ''If they could give me
work right now, it's cool. But after a time, I start to cry out.''

That time has not come, but it is apparent today that most Grenadians really did
want the Americans to ''rescue'' their country.

Now that the Americans have landed, many Grenadians want them to stay. For some,
this feeling grows out of a disillusionment with their own political process,
after a series of what some see as betrayals by the Bishop Government and,
before it, the Government of Sir Eric Gairy.

''We don't want no government now,'' said a young woman named Janice. ''We happy
to let America stay, because you can't trust. You don't know who to trust.''

Conrad St. John, a policeman, said:

''Grenada don't want elections. We want the Americans. It don't matter who rule
Grenada, the people say, the same thing will happen.''

Edwin DeCaul, who runs a shop making suitcases, said: ''People are afraid of
politics. We've had enough of it.''

Others want the remaining Americans to stay out of fear for the future.

Commanders of the remaining 300 United States servicemen and of the 500-man
Caribbean peace force say no Cubans have been found hiding out and there has
been no hostile action by remnants of the former Grenadian Army. But some local
people worry.

''Those guys are only waiting for the Americans to leave,'' said Mosden
Cumberbatch, a diving instructor. ''I still believe there are people in the
bush.''

And Roosevelt Gaskin, an unemployed sailor and farmer, said:

''There must be some guys out there, bobbing and weaving, waiting to link up
with each other, and I don't believe the Caribbean boys are well trained enough
to handle them. Because these guys are mean guys.''

So for now, as the island recovers, the people are basking in a respite from
fear and from politics, and reveling in the American presence.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              334 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 21, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET BLOC RIFT REPORTED BY U.S.

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 931 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 20


State Department officials said today that a rift had broken out within the
Soviet bloc over how to respond to the deployment of the new United States
missiles in Europe and the suspension of the Soviet- American talks in Geneva.

The most contentious debate is between Rumania and the Soviet Union, the
officials said, which reached a peak on Dec. 9, when the Rumanians refused to
send a representative to a meeting in Moscow of Communist parties to discuss the
bloc's ideological and propaganda approach to the current world situation.

''It is unprecedented,'' one department expert said, ''for a member of the
Warsaw Pact not to attend such an important session, as the one in Moscow which
was meant to map strategy.''

The Rumanians have long followed a foreign policy relatively independent of the
Soviet Union, even though they remain officially in the Warsaw Pact. For
instance, the Rumanians are the only pact member to maintain diplomatic
relations with Israel.

Rumania Endorsed U.S. Position

In the current dispute, President Nicolae Ceausescu of Rumania has in fact,
endorsed the original American position in the medium-range missile talks, the
''zero-zero option'' that all such missiles be abolished. More recently, he has
called for the allies not to deploy the new Pershing 2 and cruise missiles, and
for the Soviet Union to begin dismantling the SS-20 missiles that are targeted
on Western Europe.

The Soviet position, which has been endorsed by other Warsaw pact members, but
not Rumania, is that the SS- 20's are needed to maintain a nuclear balance in
Europe and that the new United States deployment that began this month has
compelled the Soviet Union to break off the Geneva talks and to respond with the
deployment of new missiles of its own.

The Russians have announced that new missiles are being deployed in East Germany
and Czechoslovakia and on submarines near the American coast to offset the
United States missiles being installed in Britain, Italy and West Germany.

State Department officials said that United States embassies in other East
European countries had also reported some signs of unhappiness with the Soviet
decision to break off the Geneva talks and install new missiles in that part of
the world.

Andropov's Illness a Factor

Hungarian and Bulgarian officials have privately told United States officials
they believed that the prolonged illness of Yuri V. Andropov, the Soviet leader,
had contributed to the tensions in the region, the State Department officials
said.

There is considerable concern in Bulgaria, one official said, over the
possibiity that the Soviet Union might decide to deploy new missiles there as
well. One of the main international initiatives of President Todor Zhivkov of
Bulgaria has been for a nuclear-free zone in the Balkans. A meeting of the
Warsaw Pact Defense Ministers was held in Sofia two weeks ago, which was
attended by the Rumanians, but which ended without any claim of unanimity.

There has been no public statement about Mr. Andropov's condition, but a State
Department official said that Armand Hammer, the American industrialist and a
frequent visitor to the Kremlin, had been invited to see Mr. Andropov last
Friday only to be told at the last minute that Mr. Andropov was not well enough
to meet with him.

The meeting in Moscow of the Communist Party secretaries dealing with
ideological questions was attended by representatives from Bulgaria,
Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Poland and the Soviet Union, as well as
from Cuba, Laos, Mongolia and Vietnam. This was the first time Rumania did not
attend such a session.

Rumania Irritated With Moscow

According to State Department officials, they were told that the Rumanians
stayed away from the Moscow meeting to show their irritation with the Kremlin's
refusal to consider the Rumanian suggestions for easing the crisis in Europe.

There has been no sign, however, that Moscow was planning any direct retaliation
against the Rumanians. The Soviet policy seems to be to try to ignore publicly
the Rumanian dissension by paying it no attention in its press.

Some State Department officials said that the Soviet Union seemed more concerned
about muted signs of dissension in Czechoslovakia and East Germany where the
controlled Communist press has devoted extensive coverage to justify the Soviet
decision to deploy new missiles there, and to assure readers that the Soviet
bloc was still interested in detente.

Although all the Eastern European Governments and parties except Rumania have
formally backed the Soviet moves, some Eastern European leaders have been
noticably less harsh toward the United States, for instance, than have the
statements attributed to Mr. Andropov and Soviet military leaders in the last
few months.

In recent years, the East European press has focused on the need for blocking
the deployment of new United States missiles and preventing a nuclear war in
Europe. This policy of trying to reduce the level of missiles in Europe has
seemingly been set back by the Soviet announcement that it was going to deploy
new missiles in countries that had not regarded themselves as being in the front
line of possible nuclear war.

Erich Honecker, the East German leader, has been particularly cautious in his
recent comments, stressing his country's desire to maintain relations with the
West. Mr. Honecker seemed to be questioning the Soviet decision to withdraw from
the Geneva talks when he said ''it is better to negotiate ten times than to
shoot once.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              335 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 21, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENT'S NEWS CONFERENCE ON FOREIGN AND DOMESTIC ISSUES;

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 4982 words


Following is a transcript of President Reagan's news conference last night as
recorded by The New York Times OPENING STATEMENT

I have a few remarks here before taking your questions.

With the holiday season upon us, I'm delighted to see Americans giving each
other the best Christmas present possible - a strong economy that will insure
more jobs and opportunities in the months ahead.

Confidence is in the air and with good reason. Today's encouraging news on the
strength of housing starts and personal income, recent reports on prices, retail
sales, employment and factory use all confirm a welcome fact: 1983 has been a
banner year for the American economy, with the United States economy enjoying a
strong recovery and its lowest rate of inflation since the 1960's.

Wholesale prices last month actually fell. Consumers are flocking into stores
during the holiday season; our factories are operating at nearly 80 percent of
capacity, up more than 10 percentage points from a year ago. Unemployment is
still too high, but there are more people working in this country today than
ever before, and every month we're creating over 300,000 new jobs.

In the last few weeks I've been involved in a number of meetings about next
year's budget. And it's clear that here in Washington all of us, both in the
Congress and the executive branch, still have our work cut out for us.

If the Congress will help me to restrain Government spending, we can justify the
people's confidence and keep America moving forward. We can make 1984 a year of
strong and steady progress for America - continuing economic growth,
unemployment coming down and inflation staying under control.

And now before we begin the questions, I'd like to wish the members of the White
House press corps a very happy holiday season.



QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS




Troops in Lebanon

Q. Mr. President, last week you said that if there's a complete collapse, you'll
pull the troops out of Lebanon. Did you mean that if Gemayel fails to put
together a broad, viable Government that you'd pull out? Or can you clarify? And
I'd like to follow up.

A. Yes, I can clarify, Helen. Actually, I was asked a hypothetical question
about whether there were any other circumstances other than achieving our goal
by which the Marines might leave, or the whole multinational force, and I tried
- I guess I tried to give a hypothetical answer to that, and maybe a bad choice
of words.

I simply meant that the only thing I - and I don't foresee this - but the only
thing I could think of other than achieving our goal would be if perhaps that
Government and the forces that he's dealing with in trying to broaden the
Government, if there should be a complete change of course to the place that we
were no longer asked to be there, that they were going in a different direction
than the one that brought us in in the first place at their request, then I
suppose that would be a reason for bringing them out.

But I wasn't trying to send anyone a message or anything; I was just trying to
say, well, yes, you can't say there isn't any other way by which they wouldn't
come out.

Q. Mr. President, do you think that you've put the U.S., the peacekeeper role,
in jeopardy by making a military pact at this time with the country that's
invaded, annexed and occupied Arab lands?  A. Helen, we didn't make any pact or
anything that was different than what has been our relationship all along. There
was a reaffirmation of this in talking to Prime Minister Shamir. We also
emphasized to him that we were going to go forward with our relations with the
moderate Arab states as part of our hope for being a catalyst - or trying to be
- in bringing them all together and ending once and for all these hostilities
that have so disturbed that area and caused such tragedy for so long.

It really - there was no signed agreement or anything else. We were really
reaffirming the relationship that we've had since 1948. But at the same time, as
I say, telling them that if we're to have any chance of bringing them together
or continuing a process that started at Camp David where Egypt and Israel wound
up with a peace treaty - if we're to have a chance of bringing that kind of a
peace, we've got to befriend all those countries and they've got to be able to
trust us that we can be fair to all of them.




El Salvador Progress

Q. Mr. President, the death squad activity is continuing in El Salvador, so I
was wondering, are you satisfied now with the progress the Government there is
making in halting it? And if not, how long can you continue supporting a nation
where this takes place?

A. Well I feel that we have to continue supporting them just as long as we would
support them against the leftist guerrillas that are trying to take over the
Government. We have a situation here of a 400-year history of mainly military
dictatorships, and now for the first time, virtually, in all that country's
history, we have a Government that has made it plain that they are trying to
establish democratic principles and policies.

They're being assailed from the left by the Cuban and Soviet backed guerrilla
forces. But at the same time they're being sniped at from the rear by - they're
called the death squads and the so-called rightists, who, by the same token,
don't want democracy. They want to go back to what they've had in this 400-year
history.

And the El Salvador Government has made great progress in establishing
democracy. They're hindered in their fight against the guerrillas by this action
behind their backs, but you have to look at punishing that Government for trying
to be democratic when it is being assailed from radicals from both sides - I
think our obligation is to try and help democracy triumph there, and this is why
we've offered some help.

And I must say when the Vice President went down there recently and told them
about how essential it is to get a handle on this force from the rear as well as
the one on their front that they're fighting - he was very well received and
there was no disagreement with what he said. And there has been a stepped-up
effort, and they want technical help from us in that regard - that we are
willing and can provide.

Q. Was the Vice President carrying a direct message from you on the death squad?

A. Yes, yes. And he had his own words also about it. And I'm in complete
agreement with those, too.

Chris?

Errors in Beirut

Q. Mr. President, the House subcommittee investigating the bombing in Beirut has
found, and I quote, ''Very serious errors in judgment were made both by officers
on the ground and up the military command.'' Do you feel that disciplinary
action should be taken against officers found responsible by Congress or the
Pentagon?

A. Well, Chris, there are two reports. There's a very voluminous report and a
complete one that has been brought in by the military team that's been
investigating this, as well as the Congressional group. Both of those have just
arrived at the Defense Department, and Secretary Weinberger is having a complete
study made of them and then will submit a report to me on his findings, probably
within the next several days.

But, as I say, they are voluminous and it's going to take a little while. So I
can't comment now until I see what those findings have been, in both reports.

The Secretary also has said that, other than things that must remain classified
for security reasons, he also intends to make public the findings in those
reports, as quickly as possible.



Beirut Inquiry

Q. Let me follow up, sir. Two days after the bombing, the Marine Commandant P.
X. Kelley was in Beirut and said that he was completely satisfied with the
security there. Was he being straight with the American people, and do you still
have confidence in him?

A. Yes, I do, very much. And I think he was, on the basis of what he saw, what
was there. I think the main issue then that he was addressing himself to was
could anyone prepare themselves for this unusual attack that took such a tragic
toll. And the moving of the men in such numbers into that building was done
because that was the safest building from the standpoint of the weapons that had
been used against them up until that point: mortar fire, small arms fire. And it
was a steel-reinforced concrete building.

So I, no, I don't think he was attempting to cover up for anyone.





U.S. Security Moves

Q. Mr. President, there have been in the past few weeks dump trucks surrounding
the White House; when you traveled to Indianapolis, there were buses blocking
intersections to protect you; there are reports that there are ground-to-air
missiles now near the White House. Could you tell the American people what the
nature of the threat is, and how this all makes you feel as President to have
this going on around you?

A. Well, I just feel such popularity must be deserved! No, let me just say on
that, frankly, I had not noticed the blocked intersections, I hadn't paid any
attention to it. I was waving at the people along the street in that appearance.

The only thing I regret is the inconvenience, when necessary moves have to be
made, the inconvenience that I can cause to many other people in this. There are
no specific or definite threats that any of us know of here. We only know that
worldwide there has been a call in a number of these terrorist groups for
stepped-up violence. The term ''United States'' has been used as a potential
target.

Actually, there has been a decline. Last year there were 52 terrorist incidents
in the United States; this year so far, and the year's practically over,
there've only been 31. And there has been no call for special measures or
legislation or tactics of any kind, but I think it is simply a case of having
seen what has happened, and the stepped-up violence in the Middle East mainly.
It's far easier to explain taking precautions than it is to have something
happen and then have to explain why you didn't do something about it.

Q. But are you concerned that by building these areas that you may give the
impression that you might be giving in to threats and terrorists?

A. Well, I don't think it's giving in to set up a barricade to keep somebody
from doing this. You know there have been attempts to ram the gates of the White
House during these three years that we've been here. There have been some people
that have gone over the fence, so I think that these are just normal security
precautions in a climate that has shown us that this sort of thing can happen.
And as far as I'm concerned I haven't let it interfere with my sleep or my work
in the office job.

Q. Mr. President, a question and follow-up, sir. It seems evident from the polls
that the American people do not support the U.S. Marine presence in Lebanon
right now. Respectfully, sir, whether the policy is right or wrong, do you
believe the public will put up with continuing American deaths there?

A. Well I can understand public opinion, because they're hearing great attacks
from a number of sources on our presence there - some of them, I think,
politically motivated. But I have to say this about the mission - the purpose in
being there - and let me just take a moment if I can on this.

They do have a purpose and a mission there, and there has been a result from
this, and progress made. If you will recall, it's been several years, of course,
since Lebanon kind of came unglued and the Government was helpless to stop some
of the troubles in its own land. But we had the factor of more than a million
refugees, Palestinian refugees, in Lebanon.

They've been there for decades. And over this period of time they created their
own militia - the P.L.O., a military and terrorist group. Well this group was
not only causing trouble within Lebanon, it was crossing the northern border of
Israel, it was preying on civilian citizens there, and finally, Israel crossed
the border into Lebanon. The first goal was to simply push them back some 25
miles so they'd be beyond rocket or artillery range, but the others just
repeated and kept on attacking them, so they went all the way to the edge of
Beirut. And then we had a war taking place right within the city of Beirut in
which thousands of civilians have been killed and wounded by this kind of
combat.

In the meantime, during all of this, the Lebanese asked the Syrians - asked them
to come in and help preserve order because in Lebanon we had and have groups,
various, sometimes religious groups, but other groups kind of like warlords with
their own militias. And they're fighting each other and at times fighting
against the forces of the Lebanese Government.

We were then asked to come in with a multinational force, and we went in once
the Government had been formed there, and once the P.L.O., when they were
ejected, as they were - granted they came back later by way of Syria - but the
goal and the idea was for the two foreign forces that were then left in there
when the P.L.O. left, for them to get out. But the Lebanese Government needed
time to build its strength to where it could then go in with these internecine
groups that were fighting there - go in and establish order over its own
territory.

Israel, having completed its mission, has announced its willingness and
intention to get out. Syria did too, and then for some reason Syria reneged on
that promise and has refused to get out, even though they have now been
officially asked to get out by the Government that asked them to come in.
During the occupation by both Syria and the Israelis, they managed to keep some
hold on those fighting groups in there, in some order.

The mission of the multinational force is what it was then. We have helped train
the Lebanese Army and it is a capable force. We have armed it, and when the
other forces, the foreign forces, get out, and the Lebanese military advances to
try and establish order in their land, the multinational force is supposed to,
behind them, try to achieve some stability and maintain order, because Lebanon
doesn't have the forces to do both.

Well this is the mission. And, as I say, progress has been made. The warring
forces, meeting in Geneva, have acknowledged that the Gemayel Government is the
legitimate Government of Lebanon. There is an agreement that has been reached
and signed between Lebanon and Israel in which Israel has agreed in writing that
they will withdraw. Indeed, I think they're anxious to. Now the stumbling block
still seems to be Syria. But at the same time, the Gemayel Government is trying
to bring these other forces in Lebanon, and if they will remember that they're
Lebanese also, and they want a Lebanon for the Lebanese people, they will come
in at his request and join the Government. And he's trying to broaden the base
of the Government to give them representation, and end that kind of fighting
there.

Now I think, as I say, that progress has been made toward that goal when you
think back to where we were when airplanes and artillery were destroying the
civilian sections of Beirut.



Pressure in Mideast

Q. But, sir, respectfully, each week the U.S. seems to be using greater and
greater firepower there. We had returning hostile fire, the artillery, then air
strikes, and now the 16-inch guns of the New Jersey. You said last week that you
don't want escalation or a war - can you avoid it without Syrian cooperation?

A. You can avoid war, but I will say this now, reiterate it: I will not O.K.  a
mission or ask or order our armed forces to go some place where there is danger
and tell them that they have not the right to defend themselves. So when the
sniping began and there was no retaliation, I made it plain, by way of the
channels in the Pentagon.

As far as I was concerned, when an American military man is shot at, he can
shoot back. And I think that there's been some indication that rather than
stepped-up activity, that there has been some pause for thought on those that
were deciding that the multinational forces were fair game.

I don't say that they won't try these terrorist activities again; I'm sure they
will. But are we - and where would we be in the world - are we to let the
terrorists win? Are we to say that, well, if terrorists are going to be active,
we'll give in to them, we'll back away?

Sam.




Role of the Press Q. Mr. President, on the press, Secretary Shultz said the
other day that in World War II reporters went along because, on the whole, they
were on our side. And then he observed that these days it always seems that the
reporters are always against us and they're trying to report things to screw
things up. Is that your view of the press, also?

A. Now you're not going to get me into the middle of that, are you? I'm simply
going to say that I do believe, Sam, that sometimes, beginning with the Korean
conflict and certainly in the Vietnam conflict, there was more criticizing of
our own forces and what we were trying to do, to the point that it didn't seem
that there was much criticism being leveled on the enemy. And sometimes I just
wish that we could get together on what is of importance to our national
security in a situation of that kind, what is endangering our forces and what is
helping them in their mission.

Q. Well, sir, is one of the problems a definition of the word ''us''? When
Secretary Shultz uses it, or if you say ''our forces,'' do you think he was
using it in terms of an Administration, the Reagan Administration?

A. No.

Q. Or, let's say, the Carter Administration? In other words, is ''us'' the
Administration in power, or is there a higher duty that the press has?


A. I thought the us he was talking about was our side, militarily - in other
words, all of America.

Yes - Alfreda.



Re-election Plans

Q. Thank you, Mr. President. It appears, Mr. President you are going to run for
re-election. Well, you said you were going to announce something on the 29th.
You have completely alienated blacks by your assault on the gains for justice
and progress by them in the past. You're ignoring the needs and wishes of
Hispanics. You cut programs that benefit the poor and you're against equal
rights for women. So do you think you'll have enough white males to win, and
aren't your actions really hurting the Republicans' national and state
candidates?



A. Alfreda, I know that this has been widely heralded that all these things are
true. They aren't true. We haven't, in our social reforms, picked on anyone.
And, indeed, what we have done - when we came here it was my belief, and we
operated on this basis, that it wasn't that we were feeding too many of the
needy, we were taking care of too many of the non-needy. And where we have
trimmed rolls, we've trimmed them up at the upper level.

Today, any family with an income at a level of 130 percent of poverty - the
poverty level or lower - is eligible for these Government programs. And indeed
we are taking care of more people than we've ever taken care of before.

And there has been nothing in our programs, or anything else, that can be taken
as prejudice against any sector of our society. Indeed, with regard to the civil
rights movement and racial prejudice in this country, I'm old enough to have
been on the right side of that long before the term civil rights was ever used.

And, with regard to women, I think the record shows - the laws we've changed,
the regulations we're changing all the time, the number of appointments -
there's no prejudice there.

But I do know that a perception has been created and - right today, with these
employment figures that I gave - with the drop in unemployment, blacks and women
are getting a higher proportion of those new jobs than is anyone else.


Q. Blacks are still unemployed. And discrimination plays a part in it. And you
seem to be against those methods that have been put into place for eradicating
discrimination.

A. No, not -

Q. And secondly, in the telephone conversation that one of the causes was the
seniority system. And I asked you what you would do about it, and you said we'd
have to speed up the process, but you didn't explain that process. I wish you
would explain to me that process.

A. What process is this?

Q. That's what I'm asking you.

A. Well, no, I mean what I, I just, I lost something there.

Q. O.K. I asked you - I said to you you were against the Boston and Detroit
cases, and you said, well, that's because of the seniority system you -
wouldn't. And I asked you what you would do about that, because blacks would
still be the last hired and the first fired. You said we'll have to speed up the
process. I asked you what did you mean by the process, and I didn't get an
answer. I wish you would explain that.

A. Well, I think that you've given an example there that is a very difficult
one, because of fairness to all people involved. Where you pick a situation in
which seniority and service is the basis for employment, and you also picked at
a level of government in which the Federal Government has no business
interfering, there isn't anything that we could do unless there's an outright
violation of some individual's civil rights.

But I just think that there can be common sense programs worked out to where you
won't have to wait until someone has accumulated a great many years of seniority
before he becomes eligible. That there might be some fair way in which you can
recognize the rights of seniority, but also recognize the fact that others don't
have seniority because for a long time they were discriminated against.



 Marine Safeguards

Q. Mr. President, you said earlier tonight that you would not send American
soldiers or marines into a situation where they could not fight back. Haven't we
sent them into a role in Beirut, a political, a diplomatic role, as peacekeepers
when they do not have adequate safeguards against terrorism?

A. No. I don't know what you call adequate safeguards against terror or what we
would call it. You know, any time that you - and particularly in a place like
that, where even innocent civilians in the street are mowed down simply because
snipers want to shoot someone, it's been that kind of a scene. It's that kind of
a thing that we're trying to resolve in behalf of the innocent people there who
want to live in peace like the rest of us.

Some time I'm going to impose on you and read some of the letters that I get
from people in Lebanon who tell us what life would be like if the multinational
force wasn't there, and what it has meant in their lives as individuals living
in the midst of that kind of brutality and bloodshed. And I was under no
illusion, and I have to tell you that I discovered for myself that the hardest
thing you'll ever have to do in this job is give an order that puts some of
those wonderful young men and women in our military uniforms in places like
that. But in the interest of our own national security, and in the interest of
overall peace, some of these things have to be done.

The Middle East is a tinderbox; it is the one place that could start a war that
no one wanted, because of its importance, particularly to the free world and to
our allies. And we can't just turn away and say if we don't look it'll go away.
And this all started because of our determination to try and bring about peace
between those factions that have been so long warring with each other.

The moderate Arab states, again, and the progress that we've made - there was a
refusal on their part to even acknowledge the right of Israel to exist as a
nation. So therefore, there could be no negotiation. Anwar Sadat, God rest his
soul, broke out of that mold and we have peace between two countries, and the
territory of the Sinai has been returned to Egypt by Israel, and they're at
peace with each other.

Our goal was to see if we couldn't find more leaders and more governments that
would become ''Egypts,'' in a sense, in settling their disputes and having
peace. And today the very fact that there's an indication that they are willing
and prepared to negotiate differences indicates that they no longer are holding
that position of refusing to let Israel exist.


Q. Can I just ask, to follow up? Does it give you some pause when conservative
thinkers like William F. Buckley Jr. and Richard Viguerie suggest that you
should be taking the marines home?

A. Well, I take my friend Bill more seriously. I read that column, too, and I'll
have to have a talk with him shortly.




Marines' Security

Q. The subcommittee report that was mentioned earlier tonight also concluded
that continued deployment of the marines will almost certainly lead to further
casualties. I know you don't want to discuss what the security arrangements were
for the attack but what about now? Are you confident that as of tonight the
marines in Beirut are as protected as they can be given where they are?

A. I won't be able to answer that again until I, too, see the reports -
particularly a report that is coming in that is very voluminous and must go into
great detail - it's about that thick and it has been made by military experts.
So I just can't comment until I know.

Q. If I could just ask you, sir, then, are you saying that you aren't sure at
this point whether tonight the marines are as adequately protected as they can
be?

A. I think they are to the extent that those on the field and the officers that
are involved there are dong everything they can to insure that - and I just have
to assume that and I think that I'm justified assuming it.




Prisoner in Syria

Q. Mr. President, within days of your inauguration in 1981, you vowed that
Americans would not be held hostage again. And the Syrians are holding Airmen
Lieut. Robert Goodman and say they won't release him until the Marines leave
Lebanon. Do you consider Lieutenant Goodman a hostage? And what efforts are
under way to secure his release?

A. Well, we have believed for a long time that the settlement there must be - in
this whole area must be political. I should've said this earlier in my answer,
before, about the history of this Lebanese situation, but we've had ambassadors
there from Phil Habib, and Robert McFarlane, and now Don Rumsfeld, because we're
determined that there is a possibility - and it is the only way.  You cannot -
this can't be settled by force. And it is not going to be settled that way.

And Ambassador Rumsfeld has been in Damascus; he has met with the Syrians.
Certainly that is very high on the agenda. The Syrians claim that he's a
prisoner of war. Well, I don't know how you have a prisoner of war when there is
no declared war between nations. I don't think that makes you eligible for the
Geneva Accords.

But yes, we want that young man back. And, as I say, we're not missing anything,
any possibility, in trying to bring to terms these various factions so that we
can achieve the goal of restoring order, a broader-based government in Lebanon
acceptable to more of the people - those that are presently hostile to this
government - and the foreign forces back to their own borders.

Q. But sir, is Lieutenant Goodman, in your opinion, a hostage? And do you think
the Syrians will use him as a bargaining chip?


A. I doubt that very much, I really do, in the sense of holding it up for
trading something or other - no, I don't believe so. But I'm sorry that he is
there and I'm glad he is alive, but we're going to make every effort to get him
back as quickly as possible.

Q. Thank you, Mr. President. Merry Christmas.

A. All of you had two questions?



Christmas Wishes

Q. What are you buying your wife for Christmas?

A. I won't tell.

Q. What do you want for Christmas?

A. What?

Q. What do you want for Christmas?

A. What do I want for Christmas? You know what I'm going to say? I want peace.

Q. Well, what do you want in a box?

A. If you can get it in a box I'll take it in a box.

Q. How do you package it? Is that your problem?

A. No, I'll tell you, I'm very happy, and I'd just like to feel that all of you
have a very happy holiday and a merry Christmas, and for all the people in
America, I hope that they all have hope now and can see the progress being made.

Q. Has it been a good year for you, sir?

A. Yes, except for a lot of phone calls that I've had to make, and some letters.

Q. How could it be better next year?

A. Not making those phone calls, writing those letters, and the continuation of
the recovery, and I'm sure it will continue.

Q. Do you agree with Larry Speakes on his statement on the press, Mr.
President? He said that . . .

A. I don't know which statement you're talking about . . .

Q. . . . all patriots and all great Americans have never tried to screw anything
up. Do you agree with that, Mr. President?

A. (From Mr. Speakes) He agrees with everything.

A. I agreed with him when he said I was all through.  Q. How did he mean that?

Q. When will the Marines come home?

A. The Marines will come home as quickly as we can possibly bring them home -
accomplishing our mission . . .

Q. Sir, could you say it where we could hear you?

A. There have been some suggestions made with regard to bringing them home -
that some of my considerations might be based on the fact that it is an election
year and politics are coming up. I will tell you this - no decision regarding
the lives and the safety of our servicemen will ever be made by me for a
political reason.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of President Reagan

TYPE: text

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              336 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 21, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CRACKDOWN ON DRUGS IN THE MILITARY FOUNDERING OVER CHALLENGES TO TESTS

BYLINE: By PHILIP M. BOFFEY

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 933 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 20


A crackdown on drug abuse in the military services is foundering in dissension
and confusion because of disputes over the accuracy of urine tests administered
to three million servicemen a year.

The chief quality control expert for the program, Col. William W. Manders of the
Armed Forces Institute of Pathology in Washington, has challenged the validity
of tests used to detect marijuana derivatives in urine and has testified against
results from the program in a court-martial at Homestead Air Force Base in
Florida.

In an interview, Colonel Manders warned that the tests might well produce ''a
travesty of justice'' in which ''people are likely to get railroaded'' on the
basis of questionable laboratory results.

The chief problems, he said, are that some laboratories do sloppy work and that
the tests, even when performed properly, can sometimes yield false results,
making them dangerous for use in legal proceedings. The military judge in the
Homestead case agreed with this assessment and acquitted the defendant last
month.

Retaliation by Pentagon

The Pentagon has retaliated by labeling Colonel Manders ''a serious impediment
to the drug abuse prevention program'' and arranging his transfer to a new job
in California that has nothing to do with drug testing.

John H. Johns, the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense responsible for drug
policy, complained in an interview that Colonel Manders had failed to provide
''objective recommendations and evidence'' to the drug program, had raised
objections based primarily on ''conjectures and feelings'' rather than hard
scientific evidence, and had failed to cooperate with those running the drug
detection programs in the Army, Navy and Air Force.

Dr. Johns said that long before the Homestead case he had recommended that the
colonel be transferred. But the colonel considers his pending departure the
result of ''extreme political pressure,'' adding, ''Anyone who thinks he can
testify for the defense without repercussions has got to be foolish.''

Experts Split on Tests

Meanwhile, a meeting of drug experts convened by the White House last week split
on the adequacy of the tests, and a meeting of Air Force legal officers outside
San Antonio, Tex., last week heard experts on both sides of the dispute in an
effort to improve the use of test results in legal proceedings. The meeting site
had to be moved, according to participants, because one Air Force commander
would not even allow Colonel Manders on his base.

The dispute has wide implications. The military services depend on test
credibility to generate fear of detection and thus deter servicemen from using
drugs. Moreover, the tests are often the chief basis for disciplinary action,
ranging from administrative slaps on the wrist to bad conduct discharges, that
can affect an individual's progress in both military and civilian life.  In the
last year, tens of thousands of servicemen failed their urine tests and were
deemed to have taken drugs, according to rough estimates by Defense Department
officials. In perhaps 30 percent of these cases, the individuals were
disciplined, based on judgments by their commanding officers that the
infractions were serious enough to punish, the officials estimated. That
suggests that thousands, if not tens of thousands, of individuals have been
punished on the basis of the tests.

Implications of Dispute

The dispute also has implications for civilian drug testing programs. ''The same
argument comes up in drug tests for civilian employees, such as bus drivers,''
says Arthur McBay, chief toxicologist for North Carolina, who has criticized the
adequacy of the military testing program in his capacity as a consultant to the
Federal Government. ''The basic problem is that this is a lot more complex thing
than a lot of people thought it was.''

The military drug testing program was initiated in the early 1970's as a result
of concern over widespread use of heroin and marijuana in the Vietnam War. It
sputtered along until 1981, when a favorable court decision allowed broad use of
screening tests, and a technical breakthrough by Colonel Manders and his
associates produced the first reliable test for detecting derivatives of
marijuana and hashish.

But as this test came into wide use over the last two years, the performance of
the laboratories drew under criticism and even Colonel Manders became alarmed at
what he considered overreliance on tests performed on a single urine specimen to
determine an individual's guilt or innocence.

The military services typically use a two-level testing process. First, a simple
screening test, either a radio immu noassay or an enzyme immunoassay, is used on
a broad-scale basis. Then, all samples of urine that show positive signs of
marijuana derivatives are sent to a laboratory for more sophisticated analysis
by gas liquid chromotography, using a technique perfected by Colonel Manders and
his colleagues.

But chromotography is not foolproof, according to its critics, because it is
based on the length of time it takes a substance to travel through a column of
material, and more than one substance can take the same time.

Under the program, tests are given for several other drugs, but the dispute is
over the marijuana, which, with alcohol is the most widely used.

The military services are increasingly turning to mass spectometry for marijuana
testing, a more definitive analytical tool, but Dr. Johns said that the costs
and training requirements make such tests difficult to use on a large scale.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              337 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 21, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MANHUNT STILL INTENSE IN '81 SLAYING

BYLINE: By ROBERT HANLEY

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1204 words

DATELINE: KNOWLTON TOWNSHIP, N.J., Dec. 20


Every day for two years, a contingent of New Jersey state troopers has come to a
makeshift command post in the basement of Town Hall here, waiting for the tip
that will crack their biggest investigation in a half-century.

Eight-tenths of a mile from the tiny nerve center is the spot where a highly
decorated state trooper, Philip Lamonaco, then 32 years old, was shot eight
times and killed on Dec. 21, 1981, during an apparently routine traffic stop on
a stretch of Interstate 80 that cuts through desolate hills and farmland near
the Pennsylvania border.

In the two years since then, the state police have implicated the remnants of a
New England radical group - the Sam Melville/Jonathan Jackson Unit - in the
murder. Four men and two women are being sought. The hunt has stretched
nationwide and into Canada. Police officials say the hunt has cost $1 million.

And Col. Clinton L. Pagano, superintendent of the state police, has vowed that
the search will not be relaxed nor the rural command post dismantled until the
case is solved.

''We are maximizing this until we find them,'' Colonel Pagano said. ''We're
going to do everything we can to keep disrupting them till we have them. There's
a public expectation that law enforcement will make a special effort in a case
like this. There is no place in the nation where we won't go or haven't been.''

Last month, a New Jersey grand jury indicted two Massachusetts natives, Thomas
W. Manning, 37, and Richard C. Williams, 35, on charges of killing Trooper
Lamonaco.

The four others being sought for questioning are Raymond L. Levasseur, 37, a
close friend of Mr. Manning's; Mr. Manning's wife, Carol Ann, 27; Mr.
Levasseur's wife, Patricia, 29; and Jaan K. Laaman

, a 35-year-old friend of Mr. Williams. No charges have been filed against any
of the four by New Jersey authorities, but warrants are outstanding against them
in New England.



Various Charges

In addition, all six are wanted by the Federal Bureau of Investigation or
Massachusetts authorities on various charges. Mr. Levasseur and the Mannings
have been charged by the F.B.I. with robbing a bank in Maine in 1976. Mr.
Levasseur and Mr. Manning have been on the F.B.I.'s 10- most-wanted list since
then. They are also wanted for questioning about a series of bombings in the
Boston area in the mid-1970's.

Because of these crimes, and the New England roots of the six people, a
Boston-based 16-member task force of F.B.I. agents and state police from all six
New England states has been working closely in the manhunt with New Jersey state
police.

In terms of money spent and man- hours expended, Colonel Pagano said the
investigation was the most intense the state police have staged since Charles A.
Lindbergh's infant son, was kidnapped from his New Jersey home in 1932.

Fifteen troopers are permanently assigned to the command post here. Road maps of
the New England states and New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania fill its walls.

Over the months, the troopers have sought public help in the search by mailing
500,000 flyers, photo montages and descriptive circulars on the six people to
weekly newspapers, gasoline stations, doctor's offices, car dealers, weapons
dealers, truckers' magazines, and schools throughout North America, according to
Lieut. John Leck, head of the 15-man contigent.

At least 8,000 calls have come into the command post from people who think they
have seen the suspects. ''We've had calls from all 50 states and most of the
provinces of Canada,'' Lieutenant Leck said.



Thousands of Cards

Information from the calls is recorded on thousands of index cards. All calls
are checked out, the lieutenant said. For those that seem least promising, the
command post asks local police departments to make inquiries. For the calls that
might be more fruitfall, New Jersey troopers have been sent to investigate. They
have gone to Wyoming, Colorado, Florida, Chicago and parts of Canada.

At least 50 fugitives wanted in criminal cases totally unrelated to the Lamonaco
investigation have been arrested during the course of the inquiries, Lieutenant
Leck said.

But the six people wanted by New Jersey remain elusive.

''They know how to disappear into the underground,'' said Major Charles Coe, who
heads the investigation. ''They're masters at it.''



Homes Were in Farmhouses

Authorities are assuming that the Mannings and the Levasseurs are living in
isolated farmhouses, as they were at the time Trooper Lamonaco was killed.

The Mannings and their three children were staying at a farm at the end of a
long dirt road in Marshalls Creek, Pa., about 10 miles from the site of the
shooting. The Levasseurs and their three children were living about 30 miles
away in Germantown, Pa., a hamlet in the Poconos.

Both houses were raided within days of the crime and yielded information on the
life styles and backgrounds of the families, authorities said. Both men were
combat veterans in Vietnam whose politics became increasingly radical after they
joined a New England prison reform group after the war.



Described as Truck Drivers

While in Pennsylvania, the families had little contact with neighbors. The men
were considered expert woodsmen and marksmen. They were away days at a time, and
their wives explained, when someone asked, that they were long-haul truck
drivers.

Medical and dental needs of the children were carefully attended to. The
Mannings sent their oldest child, Jeremy, to a Montessori school. Bills were
faithfully paid in cash or by money order.

The state police say they are hoping to capitalize on the children as the key to
finding the suspects. The flyers distributed across the hemisphere contain
pictures and information about the three Manning children - Jeremy, now 10;
Tamara, 4, and Jonathan, who was born a week before the shooting; and the three
Levasseur children - Carmen, 7; Simone, 5, and Rosa, 3.



5 Bank Robberies in Vermont

Last month, the F.B.I. sent circulars to banks across the country listing the
six adults as primary suspects in five bank robberies staged in South
Burlington, Vt., and four upstate New York communities since April 1982.

In those crimes, two men who wore ski masks and bulletproof vests stole $582,000
moments after the money was delivered by armored car.

The New Jersey state police say they consider the Lamonaco case a challenge to
their sense of loyalty and brotherhood toward fellow troopers. This is not only
because of the slaying of Trooper Lamonaco, but also because Colonel Pagano's
brother, Lester, a 53-year- old state police lieutenant, was killed in a car
crash while working on the investigation last July.

Since the killing, two changes have been made within the state police. All
troopers must now radio their commanders before stopping vehicles during
daylight hours. Previously, such calls were only required after dark.



More Efficient Weapons

In addition, all troopers now carry 9-mm. handguns - the type of weapon that
killed Trooper Lamonaco. The guns are capable of firing 41 shots in 25 seconds,
compared to the 12 shots that could be fired from .38- caliber revolvers in the
same time period.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of New Jersey; photos of state troopers at command post; photo of
Troopers Bill Graupe and William Turner

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              338 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 21, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Hope Off for Lebanon To Entertain Troops

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 6; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 95 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Dec. 20


Bob Hope left on a military cargo plane today for his first overseas U.S.O.
Christmas tour since 1972, a weeklong series of performances to entertain
American troops in Lebanon.

Mr. Hope, 80 years old, will perform aboard ships of the Navy's Sixth Fleet in
the Mediterranean with Brooke Shields, Ann Jillian, George Kirby, Vic Damone,
Cathy Lee Crosby and Miss U.S.A., Julie Hayek.

The trip is sponsored by the United Service Organization and the State
Department.

The last time that Mr. Hope entertained troops overseas was in Vietnam, during
Christmas 1972.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              339 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 22, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BACKING SALVADOR: 'INSANITY'

BYLINE: By Adam Hochschild ;
Adam Hochschild writes for Mother Jones magazine. He traveled to El Salvador as
part of a delegation from the Commission on United States- Central American
Relations, a private advocacy organization based in Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 746 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO


President Reagan ought to do two things immediately. First, he should reinstate
the draft. Second, he should send United States ground troops to fight in El
Salvador.

He made a very promising start in this direction by his invasion of Grenada. But
that's just small potatoes. The mainland is what counts. After all, Mr. Reagan
has told us that the Salvadoran rebels are a threat to our own security. It is
El Salvador today, he implies, and Texas tomorrow. The war in El Salvador isn't
going very well right now. And if this war is really worth fighting, why let an
inept ally botch the job? Why not use the Marines and do it right?

My suggestions for the President are appalling, of course. But I secretly hope
he takes me up on them. My reason is this: As long as only Salvadorans are being
killed, most people in the United States don't care that much. Our boys are not
dying.

A few weeks ago, I saw a documentary film from the Vietnam years that showed
scenes of the great demonstration against the war held in Washington in 1970.
That occasion

was one of the first times that large numbers of Vietnam veterans publicly
joined the outcry against the war. Watching those images again brought it all
back. Soldier after soldier, some weeping, some speaking the names of dead
comrades, came before the crowd and threw their medals on a mounting pile.
Seeing all this 13 years later made me feel very sad. Sad because the whole
wretched business is happening all over again. And sad, also, because this time
there are no returning vets who can speak to the nation so powerfully. Those
Vietnam vets had considerable impact. From 1970 on, it was impossible to write
off the anti- war protests as the work of only students and fringe groups.
President Richard M. Nixon swiftly began to reduce the number of United States
combat troops in Vietnam. And, partly for fear of similar protests, President
Reagan has been shrewd enough not to send them to Central America.

If large numbers of United States troops were fighting the war in El Salvador
first-hand, I'm convinced they would strip off their medals, just as so many
Vietnam vets did.

Consider the facts: By the most conservative count - and these figures are even
used by United States officials - more than 30,000 unarmed, noncombatant
civilians have been killed in four years of civil war in El Salvador, the vast
majority of them by Salvadoran Government troops and security men. The United
States claims it wants the death squad murderers brought to justice. But is that
a realistic expectation to make of a regime that has never convicted a single
soldier or policeman of killing a civilian? Any judge who delivered such a
verdict would be dead himself the next day.

Combatants captured by the Salvadoran Army are routinely shot. Excuses are
always made when you ask to see a prisoner-of-war camp. A Salvadoran colonel I
interviewed near the front lines in January claimed, improbably, that his men
somehow just never managed to capture guerrillas alive.  The regime we are
propping up in El Salvador is riddled with corruption that staggers the
imagination. A few years back, the chief of staff of the Salvadoran Army was
caught trying to sell $30 million worth of United States arms to two undercover
United States police detectives posing as Mafiosi. He was tried and convicted in
the United States, served a short prison term and returned to El Salvador.
Authorities there have never even investigated the case.  A list of reasons to
oppose the war could go on and on. Here is one final item: In January, the army
colonel in charge of running El Salvavdor's post office was found to have been
opening incoming international mail. He and his associates were charged with
stealing some 25,000 checks and money orders totaling more than $3.5 million
sent home to their families by Salvadorans working in the United States. The
colonel denied everything and is believed to have fled to Miami.  Last summer, I
told that story to a group of people in San Francisco. When I finished, a man of
Salvadoran ancestry stood up in the back of the room, and said: ''Yes, Yes. I
sent several checks to my relatives in Salvador, and they never got there.'' He
clearly saw the insanity of United States support for the regime in El Salvador.
But what do we have to do to bring that home to the rest of the people in this
country? If you don't like my modest proposal of sending in the Marines, what's
your solution?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              340 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 23, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
ON WHOSE SIDE?

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 828 words


When Secretary of State Shultz recently observed that American reporters were
not ''on our side'' but seemed ''always against us,'' the White House press
secretary, Larry Speakes, told reporters: ''I do not think that reflects the
attitude of the President.'' Larry, you should have known better.

Mr. Reagan, at his latest news conference, not only agreed with Mr. Shultz; he
displayed in his usual amiable manner his animosity toward the American press as
well as a profound lack of understanding of its function.

It's commonplace, nowadays, to say that that only reflects the attitude of the
American public. Mr. Reagan, however, is President of the United States. He
doesn't have to like reporters any more than the public does; but if he doesn't
understand a free press operating in a free society under a Constitution he's
sworn to uphold, his high office demands that he learn.

Not Ronald Reagan. He even told editors of the Gannett papers recently that
there was ''no conscious decision by anyone'' at the White House or State
Department to bar reporters from the Grenada invasion - thus confirming earlier
Administration statements that this decision had been left to the military. But
who's supposed to be in charge of the armed forces in this country? Generals and
admirals or the civilian government?

Then, when asked about Mr.  Shultz's remarks, Mr. Reagan said of the press that
''beginning with the Korean conflict and certainly in the Vietnam conflict,
there was more criticizing of our forces and what we were trying to do, to the
point that it didn't seem that there was much criticism being leveled on the
enemy.''

Now, historically, the sharpest criticism of the Truman Administration's conduct
of the Korean ''conflict'' was ''leveled'' by the Republican Party; you could
look it up. And throughout the Vietnam ''conflict'' a large segment of the
American press and quite a few of the reporters on the scene remained
determinedly hawkish; you could look that up, too.

Aside from muddled history, however, does Mr. Reagan believe that criticism
''leveled'' by the U.S. press at Ho Chi Minh and Hanoi would have had the
slightest effect on the Vietnam ''conflict''? And does he believe that a free
press should not have reported on the military difficulties of what was the
third largest war in U.S. history? Or on the ignorant and deceptive conduct of
that war by three Administrations of both parties?

Such reporting - particularly graphic and unstaged television images from
Vietnam itself - probably did influence public opinion against the war. Mr.
Reagan apparently assumes that that was its purpose. This assumption not only
impugns the patriotism of the capitalists who own the major newspaper and
broadcasting companies; it is ignorant of the obligation of a free press,
established by the First Amendment to the Constitution, to inform the American
public as best it can about the public's business - certainly including wars or
even ''conflicts.'' But ''I just wish,'' Mr. Reagan went on in his aw-shucks
manner, ''that we could get together on what is of importance to our national
security . . . what is endangering our forces and what is helping them in their
mission.'' Well, Americans have learned that ''what is of importance to our
national security'' is not always what either Democratic or Republican
Presidents say it is; and there's little evidence that either Ronald Reagan or
any recent President has tried very hard to ''get together'' with those of
honestly differing views.  The implication that press reporting has been
''endangering'' American forces is untrue and unworthy; and ''helping them in
their mission'' is certainly not to be equated with unquestioning press support
of whatever a President decides. Is it being on the Syrian or Soviet ''side'' to
report that Marines are in an untenable military position and have been given a
probably impossible assignment in Lebanon? No, it's being against Ronald
Reagan's policy.  Mr. Reagan can't make that distinction, simple as it is. When
asked who was the ''us'' reporters are always against, he said Mr. Shultz had
been talking about ''our side, militarily - in other words, all of America.''
That's a major trouble with Presidents. They assume that having been elected to
temporary power by the American people, they come to embody that people - that a
President's policy becomes ipso facto the people's policy, or ''our side.'' In
fact, it's just the President's side, often wrong, and often representing
nothing more than his political interest.  The free American press, with all its
human faults, nevertheless has the obligation, owing to its constitutional
protection, to make that kind of distinction. Doing so doesn't please Presidents
and sometimes angers the public; but it's still the duty of the press to
provide, if it can, ''that glimpse of truth for which you have forgotten to
ask.'' Only when doing so is it really ''on our side.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              341 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 23, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

DELAY IS URGED ON ARMY UNIFORMS

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 537 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 22


Representative Joseph P. Addabbo, chairman of the House Defense appropriations
subcommittee, today asked Army Secretary John O. Marsh to review plans to buy
new camouflage fatigue uniforms after their use in Grenada showed them to be too
heavy for the tropics.

The Army has already bought 6.4 million sets of the battle-dress uniforms at a
cost of nearly $205 million and has plans for a total purchase of 13.4 million
sets costing $432 million.

Mr. Addabbo, a Democrat from Queens, said the Army should hold up on the further
purchases until it could determine what might be a better buy for tropical use.

Grenada-based troops complained that the uniforms, made of a 50-50 blend of
cotton and nylon, were too heavy for warm-weather climates, retained heat, took
a long time to dry and wrinkled and bagged easily.

Army's Plans Unchanged

The Army said this week that it had been aware of the problem earlier and had
created a study group to develop plans for light-weight fatigues. But it said it
still planned to go ahead with the full intended purchase, which would provide
at least four sets of fatigues for its active, reserve and National Guard troops
and some marines.

Meanwhile, the Army held a briefing to defend its continued purchase of the
camouflage battle dress.

''It's a good uniform,'' said Brig. Gen. Jimmy D. Ross, director of troop
support.

General Ross said the present battle dress, which got unfavorable marks in a
survey of Army personnel, was designed for soldiers serving in northern Europe
and other cooler climates, not for the tropics.

He said the Army planned to begin tests within 30 days of a new lightweight
camouflage uniform for the tropics made of 100 percent cotton. He estimated
that, if the new uniform passed the tests, it would be ready for distribution in
12 to 15 months.

He was unable to explain, when asked, why it took the Army so long to come up
with a lightweight battle dress. The heavier one now in use was authorized in
1979.

The Grenada Complaints

General Ross acknowledged there were complaints from troops who were sent to
tropical Grenada and he said 3,000 sets of a Vietnam-era jungleweight uniform
were sent to troops there within a matter of days. He said he had heard reports
that some soldiers suffered heat stroke in Grenada but he did not have any
definite information on this.

Taking note of troop criticisms of the present battle dress, General Ross said
design changes had been made to give it a ''more military look.''

The Army survey had disclosed considerable opinion among soldiers that the
battle dress was sloppy-looking.

Companies Are Identified

The Army listed these companies as manufacturers of uniform material and various
parts of the uniforms:

Tantex Inc. of New York City and H. Landau Inc. of Bala Cynwyd, Pa., manufacture
material for the uniforms.  Winfield Manufacturing of New York, Proper
International of Puerto Rico and Coastal Industries of Selma, Ala., make the
trousers.

Selma Apparel of Selma, Gibraltar International of Brooklyn and Terry
Manufacturing of Roanoke, Ala., manufacture the shirts.

Proper International of Puerto Rico, and Atlas Headwear of Compton, Calif., make
the caps.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              342 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 24, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YEAR, SAME YEARNINGS: BOB HOPE TREATS TROOPS

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 824 words

DATELINE: ABOARD U.S.S. GUAM, off Beirut, Lebanon, Dec. 23


Lance Cpl. Russell Biffle, from Mississippi, watched today as Bob Hope told
jokes, Brooke Shields burst into song and Cathy Lee Crosby cavorted in a slinky
red dress.

It was, he thought, like getting at least a little bit of America in the
tormented country of Lebanon.

''It's not home,'' Corporal Biffle said after the Hope Christmas concert aboard
this 18,500-ton helicopter assault ship, 10 miles off Lebanon, ''but it's as
close to home as we'll get.''

Then he buckled on his flak jacket, slung his M-16 automatic rifle over his
shoulder and prepared to return to the bunkered, sandbagged base at Beirut
International Airport that is a home, however claustrophobic, for the 1,800
American marines deployed there.



The Best They Could Expect

The program was the best the marines could expect by way of celebration. On
Christmas Day, their spokesman said, they will probably be on alert because it's
a Sunday and, for some reason, the day is favored by those who fire on them.

Mr. Hope's entertainers are to perform seven shows aboard six ships, but only
about half the marines in Beirut will be spared duties to see them, a naval
spokesman said.

At the airport compound, however, there is evidence that people in America are
thinking about their low-ranking envoys in the Middle East.

So far, Marine spokesmen said, the base has received 35 tons of gifts in 10,000
parcels transported from ship to shore by helicopter. The city of Albany, N.Y.,
sent 1,500 shaving kits. Dogs trained to detect explosives sniff at all the gift
packages in case they contain bombs.

On board ship, everyone was out of range of all but the biggest guns and there
were no snipers. But in his concert, the 80-year-old Mr. Hope alluded to the
danger ashore.  ''If this is peacekeeping,'' Mr. Hope told the marines, ''ain't
you glad you're not in a war?''

The show began slowly, with some marines at first subdued, perhaps weighted by
the burden of their task and the memory that 241 of their colleagues died in the
Oct. 23 truck-bomb explosion at their base. They were, as one marine put it,
''tired, dirty and smelly.''

Mr. Hope's team got his cue cards all mixed up, and his delivery faltered. The
marines sat on their flak jackets and helmets in the cavernous hangar deck of
the Guam and waited.

Mr. Hope appeared in a golf outfit with a difference. The jacket was in a
camouflage pattern, as were the knickerbockers and the cap. Even the club he
carried had been painted with camouflage paint. That got some laughs. A joke
about Mormons and the Pope didn't, perhaps because it seemed remote from Marine
concerns. And Mr. Hope repeated the punch line three times. Then all was
redeemed.

Miss Shields, the 18-year-old model who is also a freshman at Princeton,
appeared, and so did Miss U.S.A., Julie Hayek. Wolf-whistles filled the hangar
deck. Ann Jillian, star of a television series called ''Jennifer Slept Here,''
came on stage in a backless blue gown.

'You Are Our Heroes'

''Hi, guys,'' Miss Jillian said. That sent them halfway wild. ''So many men,''
she purred, ''so little time.'' And that completed the job, in a style much
associated with the 1940's.

Her song, with the line ''did you ever know that you are our heroes,'' left them
rapt and silent, pondering the possibility that they were, in fact, heroes, not
just the components at the sharp end of a controversial and dangerous presence.

''As emissaries of the United States,'' Miss Jillian had told reporters before
the 90-minute show, ''we are coming here to show these guys that they really,
truly have a big family in the U.S.A.''

There were other entertainers, too. Vic Damone sang romantic songs. George Kirby
got good laughs with impersonations and jokes. Then the whole cast gathered on
stage and Miss Jillian sang ''Silent Night,'' inviting the marines to join in.
Not many did, for the carol meant that the show was over and it was time to go
back to base, and some looked tired and homesick.

''This is a good Christmas for us,'' said Petty Officer 1st Class John Jayroe,
27, from Baltimore. ''Christmas is different out here. You miss everything that
happens back home. It's a different world.''

Doing 'the Right Thing'

Some of the celebrities expressed amazement that, seen through high- powered
binoculars from the ship, Beirut seemed so normal, with carloads of commuters
clogging the streets. ''It's almost unreal,'' Miss Crosby said.

Mr. Hope, in a conversation with reporters, said that unlike Vietnam, here the
military was in charge, not the politicians, ''so we might just have a chance.''
The marines, he said, were doing ''the right thing.''

Miss Shields, accompanied by her mother, said: ''I think the guys on shore have
to keep their faith. We are coming here and representing everybody at home.''

A marine called Ezell Edwards, from Chicago, said: ''It's O.K., I guess. But I'd
rather be home.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              343 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 24, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Laos Turns Over Bodies Of U.S. Servicemen

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 106 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 23


Laos has handed over to a United States team the bodies of some American
soldiers who were reported missing in action in the Vietnam War, the Laotian
press agency said today.

The report, monitored in Bangkok, did not identify any of the servicemen.

This week the team, from the United States Joint Casualty Resolution Center in
Honolulu, conducted the first official American inspection of the site where a
United States Air Force C-130 cargo plane crashed Dec. 21, 1972, after having
been hit by antiaircraft fire. It was the first official inspection of a crash
site in Laos since the Communist Government took over in 1975.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              344 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 25, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MARINE CHRISTMAS: 'GOOD TRY, BUT...'

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1065 words

DATELINE: BEIRUT, Lebanon, Dec. 24


Christmas seems to have caught up with Lebanon despite itself.

Today, the hawkers here were selling inflatable Santa Claus dolls in red and
white plastic. People threw luncheon parties - dinner is more difficult because
of the 8 P.M. curfew - and exchanged gifts. Christmas trees were decorated, and
the ritual provided some small respite from the country's turmoil.

But the Lebanese people have not lowered their guard. Every truck or car is a
potential bomb, every vacuum a place to fill with violence.

Despite Christmas - or maybe because of it this year, for Sundays in the Middle
East have been particularly prone to violence - there has also been no lowering
of the guard at the United States Marine compound near the international
airport.

Christmas Lunch a Day Early

Behind their olive-green sandbags, in gun emplacements, overshadowed by
protective earthworks, the 1,800 marines in the international force had their
Christmas lunch today: roast turkey, baked ham and other delicacies. Like
Thanksgiving, the occasion was held a day early for what were described as
security reasons, and it was filled with bravado and camaraderie, and loss.

Two days ago, First Sgt. Robert Nichols, 37 years old, a marine of 20 years
standing, received a parcel from his wife in Camp Lejeune, N.C. It weighed 38
pounds. In it, his wife had set up a small Christmas tree, hung with photographs
from their scrapbook of remembered moments. At first sight, Sergeant Nichols
said in the bunkered clubhouse occupied by F Company, it seemed a good and warm
idea.

''But when I got down to writing home last night,'' he said, ''I said to my
wife, It was a good try, but. . . .'' His voice trailed off. The message seemed
clear enough: The reminders of the good times past only made pains present more
acute.

''You know, there's a lot of camaraderie, and we try to keep each other buoyed
up,'' he said. But, he said in blunt language, they all knew Beirut was a
miserable place to be.

As he recounted his experiences, the sergeant, a Vietnam veteran, pulled out a
well-worn wallet packed with photographs in plastic envelopes. They had been
looked at often. Here was the older son, Jason, 5, clad in father's flak jacket
and helmet, grinning across the void of separation. And here was Scott, 2. Here
the two together.

''Yes,'' the sergeant said, ''when I first saw those pictures from the
scrapbook, I thought it was pretty good, but when I sat down to write. . . .''

False Alarm by Sniffer Dog

There was a radio report today that a car laden with explosives had been found
near a Marine post. It turned out to be a false alarm, caused by an overzealous
Marine dog, trained to detect explosives, who had smelled a bomb where there was
none.  Then, in the south, another Christmas Eve report: Three charred bodies
were found in a burned-out car whose deathly cargo of explosives had detonated
prematurely.

Near Beirut, the wooded hills of the Shuf Mountains resounded with the thumps
and bangs of an artillery battle between the Lebanese Army and Moslem Druse
opponents.

Ships from the American Sixth Fleet lay offshore, unidentified warplanes howled
briefly over the city, the Government banned public meetings over the Christmas
period to prevent people from getting overexcited - that is, violent - and a
foreigner, sitting on his balcony overlooking the Mediterranean, heard a burst
of gunfire.

''Just someone shooting rats,'' he said with studied nonchalance.

Power of Wednesday's Blast

Only last Wednesday, the latest reminder of the peril that people here feel took
the form of a one-and-half-ton truck bomb that blew up outside a French command
post near the ''green line'' dividing Christian and Moslem quarters. The blast
channeled a great rush of wind through streets with such force that the steel
doors of ground- floor workshops and garages were sucked outwards. Many of the
injured suffered from collapsed lungs.

In the wreckage, hanging from a strand of French barbed wire, was a tattered
critique of the Lebanese poet Mikhail Naimy. It fluttered open at a page that
said: ''Fate has no eye to watch over us, Naimy says. We live, suffer and die
alone. Fate is totally unmindful of our agonies.''

At the Marine encampment around the airport, a place no tactician would choose,
the sound of Christmas will be the throbbing of bulldozers piling up protective
earth and gouging the red soil for underground bunkers.

Chaplain Holds Service

The chaplain of the Marine Corps, Capt. Eli Takesian of the Navy, visited the
men today and held a service, recalling Beirut's proximity to the biblical
lands. ''You are here, and you are called peacekeepers,'' he told marines
squatting on their steel helmets at a small outdoor service, M-16 rifles at
their sides.  ''And my prayer is that finally we will find peace for the people
in this troubled land.''

His sermon had its counterpoint in the Shuf Mountains, as the sounds of the
battle there carried to the H Company position where the service took place.

The chaplain of the 22d Marine Amphibious Unit, Comdr. Kevin Anderson, asked the
marines at the service what they thought of Christmas in Lebanon. ''One day
closer to the home,'' came one quick reply.

Since the Oct. 23 truck bombing that killed 241 American servicemen, the
preoccupation among the marines has been more and more with security, so it
seems as if a great burrowing-in is taking place.

Recently, marines said, they have not been taking incoming fire and some of the
troops have been in Beirut only since Nov. 18, so there has been no time to be
worn down by the boredom and action that provide the military's opposing poles.

''We all knew before we left that we were going to be away from home during
Christmas,'' said First Lieut. Richard Gardner, 27, so there was some mental
preparation. ''But who wouldn't want to be home at Christmas?''

His sister had sent him a red candle and a food package, so he would have a
private party. ''Burn the candle, eat some food, that's it,'' he said.

Throughout the Marine positions, there are walls decorated with letters and
cards and posters sent by groups of people in the United States. ''It's
unbelievable the support we are getting from home,'' Lieutenant Gardner said.
''It makes you think that what you are doing is worthwhile.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Chaplain Eli Takesian of Washington holding service (pg.1)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              345 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 25, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HAVANA IS RESCHEDULING HALF ITS DEBT TO THE WEST

BYLINE: By CLYDE H.FARNSWORTH

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 898 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 24


Cuba has rescheduled nearly half of its $3.5 billion debt to Western governments
and banks, according to a research group that monitors the Cuban economy.

Recent studies by the group, the Cuban American National Foundation of
Washington and Miami, also said that Cuba had been largely unsuccessful in
diversifying what is still largely a one-crop economy based on sugar.

The studies have provided a a profile of the Cuban economy, which has been
closely linked to the Soviet Union for that last two decades. The foundation is
supported by a Cuban-American academics and business leaders, many of them
former backers of Fidel Castro.

One study, titled ''Castro and the Bankers; the Mortgaging of a Revolution,''
says that banks and government creditors have forced Cuba to pay unusually high
interest rates and service fees as the price of rescheduling.

It says the banks had thought the Soviet Union would stand behind Cuba's
credits.

Soviet Disclaims Responsibility

''To the dismay of the lenders,'' said Ernesto F. Betancourt, a foundation
consultant, ''the Soviet Union made it clear it was unwilling to back the debt
of its Caribbean client state.'' ''It certainly made lending to Cuba riskier,''
said Mr. Betancourt, a former Cuban lobbyist here and former budget director for
the Organization of American States. He is also a consultant for the World Bank.

The report said Cuba's needs for hard currency from the Soviet Union compete
with ''the growing demands of other Soviet client states such as Poland, Vietnam
and Afghanistan.''

Mr. Betancourt was joint author of the report with Wilson P. Dizard 3d, a
research associate at the foundation.

Rather than force Cuba into default, which might have caused the banks to write
off their loans, they went along with rescheduling, but drove a hard bargain.

One of the principal sources of foreign exchange for Cuba, other foundation
experts reported, is the oil revenue of Angola derived from operations of Gulf
Oil.

Angola pays hundreds of millions of dollars a year for the 35,000 Cuban soldiers
who are helping the Angolan Government fight guerrillas, according to Frank
Calzon, executive director of the foundation.

In a ''Memorandum on Joint Ventures in Cuba,'' the foundation asserts that the
Government has reversed itself on a basic tenet of revolutionary dogma in trying
to attract foreign investment.

A decree of Feb. 15, 1982, invites foreign enterprises to invest under terms
similar to those in some Eastern European countries.

Jorge A. Sanguinetty, an economics professor at American University and a former
investment planning chief for Mr. Castro, said the decree was intended to
attract import substitution industries.

The hope is to make such products as tires, machinery and pharamaceuticals that
are needed by the Cubans and are now being imported. Cuba, he said, also wants
to build hotels to attract more tourists. Mr. Calzon said the Cubans had been
making efforts to attract enterprises from Spain and Scandinavia, but without
success.

There appear to be several reasons for the lack of success: no legal recourse
and safeguards; the requirement that enterprises not contract workers directly
but only through a government entity; lack of access to the United States; a 30
percent tax on profits, and the unusually high rate of absenteeism of Cuban
labor.

The foundation experts estimated that Cuba had a hard currency gap of $250
million to $300 million a year, representing the difference between what it is
able to sell for hard currency and what it needs to buy.

Sugar Remains the Main Crop

Sugar continues to be the main crop, accounting for 95 percent of export
earnings. Half the crop, Mr. Sanguinetty said, is sold to the Soviet Union to
help pay for Soviet oil.

Twenty years ago sugar also made up 95 percent of Cuba's exports.

''Twenty some years of revolutionary efforts at industrialization,
diversification and development have failed to shift Cuba's dependency on
primary commodities for its export operation,'' the report said.

Cuba's isolation from the American economy is also seen by foundation experts as
one of the reasons for the poor economic performance.

No American banks have lent money to Cuba since a trade embargo was imposed in
1962. That move was set off by the expropriation by Cuba of $2 billion worth of
American property, including oil refineries.

The leading creditors, according to the foundation, are the Royal Bank of
Canada, the Bank of Tokyo, Credit Lyonnais, the French Caisse Nationale de
Credit Agricole, the Libyan Arab Foreign Bank and the Union de Banques Arabes et
Fran,caises. Cuba also owes money to the Governments of Austria, Belgium,
Britain, Canada, Denmark, France, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland and West Germany.

Western banks and governments have rescheduled credits of $1.5 billion this
year. On medium-term credits, of up to seven years, the banks and governments
require Cuba to pay 2.25 percentage points over the London Interbank Offered
Rate, a measure of international interest rates, which is now 10.4 percent for
six-month borrowings.

Brazil, with $90 billion of debts outstanding, recently paid 2 percentage points
over the interbank rate in a rescheduling. The rescheduling fee set for Cuba was
1.25 percent of the loans. Brazil recently paid 1 percent.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Christmas tree at Swiss Embassy in Havana

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              346 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 25, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV VIEW;
THE MEDIUM WAS AT ITS BEST ON BREAKING STORIES

BYLINE: By John Corry

SECTION: Section 2; Page 21, Column 5; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 991 words


Nonfiction television - a loose, barely definable category, previously made up
of news, information, documentaries, docudramas, commentary, interviews,
analysis, self-help, how- to programs and contests of all kinds - proliferated
this last year, even to expanding the boundaries of the genre. ''The Day
After,'' ostensibly fiction, was exploited, interpreted and discussed as if it
were nonfiction and became, in the process, a news story in itself. ABC's vision
of thermonuclear horror, seen by 100 million American viewers (and since then
exported; it is now being shown as a movie in European theaters, for example)
was esthetically shabby but politically important. It made a major statement.

The statement was that disarmament, rather than deterrence, was the way out of
the nuclear dilemma. ABC denied, however, that ''The Day After'' made any
statement at all. It was almost as if the network had forgotten that in a
democracy it had every right to make a political statement. On the other hand,
the arena does become muddied when fact, fiction and politics intertwine, and
while ''The Day After'' intensified the nuclear debate, it scarcely clarified
it. One looked elsewhere on television for clarification - to programs that got
down to the serious business of explanation.

Television offered some programs that did exactly that. ABC's ''Nightline,'' for
one, with Ted Koppel, distinguished itself throughout the year. For one thing,
it stayed on top of the news; for another, it employed Mr. Koppel. The
''Nightline'' format is the multiple interview, with experts or participants in
a news story on hand to answer questions. Experts or participants, however, may
also be ideologues, more interested in pressing a point of view than in
explaining one. Mr. Koppel, fortunately, seldom allowed them to do this. He
listened to what people said; he weighed it. Politely, he asked the proper
questions in return. He did not score debating points; he seemed to be in
pursuit of truth. Night in, night out, his ''Nightline'' was the best piece of
daily television journalism around.

The early-evening news shows, meanwhile, were marked by two major changes. The
first was that ABC and NBC joined CBS in using a single anchor; the second was
that public television's ''MacNeil/Lehrer Report'' expanded into the
''MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour.'' Both changes were widely publicized, but while the
first was cosmetic, the second was substantive. The result was that
''MacNeil/Lehrer,'' along with ''Nightline,'' became television's other
prominent example of serious daily journalism.

Public television also offered the 13-part ''Vietnam: A Television History,'' a
stunning piece of reportage, distinguished by, and also criticized for, its
even-handedness. It did not take sides; it showed the Vietnam War not
necessarily as we wanted to see it, but as the evidence showed it to be. On
commercial television, however, documentaries did not flourish. ABC made some of
the best that did appear, but for the most part the networks made them only
sparingly, and documentaries found their home mostly on public television.
''Frontline,'' a weekly documentary series on public television, delivered mixed
results - on occasion, it was a triumph of style over substance - although some
individual public- television documentaries were outstanding.

This viewer's nomination for the single most watchable, compelling documentary
of the year, for example, is public television's ''Summer of Judgment: The
Watergate Hearings.'' It was a reprise of history, just as ''Vietnam: A
Television History'' was a reprise. One could argue that neither ''Summer of
Judgment'' nor ''Vietnam'' told us anything new, and certainly they were not in
the tradition of investigative reporting. They were, however, of inestimable
value in promoting the cause of an informed citizenry. Whatever the purposes of
journalism, surely one is to throw a cold, clear light on the past so that we
may act more intelligently in the present. ''Vietnam,'' especially, did this to
a remarkable degree.


C-Span, the cable network, contributed to the education of an informed citizenry
in a different way. Most importantly, it pointed its cameras at members of
Congress as they stood making speeches in the well of the House. The speeches
were not always edifying, but as an illumination of the process of government,
the programs were superb. In its way, C-Span had the merits of the ''Vietnam''
series, presenting things not necessarily the way we want to see them, but the
way they are. C-Span, an idea whose time has come, also televised committee
hearings, public meetings and interviews with people who had something to say
about government.

As always, meanwhile, television as a whole was at its best when it had a big
breaking story. Whatever its failures as a news medium - and criticism of
television journalism has intensified in recent months - television is
wonderfully well equipped to show us what is happening when it happens. The
bombing of Marine headquarters in Beirut and the invasion of Grenada, both in
the same week, were two of the biggest stories of the year. Cameras and
correspondents were absent at the beginning of both stories, with Pentagon fiat
keeping them away from Grenada. But in the aftermath, television showed how good
it could be.

Individual commentators sometimes stumbled in their analyses; individual
reporters sometimes stumbled on their facts. But as a vehicle for the national
debate that followed Beirut and Grenada, television was at its best. It was also
at its best in the coverage of the events that surrounded the downing of the
Korean passenger plane by a Soviet jet. Over a period of days, it put together
facts, while simultaneously carrying the national, even international, debate.
Television journalism, often frivolous, frequently tangential to real news,
pulled itself together for the big stories.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              347 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 25, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 16, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1359 words


FICTION 1217

POLAND, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) Seven centuries of history
in fictional form.  218

PET SEMATARY, by Stephen King. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The new family in town
discovers the horrors that lie in a neighboring cemetery.  3427

THE NAME OF THE ROSE, by Umberto Eco. (Helen & Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $15.95.) Unraveling the mystery of a murder in a 14th-century
Italian monastery.  4317

WHO KILLED THE ROBINS FAMILY?, created by Bill Adler and written by Thomas
Chastain. (Morrow, $9.95.) The publisher offers a $10,000 prize to the reader
who submits the best answer.  51029

RETURN OF THE JEDI, adapted by Joan D. Vinge. (Random House, $6.95.) Illustrated
storybook based on the latest ''Star Wars'' film.  686

THE ROBOTS OF DAWN, by Isaac Asimov. (Doubleday, $15.95.) A detective from Earth
investigates the murder of a robot on the planet Aurora.  796

THE WICKED DAY, by Mary Stewart. (Morrow, $16.95.) King Arthur, fulfillng a
prophecy made by Merlin, falls into an incestuous relationship.

858

THE SAGA OF BABY DIVINE, by Bette Midler. (Crown, $11.95.) The entertainer
imagines what her infancy was like in a fable lushly illustrated by Todd Schorr.
9716

CHANGES, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) The crises that arise when a
television anchorwoman and a glamorous physician fall in love.  1066

MORETA: DRAGONLADY OF PERN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $14.95.) A
battle against ecological disaster on a faraway planet.  11134

THE NEVERENDING STORY, by Michael Ende. (Doubleday, $15.95.) A lonely boy meets
challenges and finds his true self in a magical land.

121121

HOLLYWOOD WIVES, by Jackie Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The struggle for
money and power in Tinsel Town.  131214

THE AUERBACH WILL, by Stephen Birmingham. (Little, Brown, $16.95.) Three
generations of a German-Jewish family in New York.  14 1

BERLIN GAME, by Len Deighton. (Knopf, $15.95.) Espionage on both sides of the
Iron Curtain.  151414

WINTER'S TALE, by Mark Helprin. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $14.95.) Heroic
lives in Manhattan between the late 19th century and the year 2000.



 NONFICTION 1114

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck.  (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  2215

THE BEST OF JAMES HERRIOT.  (St. Martin's Press, $19.95.) Selections from the
writings of the Yorkshire veterinarian.  3350

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J. Peters and Robert H.  Waterman Jr. (Harper
& Row, $19.95.) Lessons to be learned from well-run American corporations.  445

WHILE REAGAN SLEPT, by Art Buchwald. (Putnam, $14.95.) Seven score wry
observations on the Washington scene by the syndicated columnist.  5517

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $17.95.) The rescue of two
Americans from an Iranian prison.  6659

MEGATRENDS, by John Naisbitt. (Warner, $17.50.) Predictions about America in the
next decade based on an analysis of conditions today.

7710

VIETNAM: A History, by Stanley Karnow. (Viking, $22.50.) Profusely illustrated
history of the war: tie-in with the current PBS television series.  888

TOUGH TIMES NEVER LAST, BUT TOUGH PEOPLE DO!  by Robert H.  Schuller. (Thomas
Nelson, $12.95.) Inspiration from a Protestant preacher.  992

THE HUMAN BODY, by Jonathan Miller. (Viking, $16.95.) A pop-up book illustrating
the workings of the human body.  10122

ONE BRIEF SHINING MOMENT, by William Manchester. (Little, Brown, $25.) A
profusely illustrated tribute to John F. Kennedy.

11116A HERO FOR OUR TIME, by Ralph G. Martin. (Macmillan, $19.95.) An anecdotal
account of the Kennedy years.  121012

THE BODY PRINCIPAL, by Victoria Principal. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Exercises
for women by a television personality.  131536

BLUE HIGHWAYS, by William Least Heat Moon. (Atlantic/Little, Brown, $17.50.) A
report on a trip through the back roads of America.  141472

A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein. (Harper & Row, $12.45.) Humor in
cartoons and verse.  15 1

THE KINGDOM BY THE SEA, by Paul Theroux. (Houghton Mifflin, $16.95.) A
novelist's journey around Great Britain.  The listings above are based on
computer-processed sales figures from about 2,000 bookstores in every region of
the United States.  And Bear in Mind Other recent books that in the opinion of
the Book Review staff are of particular literary, topical or scholarly interest:


THE DEATH OF CHE GUEVARA, by Jay Cantor. (Alfred A. Knopf, $17.95.) A powerful
first novel that mixes fact and fantasy about the Latin-American revolutionary,
seeing him not as a hero or a curiosity or a demon but as a historical riddle.

FAMILY POLITICS: Love and Power on an Intimate Frontier, by Letty Cottin
Pogrebin. (McGraw-Hill Book Co., $14.95.) A journalist examines the patriarchal
structure that continues to contain most marriages in this country and makes a
strong case for a redistribution of power that will prevent one member of a
family's benefiting at the expense of any other.

FIASCO, by Jack Anderson with James Boyd. (Times Books, $17.50.) In which the
syndicated columnist and his colleague demolish the idea that worldwide supply
problems were to blame for what happened to the price of oil.

THE FILE, by Penn Kimball. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $14.95.) An eloquent and
troubling book in which the author, a former editor who is now a professor of
journalism, tells of his discovery that for more than 30 years he has been
listed in secret Government files as ''a definite security risk,'' on the basis
of hearsay.

HISTORICAL ATLAS OF WORLD MYTHOLOGY: Volume One. The Way of the Animal Powers,
by Joseph Campbell. (Harper & Row, $67.50.) The start of the most sumptuous and
ambitious of all dictionaries and encyclopedias of mythology, which aims to
round up all the myths of the world in a single place.

THE ISLAND OF CRIMEA, by Vassily Aksyonov. (Random House, $16.95.) This novel by
a Russian emigre, in which Crimea is a bustling, Western-style democracy right
off the shores of the Soviet Union, reads for much of its length like a bizarre
yet joyous collaboration between Dostoyevsky and Thomas Pynchon.

JOSEPH CONRAD: A Chronicle, by Zdzislaw Najder. (Rutgers University Press.
Cloth, $30; paper, $14.95.) A major work of literary scholarship that succeeds
by avoiding fanciful theorizing about Conrad, showing us instead what a
biographer well equipped with the facts can do.

LA BRAVA, by Elmore Leonard. (Arbor House, $14.95.) Unlike most thrillers, which
hold up for the first 250 pages but don't make much sense in the end, ''La
Brava'' - about a former Secret Service man probing extortion and murder in
Miami Beach - has a conclusion even more satisfying than its exposition.

LIFE & TIMES OF MICHAEL K, by J. M. Coetzee. (The Viking Press, $13.95.) The new
novel by the South African author of ''Waiting for the Barbarians'' is a parable
of a repressive country at war in which an unexpectedly intelligent simpleton -
a mote in the dustheap of society - nobly endures.

PITCH DARK, by Renata Adler. (Alfred A. Knopf, $12.95.) Like Miss Adler's
previous work of fiction, ''Speedboat,'' her new novel is a genre unto itself, a
discontinuous first-person narrative. It also reflects her analytical mind and
ebullient style and has an old-fashioned real story to tell, a love story.

THE SACRED EXECUTIONER: Human Sacrifice and the Legacy of Guilt, by Hyam
Maccoby. (Thames & Hudson/W. W. Norton & Co., $19.95.) An examination of
Christianity and Judaism, in connection with the death of Christ, that
challenges us to a fundamental rethinking of the inhumanity at the heart of our
inherited religions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              348 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 25, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

COPING WITH THE KREMLIN



BYLINE:
By MARK BEISSINGER

SECTION: Section 7; Page 10, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 25 words

SINCE the Bolshevik Revolution, the Soviet Union has been as significant a
factor in the domestic politics of the West as it has been in international
politics. A long history of missile gaps, grain deals and gas pipelines attests
to the ways in which the West has interpreted - rightly and wrongly - Soviet
capabilities and intentions. With Western defense budgets on the rise in an era
of domestic austerity, it should hardly be surprising that once again the aims
of Soviet foreign policy have become a card to be played in the political game
of who gets what.

Jonathan Steele's contribution to the literature on Soviet foreign policy
belongs to that category of works whose primary purpose is to influence Western
defense budgets rather than to deal with the challenges Soviet foreign behavior
pose for international order. As the former East European correspondent of The
Guardian during the years of detente in the early 1970's, Mr. Steele has applied
his considerable skills as a journalist, which won him acclaim as Britain's
International Reporter of the Year in 1981, to a book whose goal and assertions
are bold. The aim of ''Soviet Power'' is to present the world as it is viewed
from the Kremlin, but he delivers a view of the world from the Kremlin through
the eyes of the European left.

Mr. Steele reproduces in mirror image many of the same fallacies and myths he is
so eager to dispel. In his introduction, he decries the abuses to which ''worst
case'' analyses, based solely on Soviet capabilities rather than on Soviet
actions or intentions, have been put by politicians and military planners in the
West. But in his zeal to pull the rug out from under those he labels ''the
prophets of doom,'' he offers what can only be called a ''best case'' analysis
of Soviet behavior, one which reads more like a primer on Soviet foreign policy
for the peace movement than a careful and balanced appraisal of Soviet power.

To combat the notion that the Kremlin has some master plan for world domination,
Mr. Steele argues that during the Brezhnev era the Soviet Union was transformed
into a conservative, status quo power, preferring detente to confrontation and
intervening in the third world only with great caution and reluctance. Seeing
the Soviet Union as a bogyman that has been set up by Western hawks in order to

Mark Beissinger is an assistant professor of government at Harvard University,
teaching courses on Soviet politics.  inflate arms budgets, Mr. Steele argues
that ''Soviet moves described as 'adventurist' have often been low- risk
policies, cautiously arrived at and in some cases internationally approved by a
majority of the world community.'' In particular, he has in mind Soviet policies
toward Latin America, where the Soviet Union has been reluctant to commit itself
to the defense of revolutionary movements and regimes. As for Soviet
''expansionism,'' ''this may be nothing more sinister than the normal search for
diplomatic and political influence that other states also follow.''

Mr. Steele not only equates the two superpowers but he also defends the concept
of European neutralism. The threat of Finlandization - under which European
countries accommodate themselves to the wishes of the Soviet Union - is''an
empty myth''; rather, neutrality could be based on the Austrian example. Mr.
Steele does not stop to ponder how a neutral Western Europe might be able to
maintain its independence vis- a-vis its more powerful neighbor to the east.

Recognizing the enormity of the Soviet military buildup in recent decades, Mr.
Steele argues that much of this expansion reflected both a legitimate response
to American efforts to maintain nuclear superiority over the Soviets and an
understandable yearning to gain the rights and privileges of a superpower. But
he questions the utility of Moscow's military muscle, concluding that ''although
the instruments of Soviet military power have grown, its influence has
declined.'' The issue is not an idle one, since Soviet politicians have no doubt
thought about how they might be better able in the future to cash in on the
enormous investment in military power they have made in recent years.

But Mr. Steele confuses a lack of success in Soviet foreign policy in some areas
with a lack of intention or will. For while Soviet foreign policy in recent
decades has suffered considerable setbacks (China, Egypt, Indonesia, Ghana,
Somalia and Chile, to name but a few), it has also scored significant victories,
some of which have been the result of a growing Soviet propensity to apply force
internationally, often thousands of miles from the borders of the socialist
motherland. Unlike the Soviets, who have viewed military force as the most
important component of the ''correlation of forces'' in the world, Mr. Steele
sees few advantages accruing to the Soviets through the application of force.
Eastern Europe is described as ''the unusual empire''; Afghanistan was an
''exceptional case''; Soviet deployment of SS-20s targeted at Western Europe
constituted ''modernization''; and Angola, Mozambique, Ethiopia, Vietnam and
Cambodia were largely pyrrhic victories, burdens the Soviet Union has been
saddled with rather than prizes they consciously sought. Given these
assessments, one wonders what in Mr. Steele's judgment would in fact constitute
Soviet ''expansionism'' or ''adventurism.''


ACCORDING to Mr. Steele, Moscow's passion for ''maintaining excessive secrecy
about the size of its nuclear arsenal and of inhibiting all public debate about
its arms budget'' is a ''political mistake.'' Such practices, he acknowledges,
heighten the sense of insecurity of the Soviet Union's neighbors. But, in fact,
this has been the conscious and consistent policy of the Soviet system for the
past six decades. Only 21 years after the Cuban missile crisis, Mr. Steele
concludes that the notion ''the Soviet Union is some kind of nuclear bully,
ready and eager to brandish its nuclear weapons and trample on Western nations,
is a figment of cold war propaganda.''

He also argues that Soviet leaders ''are sensitive to the insulting language of
the cold war, which is often permeated with punitive overtones reminiscent of
the scolding attitude of a parent to a child, a judge to an accused, or an
animal trainer to a savage beast.'' One need only to pick up any issue of Pravda
since the close of World War II to find numerous examples of Soviet
contributions to cold war rhetoric.

Mr. Steele's point that a reading of Soviet foreign policy based solely on
Soviet military capabilities is likely to be misleading is well taken. But a
reading of Soviet intentions and actions based solely on wishful thinking is
likely to be equally dangerous.


SOVIET POWER

The Kremlin's Foreign Policy - Brezhnev to Andropov.  By Jonathan Steele.  287
pp.New York: Simon & Schuster. $19.95.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              349 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 25, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RUSSIANS AND LATINS



BYLINE:
By WAYNE S. SMITH

SECTION: Section 7; Page 10, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 30 words

THE principal value of ''The Giant's Rival'' by Cole Blasier is its timeliness.
Mr. Blasier's subject is Soviet relations with Latin America. He traces the ebb
and flow of Moscow's efforts in the area since the 1920's and analyzes various
aspects of the current relationship. He makes no pretense of breaking new
ground; rather, his announced purpose is to provide an introductory discussion
of the subject and a reading list. What makes the book so interesting is that it
comes when the Reagan Administration has again raised the specter of a dangerous
Communist menace in Latin America. According to the Administration, the turmoil
in Central America represents nothing less than Soviet-Cuban aggression that the
United States must turn back if it does not wish to have Communist hordes on the
banks of the Rio Grande.

Mr. Blasier points out that, far from following an aggressive blueprint, the
Russians have usually been exceedingly cautious in Latin America. Their approach
is characterized more by opportunism than by audacity. Nor does the evidence
suggest they are pushing to turn other Latin American states into new Cubas.
Given their own economic limitations and competing priorities, one Cuba may be
quite enough. If they had as a first priority turning Nicaragua into a
full-fledged Marxist-Leninist state, for example, one would expect them to pick
up the tab for the hard-pressed Sandinista Government. But they have refused.
Thus, even if the Sandinista commanders wished to do so, they could not
nationalize everything and set up a state economy. At least in part because of
Moscow's unwillingness to open the purse strings, the Sandinistas are stuck with
a mixed economy.

And as Mr. Blasier observes with respect to Salvador Allende's Chile in the
early l970's: ''The Soviet authorities . . . did not follow the same policies as
toward Cuba, that is, subsidizing Chilean exports and imports, providing free
military equipment (Allende turned it down), absorbing huge trade deficits, or
buying up much of Chilean exports. Clearly, neither Soviet nor Chilean leaders
viewed their relationship as a repetition of Soviet-Cuban relations.''

Over the years, the Russians have succeeded in expanding their diplomatic
representation, trade and even arms sales in Latin America. Rarely, however, has
this been translated into significant political influence - with the obvious
exception of Cuba. Mr. Blasier observes that Washington has such a paternalistic
view of Latin America that it often seems genuinely convinced Latin Americans
cannot think for themselves and will be taken in by trade preferences or

Wayne S. Smith, the chief of the United States Interests Section in Havana from
1979 to 1972, is a senior associate at the Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace.  hardware the Russians wave before them. This is simply not the case. The
Latin Americans are perfectly capable of holding their own with the Russians.
The latter sold arms to Peru, for example, but won no special place at Lima's
table. They have bought large quantities of grain from Argentina, but that
certainly has not suggested to Argentina's generals or politicians that
Socialism is the wave of the future. Mexico has long had friendly relations with
Moscow but is little influenced by the relationship.

Indeed, as Mr. Blasier very astutely observes, in terms of American interests,
the principal harm from Soviet efforts in Latin America has come precisely from
Washington's overreaction to them. ''The USSR,'' he says, ''has been following a
strategy of the martial arts: turn the weight of a more powerful opponent
against him. With an occasional exception, Soviet leaders have avoided the
initiative and kept a low profile, waiting for Washington to make errors.''


CERTAINLY, the Reagan Administration has rung alarm bells over an alleged Soviet
plan for conquest in Central America. But, one might ask, what if the real
Soviet plan is to lead the United States to bog itself down in another Vietnam
and to identify itself with genocidal right-wing governments? This would again
cause deep divisions in the American body politic and polarize the situation in
Central America, with Washington perceived as defending the status quo - a
no-win position. If that is the Soviet trap, the Reagan Administration has
walked right into it. As Mr. Blasier sums it up, in Central America,
Washington's official actions have led to the very consequences they were
designed to prevent.

One need only look at the Administration's ''secret'' war against Nicaragua for
an illustration of what Mr. Blasier is talking about. The war does not reduce
the presence and influence of the Russians or Cubans.  Quite the contrary; it
cannot but result in a closer military relationship with them. Nor, for that
matter, has the secret war interdicted any arms or got rid of the Sandinista
Government. It was never designed to accomplish the first, and the second is
beyond its scope. If the Reagan Administration had deliberately set out to find
the worst possible approach in Nicaragua, it could not have come up with
anything better than its secret war. The Soviets are doubtless delighted.

The Administration may well argue that its secret war has succeeded in wringing
concessions out of the Nicaraguan Government. Doubtless the Sandinistas now feel
beleaguered, but they have been signaling a willingness to negotiate since 1981
and have accompanied this with conciliatory gestures. For a time in 1981, for
example, the Nicaraguans acceded to Washington's demands that they halt their
support for the Salvadoran guerrillas. The Reagan Administration acknowledged as
much in a statement on April 2, 1981, that noted the United States had found
''no hard evidence of arms trafficking within the last few weeks, and propaganda
and other support activities have been curtailed.'' But as the Administration
was apparently not interested in negotiating, it ignored the gesture and adopted
a confrontational line. Thus rebuffed, the Nicaraguans doubtless resumed some
degree of support. The point, however, is that it is not recent actions that
have frightened the Sandinistas into a conciliatory mood. They have all along
proclaimed their willingness to negotiate.


AS Mr. Blasier suggests, the United States must of course make it clear that it
will not tolerate Soviet military bases or offensive weapons in this hemisphere.
That principle was established in l962 and has been upheld by every succeeding
Administration. Regrettably, Mr. Blasier does not deal with the causal
relationship between the changing line and tactics of the Latin American
Communist Parties and the shifting dictates of the now defunct Comintern. He
mentions Communist-led uprisings in El Salvador in 1932 and Brazil in 1935, but
he does not relate the two to each other or to the period of militant Communism
announced by the Sixth Comintern Congress in 1928 - a period that ran until the
Seventh Congress in 1935. During that time, Latin American parties were ordered
to take the offensive against bourgeois governments, and take it they did, with
disastrous results. The uprisings in El Salvador and Brazil were quickly and
bloodily suppressed. In 1931, Chilean Communists sparked a mutiny in the Chilean
fleet, but this was put down within days and led to nothing. The hard line taken
by the Argentine party contributed to the overthrow of the democratic government
in Argentina and its replacement by a right- wing military regime, which
immediately cracked down on the Communist Party.

The Mexican party also carried out its orders, an episode of which Mr. Blasier
seems curiously unaware. He says, ''In the late 1920's, when the government
swung to the right and began suppressing its leftist opposition, the
International raised strong protests. The Mexicans held the USSR responsible for
this and refused to accept the Soviet Foreign Office's formal disclaimer of
responsibility.'' That was only the tail end of the story. In 1929, in
accordance with the instructions of the Sixth Comintern Congress, the Mexican
Communist Party called for open opposition to the Mexican Government, and the
Communist-led Peasant Leagues were ordered to launch an insurrection. This was
put down almost before it began, but, understandably, the Mexican Government was
not amused. It energetically cracked down on the Communist Party and within
months broke relations with Moscow.

As a result of the disasters of 1928 to 1935, the Latin American Communist
Parties remain exceedingly dubious about armed struggle as a tactic and are
usually reluctant to be in the forefront of a revolutionary movement. A
conference of Communist and left-wing theoreticians held in Havana in 1981, for
example, acknowledged that national liberation movements rather than Communist
Parties might represent the vanguard in certain revolutionary situations - a
tacit admission of the parties' failure to play that role.

But these gaps in Mr. Blasier's book do not detract from its overall value. This
is a book that Americans interested in Latin America and puzzled by the Reagan
Administration's explanation of events there definitely should read.

THE GIANT'S RIVAL

The USSR and Latin America.  By Cole Blasier.  Illustrated. 213 pp.

Pennsylvania: University of Pittsburgh Press.  Cloth, $14.95. Paper, $7.95.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              350 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 25, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Great Achievements: Words of Assessment

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 13, Column 6; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 300 words


When we commemorate great achievements, it is important to consider those events
that have been

beneficial

 to mankind. Thus, when I read that the Norden bombsight was among the top 10
Westchester County engineering achievements (''Engineers Pick Top 10 Feats,''
Dec. 11), I was appalled. ''We wondered about it being a weapon of war,'' Mr.
(Frank C.) Bohlander (County Commissioner of Public Works) said, but explained
that the committee finally decided it was also ''humane,'' because it saved
lives by eliminating indiscriminate ''blanket bombing.''

One of the great capacities of the human mind is its capacity to rationalize.
Even Adolf Hitler probably thought gas chambers were a humane way to kill
people. (His only ''problem'' was that he lost the war, Thank God.) The Norden
bombsight eliminated blanket bombing. Except for ''carpet bombing'' in Vietnam.
Except for atomic weapons on Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Except for any time someone
in command decides that mass destruction is useful for ''victory.''

I'm certain that the atomic weapons that closed out World War II were pinpoint
accurate. However, they did indiscriminately vaporize and cremate children, aged
men and women, hospitals, kindergartens, schools, the blind, the crippled.  Rah,
rah, Westchester! We

must

 have better achievements to show our children.

GARY L. HICKERNELL Ossining



The Times welcomes letters from readers. Letters for publication should include
the writer's name, address and daytime telephone number. Letters should be
addressed to The Editor, Long Island Weekly Section, The New York Times, 229 W.
43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036. We regret that because of the large volume of
mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              351 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 25, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT LONG ISLAND

BYLINE: By Martha A. Miles

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 2, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 841 words


BY and large, I tune out mass- market Christmas carols; but sometimes a raucous
''Rudolph'' crashes, or an old favorite seeps, through the barriers. ''I Heard
the Bells on Christmas Day'' did the latter to me early this month, and
frequently since then I've become aware of its solemn organ notes winding
through my head.

I am particularly susceptible to that sort of perpetual replay, though usually
the song is an advertising jingle or jiggling Top Ten tune. So I welcomed reruns
of a Christmas carol, for a change.

I first heard the song in high school, and loved it, and learned every word, and
sang it even in summer. It has resounding words:

I heard the bells on Christmas Day Their old familiar carols play And wild and
sweet the words repeat Of peace on earth, good will to men. Then in despair I
bowed my head, ''There is no peace on earth,'' I said, ''For hate is strong and
mocks the

song Of peace on earth, good will to men.'' Then pealed the bells more loud and

deep, ''God is not dead nor doth he sleep; The wrong shall fail, the right
prevail, With peace on earth, good will to

men.'' More than its beauty, it suited my spirit then; my warring states of mind
were comforted by its human despair and triumphant conclusion. Such is the
preoccupation of youth with its own time's troubles, in fact, that I found in it
hope that the protests would succeed and the Vietnam War end.

It was eight years or more before the war did end, in 1975. By the time the song
began its current run through my head, I no longer hoped for much peace on
earth; and as the melody niggled at me, I started to wonder how much I still
believed in the prevalence of good will.

It was not easy even to define to myself what I meant by the phrase, partly
because I am long out of the habit of thinking in such philosophical terms. As a
teen-ager I went through religions as a child goes through Popsicle flavors, and
finally settled into a fuzzy agnosticism that made no further demands. And among
most newspaper people - most of the people I know - it is far easier to hold an
abstract discussion on vices than on virtues.

But the song kept nudging, and at odd moments, half embarrassed at myself, I
kept thinking about it: whether ''good will'' means only an amicable attitude or
an actual helping hand, and how much either can do against overwhelming misery
and isolation, and what any of this has to do with Christmas anyway. And about
that time, the Long Island Rail Road started putting on the human dramas that
erupt annually out of the office parties and the stress of the year-end
holidays.

The first all but ended my mental debate: Suddenly the whole car was aware of
furious shouting; the man's tie was askew, his thinning hair awry, his face
scarlet; he was leaning over the woman in the seat facing his, accusing her of
having made him lose something - it was hard to tell what.

The woman, middle-aged, well- dressed, shrank into the corner and patted the air
helplessly. Her lips formed the word ''Don't.'' But her eyes were flicking to
and fro, aghast at seeing the anonymous faces staring back.

The man whacked the seat next to her in a final explosion of rage, leaped up and
stormed down the aisle. I broke my city rule of nonintervention and said, ''Do
you want help?''

She looked horrified and arranged her face in a trembling social smile. ''No,
no,'' she said. ''No, it's all right.''

And for the rest of the journey she looked out the window. The best gift good
will could have given her, I concluded, was to be completely indifferent; to do
nothing at all.

There was another case: A young woman, stumbling, asked where to change trains
for Ronkonkoma; I wasn't sure, and a passer-by kept her from leaving the train,
which would not have helped her at all. For no good reason she took offense at
the passer-by, ignoring me, the unhelpful one. Her shrill accusations went on
and on. In the end, he moved to another car, and in his absence other men took
up the verbal battle. It was by no means a jolly trip.

But then, only the other night, came a better example of holiday good will.

The heavy-set man had clearly partied much too well and wanted nothing more than
to sleep through his stop; he swore and flailed his arm at the friend trying to
wake him. The friend departed with an over-the- shoulder glare, barely making it
through the train's closing doors, apparently leaving the sleeper to the not
uncommon fate of a dazed awakening very late at night very far from home.  But
the train didn't pull out. And a minute or two later the friend was back, with a
conductor who had held the train. Only commuters know what an uncommon boon that
is. The railroad has enough trouble keeping the trains on schedule without
waiting on good will.

But this conductor had done it, and not only that, he helped wake the sleeper
and guide him off the train, and he did it with a smile. And the smiles ran
around the car, and for a few minutes of reflected good will, it got to look a
lot like Christmas.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              352 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 26, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

4 YEARS OF AFGHAN BATTLE: NO VIETNAM FOR MOSCOW

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 988 words


MilitaryAnalysis

Four years ago this week two Soviet motorized rifle divisions crossed from
Soviet Central Asia into northern Afghanistan. Kabul, the capital, had already
been seized by an airborne division. The Soviet intervention in Afghanistan had
begun.  Western correspondents are barred from Afghanistan. A balance sheet at
the end of four years must rely on the reports of European and other
intelligence services, the claims of the rebels fighting the Soviet-backed
Government and occasional admissions in Soviet military publications.

The most significant conclusion that can be drawn from these sources is that,
whatever else it is, Afghanistan is not the Russians' Vietnam. The Soviet Union
faces many military and political problems in the country, but none are of a
magnitude to suggest that the Russians face military defeat or political
turbulence.

Militarily, the Soviet Union has made what intelligence analysts in the United
States and in NATO capitals regard as important strategic gains.

As Henry Bradsher says in ''Afghanistan and the Soviet Union,'' a publication of
Duke University, the threat, real or imaginary, of the establishment of an
anti-Communist, Islamic country on the borders of the Soviet Union's Moslem
republics in Soviet Central Asia made the Russians move. The result, analysts
say, is an important strategic and political gain for Moscow.

A Soviet Eye on the Gulf

From the military standpoint, Soviet gains are even more impressive, military
and diplomatic analysts agree. The Soviet Air Force has taken over and expanded
the military air bases at Kandahar, Shindand, Farah, Kabul, Bagram, Jalalabad
and Herat. Soviet reconnaissance aircraft and bombers, consequently, can fly
over the Persian Gulf and the Arabian Sea at will and monitor American and other
Western naval operations in those areas.

A senior NATO officer said he regarded this ''expansion of the Soviet air
reach'' as Moscow's most important military gain. In a crisis, he said, Saudi
Arabia and other Persian Gulf countries might make air bases available to
Western air power but, he emphasized, ''the Russians are there now.'' Only Oman,
he predicted, would have the courage to provide bases in a crisis.

Analysts think that from the Kremlin's viewpoint the most important result of
the occupation may be the closing of Wakhan, the panhandle of northeast
Afghanistan that borders on China. Not only has the frontier been closed and
heavily fortified, but the indigenous inhabitants of the valley have also been
moved and settlers from Soviet Central Asia have moved in to take over their
lands.

Sign of Rebel Weakness

Symptomatic of the extent of Soviet control is that neither the expansion of the
air bases nor the clearance of the Wakhan corridor has encountered the bitter
resistance that insurgent statements issued in Islamabad and New Delhi might
lead analysts to expect.

In fact, one insurgent leader acknowledged in an interview that an attack on the
Kandahar base, which he had scouted, was well beyond the resources of any one of
the insurgent groups or, in the unlikely event that they acted in concert, ''all
of them.''

Soviet ground and air strength in Afghanistan is estimated at 110,000 to 120,000
troops. Army units are rotated every six months. The units now deployed are
mainly from the Russian and Baltic republics.  Earlier in the occupation, the
Soviet high command had what analysts describe as disciplinary problems with
Moslem troops brought from the Soviet Union's Islamic republics into an Islamic
country.

Western analysts agree that only about 12,000 to 15,000 Soviet troops are
fighting Afghan resistance and that of these only 500 to 700 are involved in
daily operations. This minimal use of Soviet military power can be attributed to
the ubiquity and effectiveness of air power in the form of fighter-bombers and
helicopter gunships and to the willingness of the reconstituted Afghan Army to
carry out ground operations against the insurgents.

That army has suffered from casualties and defections. But, analysts report, it
is still in being, stiffened by officers and noncommissioned officers trained by
the Russians and provided with modern weapons.

The Soviet Unit That Fights

The most active Soviet force is the 201st Motor Rifle Division, which has
brigades at Jalalabad, Bagram and Kandahar and independent companies at Ghazni,
Kunduz and Faizabad. The Jalalabad brigade was called out recently to liquidate
an insurgent force that had taken but could not hold a post at Torkham in the
Khyber Pass.

What are described by insurgents as major Soviet operations seldom involve more
than 5,000 to 6,000 troops of the 201st.

Western analysts put Soviet losses at about 1,000 a year from all causes,
ranging from enemy fire through disease to poisoning from the local moonshine.

The failure of promised Western arms and equipment to reach the insurgents
through Pakistan is one reason for the insurgents' weakness. A second is the
failure of the movements to unite in battle. Some of the movements are Islamic
fundamentalists who look to Teheran and Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini for
leadership. Others depend on the West for political and military support.

These differences are worsened by longstanding tribal feuds.

An American expert on the country and the Soviet occupation took a pessimistic
view of prospects for the rebels.

The insurgents, he said, do not now have, and have little prospect of receiving,
the sort of weapons, antiaircraft and antitank missiles, that they need to curb
Russian aircraft and armor. But, he added, ''even if they get them, the Soviets
will increase their efforts and their numbers.''

''We got tired of Vietnam,'' he said. ''The Russians are not going to get tired
of Afghanistan. It's too close to them and too close to the Indian Ocean.
They'll stay.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              353 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 26, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

PLANT IMAGERY INSPIRED NOVEL ON VIETNAM WAR

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 813 words


Until the color green floated into his unconscious, Stephen Wright, the new
winner of the annual Maxwell Perkins Prize for ''a first novel of exceptional
promise about the American experience,'' was struggling to find a focus for his
story of war and its aftermath. The word green suddenly came to him when he was
in the middle of still another revision. Then green became a metaphor for nearly
everything that he wanted to say through fiction.

That is how ''Meditations in Green,'' a story about Vietnam and one American
veteran's attempt to cope with his silent spaced-out life, began to come
together creatively in the mind of the novelist. The Perkins Prize winner
(selected by Charles Scribner Jr. and editors within the publishing house)
honors the late Scribner's editor whose name is linked to Hemingway, Fitzgerald,
Lardner, Wolfe and other writers touched by his fabled editing hand.

Mr. Wright's book has been praised as one of the outstanding literary novels
about the Vietnam generation. Publishers Weekly, the book-trade organ, called it
''possibly the best story yet to come out of the Vietnam War.'' Vance Bourjaily
of the Iowa University Writer's Workshop, where Mr. Wright studied, described
the 37- year-old writer as ''a tough, intelligent and eloquent man who makes the
pain of Vietnam so real that the reader hurts, too.''



'Green Horror of War'

Mr. Wright recently explained the significance of the color green in the title
and in the structure of his novel.

''Suddenly, this plant imagery came to me. It worked in different parts of the
novel - Vietnam and the aftermath. I saw green in the jungle, in the marijuana
plants, in the defoliated landscape, in the green army. All this helped me in
the contemporary sections of the novel that involved my character's re-addiction
to drugs:

''He undergoes therapy in the story, and the therapist devises an entire system
of meditation - pictures of various kinds of plants that are supposed to achieve
serenity. But the green plants that are supposed to be fixing on images of peace
metamorphose into the green horror of war.''

Stylistically, Mr. Wright uses short bursts of soaring language between the
longer passages of the narrative. He calls his literary riffs ''meditations'' -
free flights of imaginative prose. Anyone who has seen the lush foliage of
wartime Vietnam - the contrasting bursts of orange flame rising out of the green
jungle - will know what an inspired, and accurate, metaphor Mr. Wright has
created.



Sent to Numerous Publishers

Mr. Wright grew up in Cleveland and was drafted into the Army in 1969. He served
in Vietnam all through 1970. After the war, he graduated from Ohio State
University and then got a master's degree in 1975 at the Writer's Workshop at
the University of Iowa. His main teachers were Mr. Bourjaily and John Irving -
''before he wrote about Garp; he was wonderful on the nuts-and-bolts of
writing.''

After years of grappling with ''Meditations in Green,'' Mr. Wright sent off most
of the novel to a score of New York publishers, but none were impressed.
''Basically, it was in the mails for a year and a half,'' he said. Michael
Pietsch of Scribner's wrote an encouraging rejection letter, and on another
go-round, after a revision, the novel was accepted. Mr. Pietsch is now Mr.
Wright's editor.

The novel centers on a noncommissioned officer who thinks he can slide through
his tour in Vietnam, unaffected by it all. Like the author, the fictional noncom
interprets aerial photographs of carpet bombing and defoliation missions. There
are profiles of members of his intelligence outfit and of a martinet commanding
officer who suspects for good reason that his own men will kill him. The
soldiers become, in the words of one of them, ''weird spacemen,'' whose ''karma
is radioactive.'' These Vietnam scenes are intercut with the hairy adjustment to
postwar life.



'Tough to Do'

The novel thus takes its place alongside other recent books that do not glorify
Vietnam, led by Michael Herr's nonfiction ''Dispatches'' and such novels as Tim
O'Brien's ''Going After Cacciato,'' Philip Caputo's ''A Rumor of War,'' John Del
Vecchio's ''13th Valley,'' Robert Olen Butler's ''Alleys of Eden.'' In the
tradition of certain fiction after both World Wars, the tone of these stories is
partly absurdist and antiwar.

''I think a Vietnam novel is tough to do. It's a problem of form because Vietnam
didn't have a shape. In World War II, there was a clear division of right and
wrong about what was going on. With Vietnam, you had to come up with a way of
holding the whole thing together. When the plant imagery came to me, it all
started to work. But I have no ambition to be a war novelist.''

Mr. Wright still lives in Iowa City where he is writing a second novel, called
''M31.'' It will have nothing at all to do with Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              354 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 27, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam Moves Troops Into Thai Border Area

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 111 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 26


Vietnam has moved troops, tanks and armored personnel carriers into an area near
the eastern border of Thailand and is apparently preparing to attack Cambodian
guerrillas, Thai military officials said today.

They said about 350 Vietnamese troops with several T-54 tanks and armored
personnel carriers arrived in Thmar Puok village in western Cambodia from Phnom
Penh Tuesday and Wednesday.

Thmar Puok is 14 miles southeast of the major base of the non-Communist
Cambodian rebels and 16 miles from the Thai frontier.

Thai military and security officials said they expect Vietnamese forces to begin
a dry-season offensive against Cambodian guerrillas next month.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              355 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 27, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Required Reading Beirut Hindsight

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 298 words


With the unbelievable loss of marines to a single fanatic with a truck full of
explosives, many questions have been raised about the level of security around
the Marine compound (in Beirut), how the leathernecks were armed, did they have
clips in their M-16's, could an M-16 have stopped the truck, and so on.
Obviously, no serious perimeter warning system was in use, at least nothing that
worked. Again, all the marines' sophistication in weapons and the latest
hardware were foiled by one man in a truck, just a few miles from the shores of
Tripoli.

If anyone deserves blame for this disaster, it should be the Marine commander
who permitted 300 or more marines to sleep in the same building - the same
building that had already been shelled and shot at. Nothing will bring back the
dead marines; but maybe some lives could be saved next time.

Lebanon presents a fine example of our modern forces trying to fight against
old-fashioned tactics and weapons with a large dose of fanaticism added. What is
really wrong in Lebanon is that we do not have a position, politically or
militarily.

We have the power to change things in Lebanon. But we must have the support of
the American people and Congress. Perhaps the ultimate solution will be
political. Until that happens, though, we should use our military power the way
it is intended - not for target practice by the Lebanese or for would-be
Presidential candidates at home who want to dredge up Vietnam every time they
hear the word military.


Modest Expectations


Male spouses of presidents are not expected to plan menus or cook for the
university events; maintain guest lists, expense records or handle invitations;
arrange or order flowers; plan the entertainment; clean the house before or
after an event.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              356 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 27, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ANECDOTES AND THE IMPACT THEY'VE HAD ON POLICY

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1228 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 26


President Reagan and his counselor, Edwin Meese 3d, have both described the
evidence of hunger in America as ''anecdotal,'' suggesting that the Government
would need more facts to justify a change in its food-assistance policies.

Their comments came as a surprise to a number of Federal officials and lawyers
with nonprofit social welfare groups here. In the past, according to those
officials and lawyers, the Administration has been acutely sensitive to the
persuasive power of anecdotes - stories about individuals that dramatize a
larger social problem or need.

More than one Administration policy was inspired by anecdotes, they said. In
fact, they added, Administration officials have sometimes boasted about their
willingness to bend or amend rules in specific cases, saying it showed the
Government's compassion.

''Anecdotes seem to be the way in which this Administration comes to understand
a problem,'' said Eileen P. Sweeney, a lawyer at the National Senior Citizens
Law Center, a nonprofit group.

Miss Sweeney has been particularly concerned about the Social Security
disability program, which pays cash benefits totaling $18 billion a year to 3.9
million people. Many people with apparent disabilities were removed from the
rolls in the last two years as Federal officials interpreted the eligibility
rules more strictly. But the Administration loosened some of the rules after the
case of Roy P. Benavidez came to public attention.

'Conspicuous Gallantry' Cited

Mr. Benavidez, a Vietnam War veteran, had received a Medal of Honor from Mr.
Reagan, who commended him for ''conspicuous gallantry.'' But as part of the
drive to crack down on ineligibility, he was to be removed from the disability
rolls until an administrative law judge acted favorably on his appeal. His case,
once public, seemed to illustrate a larger problem, which the Administration
then tried to solve by liberalizing program rules.

Mr. Reagan's concern about Katie Beckett, a 5-year-old from Cedar Rapids, Iowa
who was hospitalized with encephalitis, led to new rules for the Medicaid
program. The girl's parents found themselves in a bureaucratic trap. Under the
old rules, Katie would have lost her eligibility for Medicaid if she returned
home. But hospital care, at $12,000 a month, cost six times as much as home
care.

At a news conference in November 1981, Mr. Reagan cited this case as an example
of ''hidebound regulations'' that caused ''tremendous expense to the taxpayers''
and did the patient no good.  The Department of Health and Human Services
subsequently waived the rules, allowing Katie to go home, and set up an internal
review board to grant similar dispensations in other cases.  The panel has since
granted 49 waivers; another 34 cases are under review.

Rule on Burial Funds

The Administration responded similarly in the case of 67-year-old Mattie Dudley,
who sold newspapers from a canopied wheelchair in Charlottesville, Va. Crippled
since infancy, she was receiving Supplemental Security Income benefits, which
are available to the aged, blind and disabled. She was threatened with loss of
Medicaid because she had a funeral certificate whose value exceeded the $1,500
limit on assets.

After learning of her case, Federal officials say, the Department of Health and
Human Services moved, in August 1982, to change the rules so that people who had
purchased burial plots or contracts would not face loss of Medicaid and
Supplemental Security Income.

There have been other cases of individual need, which have not involved policy
changes, but did draw the attention of the President and other top level
officials. Mr. Reagan made a nationwide appeal last July for assistance to a
one-year-old Maryland girl who needed a liver transplant. After a donor was
located, the family was flown in an Air Force jet to Pittsburgh. The girl, Candy
Thomas, got a new liver after a 10- hour operation at Children's Hospital there.
Mr. Reagan said he had received so many requests from families seeking similar
assistance that he had directed the Surgeon General to conduct a conference on
organ transplants.

The Baby Doe Cases

In perhaps the most celebrated case of Federal intervention prompted by the case
of an individual, Mr. Reagan directed the Department of Health and Human
Services to take steps to protect the lives of handicapped infants after he
heard about a Baby Doe in Bloomington, Ind., who had been born with Down's
syndrome, or mongolism. The parents refused to consent to surgery, and the
infant died after food and medical treatment were withheld.

Acting in response to the President's concern, the department issued a rule that
required 6,400 hospitals around the country to provide food and medical care to
infants born with severe mental or physical defects. A Federal district judge
struck it down as ''arbitrary and capricious.'' The Administration appealed, but
dropped its appeal and is now in the process of considering public comments on a
proposed revision of the rule. The Administration subsequently intervened in a
Long Island case involving a severely handicapped baby.

Of the anecdotes that have captured Mr. Reagan's attention, many have involved
babies. Sara Rosenbaum, a lawyer with the Children's Defense Fund, said it was
paradoxical that Mr. Reagan would be so concerned about handicapped children
such as Baby Doe and Katie Beckett, but appeared less concerned about ''big
social trends'' that might give rise to such handicaps. Women who are
malnourished are far more likely to bear children with low birth weight, and
such children in turn are more likely to have cerebral palsy, epilepsy, mental
retardation and vision and hearing defects, Miss Rosenbaum said.

'Heroism at Its Finest' In another anecdotal vein, Mr. Reagan has singled out a
few individuals for high praise, such as Lenny Skutnik, who dived into the
Potomac River in the winter of 1982 to rescue a plane crash victim. In his State
of the Union Message last year, the President hailed Mr. Skutnik as an example
of ''American heroism at its finest.''

Mr. Reagan has also used anecdotes to justify a crackdown on welfare fraud. But
subsequent checks on some of the anecdotes turned up facts somewhat different
from those given in his account.

In the 1976 campaign, he repeatedly mentioned the case of a Chicago ''welfare
queen'' who, he said, had collected more than $150,000 worth of welfare, food
stamps and Medicaid benefits under 80 names and numerous Social Security
numbers. Reporters who looked into the case found that the woman had been
accused of using four names and collecting $8,000 in benefits.

More recently, according to Senator Bob Packwood, Republican of Oregon, Mr.
Reagan told a story about a young man who used food stamps to buy an orange and
used the change to buy a bottle of vodka. Mary C. Jarratt, an Assistant
Secretary of Agriculture, later said Mr. Reagan had apparently been
''misinformed'' because the food stamp rules no longer permitted such
transactions.

In testimony before a Congressional subcommittee, Miss Jarratt said she did not
know the source of the story told by the President. Then, in a general comment
on the value of such anecdotes, she said, ''Examples in the extreme do not
represent a constructive approach to the issue.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Katie Beckett; photo of Mattie Dudley; photo of Roy Benavidez

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              357 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 28, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AN INTERVIEW WITH THE REV. JESSE JACKSON, CIVIL RIGHTS LEADER

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 3771 words


Following are excerpts from an interview with the Rev. Jesse Jackson by Ronald
Smothers:

Q. What do you think is the most important problem facing the United States over
the next decade? And what new ideas do you have for dealing with it?

JACKSON. There's within this country a growing sense of insecurity within, the
American people feeling unprotected. Many people are feeling unprotected by law,
that the Justice Department is not committed to justice. There's been a cutback
in this Administration on the enforcement of laws vital to the civil rights of
American citizens. Women did not get an equal rights amendment passed. For
blacks and Hispanics the Voting Rights Act has not been vigorously enforced.
Workers are victims of plants closing without notice. Slave labor markets abroad
undercut the American worker and there is the feeling that the American worker
can't do anything about it, that when you're violated, you can't go to the
Justice Department. So one of the first commitments that an American President
must make is to adequately fund the Justice Department and fully enforce the
law. For the injustice comes from unenforced laws.

For example, if the Voting Rights Act was enforced in the South adequately and
you could end the second primary in the 10 Deep South states, where 53 percent
of all blacks live, and there is only one black college person out of 115 and no
statewide officials 18 years later. Of course at that rate, it would take 190
years to achieve parity. But if the Voting Rights Act is enforced, that is
Section 2, which bans forms of discrimination; if section 5 is enforced and
registrars are accessible, and you end second primaries which keep black people,
Hispanics, women and poor people from a securer justice, you'll get 12 to 20
black, Hispanic and female Congresspersons by next November. If that happens,
we'll get our share of legislators and judges and other officials, that will
trigger the passage of E.R.A. Women will all be protected in the South if the
Voting Rights Act is enforced, and they are our natural allies. Since 70 percent
of all poor children live in a house headed by a woman where there is no man, to
enfranchise women is to protect the children. The women who go out into the
workforce will then end right-to-work laws because you have the power to do so.
Thus workers will get paid for their work. Most people who are poor are not on
welfare. They're either too proud to apply for welfare or they otherwise work
and don't get paid enough for their work.

Q. So the key to ending this feeling of being unprotected, the first step is to
enforce the Voting Rights Act and things will flow from that?

A: Which empowers the poor. When you empower the poor they then have
self-determination and they deal from the ability to protect themselves, so the
poor in that instance do not need to be embellished. They need to be empowered.
They don't need so much aid. You know, people need aid when trade is cut off.
People need aid when they are otherwise disallowed the ability to protect
themselves, so that's what's most important now.  Second to that is the need for
peace. Peace must have justice as its content and its center.

United States-Soviet Relations

Q. How would you go about obtaining peace?

A. Just as the first item of business for Eisenhower was to go to Korea and to
risk the danger of being misunderstood, even risk failure, the risk for peace
was worth it. The risk of bringing the boys back home was worth it. The boldness
with which Kennedy went to Geneva to meet Khrushchev, or Nixon by going to
China, or Carter by convening Camp David - we need an American President who
will be glad to meet the head of the Soviet Union anywhere, any time,
unconditionally but only agree conditionally. We must give the world an
impression that we have a peace policy, though we have a military capability,
and that we will not allow the hotline on the desk of the White House to go
unused. But we must take bold steps for peace the day before so there will not
be a day after. When leaders talk together the tension is relieved. When they
talk, they act. And when they act they change things. Only an agreement between
the President of this country and the head of the Soviet Union will give them
the security to then convince their constituencies to begin to roll back the
arms buildup, so peace really begins in the mind of two leaders in this
instance.

The Federal Deficit

Q. How serious is the growing Federal deficit and specifically what would you do
to reduce it? Would you raise taxes? Cut domestic spending? Cut defense
spending? A. The Federal deficit is very serious. It is undermining economic
growth. Under this Administration, the Federal deficit is the largest it has
been in the history of the country, in part because we're not generating enough
tax revenue to keep us out of the deficit. And the deficit is creating the need
to borrow money that is mortgaging the future of our children and having an
impact of drying up money in the private economy and therefore driving up
interest rates. You must first deal with what has caused the budget deficit.

One, Reaganomics. The $750 billion tax cut over a three-year period was so
severe that it traumatized the economy and triggered us into the longest
recession we have gone through since the Great Depression. It was so severe
after two years, until the third year they cut it by $100 billion. It was
projected to be $750 and it's now $650 billion. Combine Reaganomics with the
Federal Reserve Board's tight money policy, which of course drove up interest
rates.

Number two, the $1.8 trillion military budget, the largest that the world has
ever known. This is a five- year budget, with a projected cost overrun of $600
to $750 billion. This data comes from the Congressional Budget Office. The
massive recession has us now at 8 to 9 percent unemployment, higher than when
Mr. Reagan came in office. For every 1 percent unemployment, it costs $30
billion. Reagan used unemployment with which to fight inflation. So the
combination of Reaganomics where the corporations get the big tax break without
any obligation to reinvest in the economy or to reindustrialize the economy or
to retrain the workforce. So in a sense you had a dual, a double hemorrhage.
Money going out of one part of the national body, corporate incentive, and money
going out the other part of the body, the national body, for the massive
military budget. The answer in part is the real commitment for full employment.
Put America back to work. The need to build, end the slums and build houses and
hospitals and build trains and a massive transit system, that would be worth a
high-production economy.

Q. The increase in job-producing investment, what would that do in terms of the
deficit? Can you quantify that?

A: First of all you should correlate the tax incentive with reinvestment in this
economy. It's when you're not hemorrhaging the economy. You correlate tax
incentive, the price a corporation must pay for the tax investment is to
reinvest in this economy. And retrain the workers and reindustrialize also, with
the commitment to have the freedom to invest because our economy needs to
expand. We have to make the American worker secure. We have to make the American
economy secure. In the 1960's we had a 4.8 percent unemployment and inflation
was only 2.8 percent at the time. It was similar in the Eisenhower years.
Because we had a Federal Reserve Board with a low interest rate. They are a
factor in that and you've simply got to invest some money to make money. That's
why there's the high production cut. You got to invest in people. And invest in
rebuilding American cities. Invest in hospitals, invest in having a competitive
private economy. In the last 20 years we have lost our competitive edge in auto,
steel, electronics, rubber and textiles. So where is the money? The money is in
low interest rates and you invest in rebuilding America. And the money is in the
tax breaks that we're not getting returns on. The money is in the waste
dimension of the military budget and we have whole weapons systems that are
obsolete.

The Military Budget

Q. Could you name some in particular that you feel are obsolescent?

A. You got your MX missiles and B-1 missile, and I think we should freeze the
military budget at this point. We oughta have a freeze so that you would have a
zero real growth in the next five years and that would save $250 billion. A
commitment to a peace policy and not just a war policy would save money. The
more vigorously that we negotiate and resolve tension diplomatically, the less
need we have to keep escalating the building of war materials. A nuclear freeze
would save money.

We need to reduce the size of the ground forces in Europe. Also our NATO
alliance must now pay their share. And Japan must pay its share.

Domestic Spending and Taxes

Q. To eliminate the loopholes as you said and the cuts in defense spending, a
freezing of the defense budget, does that mean that you do not see any need for
any increased taxation and that you don't see a need for cuts in domestic
spending?

A. Well, no, there's no need at this point for cuts in domestic spending. Right
now we need to invest more in education. And invest more in job training.
Because our capacity to compete in the future has a lot to do with our
children's ability to compete with Honda and Toyota, Sony and Panasonic and
Mitsubishi and Mercedes-Benz and the Germans and others making transit systems.
So the education investment is a sound investment. Because of course, look at
the causes of the inflation. The oil jolts, which we can develop reserves to
reduce the impact of those jolts. The price of foods which in part had to do
with a deal we cut with the Russians and lost our grain reserves. The Vietnam
war. We stopped building houses. Skyrocketing medical costs. These were the
factors that created inflation in the first place. And so there has to be a
policy that takes into account these problem areas. Now we are still in the
development of our program which has specific budgets. We know the areas for the
adjustments that need to be made.

Need for 'a Peace Policy'

Q. How much growth, after inflation, should there be in the military budget? And
which weapons programs, proposed by President Reagan, would you alter? You did
indicate that you favor a freeze in the military budget.

A: A nuclear freeze and regather the MX missile and the B-1 bomber and nerve
gas. And you could freeze the budget and get a more efficient use of the budget
allocation that's already there. You reduce the waste, and reduce the cost
overrun and you still substantially have a basic body of money that we just
don't have now.

We can save billions of dollars from the military budget and increase our
security. Our problem is the President has a war policy and a weapons policy
when what we need is a peace policy.

Some examples of savings. If we freeze the military budget in real terms over
five years we will save over $250 billion from Reagan's budget proposals for
fiscal year '84 and '88. Congressional Budget Office is the source of our data.

But these are not enough. We need a peace policy which allows us to reduce the
dangerous nuclear arsenals and decrease exposure of our men abroad. One, the
Soviet Union has stated it might accept a nuclear freeze. A freeze would
increase our security. It would save over $50 billion over the next five years.
Two, we've spent one third of our military budget on defending Europe against
the threat of Soviet invasion that even the NATO commander in chief says is
unlikely. He says the true threat is political intimidation and division among
the allies. But it is our weapons policy that causes division.

We need a peace policy, then, which would allow us to unite our allies and
decrease our spending.  An effective peace policy will allow us to reduce our
force in Europe and save billions of dollars.

We've been sold a bill of goods about national security . Since 1945 we've spent
over $3 trillion, more than any other country, on the military. And we are less
secure now than we were then. Mere military spending cannot make us secure. Only
a peace policy can. The President wants us to spend over $300 billion on
military threats abroad; over 45 percent of the American people are afraid to
walk one mile from their house after dark.

Relations With Soviet Union

Q. What steps would you take to reduce tensions with the Soviet Union?

A. We must relate to Russia on terms other than just military character. We have
agricultural superiority. Technological superiority. Cultural exchange. Media
exchange. The American people know too little about the Soviet Union. And the
more we know each other, the more we can have a mutual appreciation of each
other's ways and means to survive. With the Soviet Union our course must be that
of coexistence and not co-annihilation and it must be a policy that takes into
account that we can, we need not, our objective is not to proselytize them or to
convert them, really, not to proselytize them. But to coexist with them and to
expand our trade relations.

Middle East Policy

Q. What would you do differently than President Reagan to seek an overall Middle
East settlement?

A. The President of the United States ought to have access to all the leaders of
nations in the Middle East and ought to talk with, if he chooses to and when he
chooses to, all warring factions.

America has a vital interest in peace in the Middle East. We have a moral
interest because people are there. Economic interest, we get so much of our
energy from them. Military interest, because of the geopolitical position. An
interest because of the Persian Gulf, because their borders will take us to the
Soviet Union. America has an interest in protecting Israel's right to exist in
security within internationally recognized boundaries. America also has an
interest in Palestinian justice, or self- determination, or a homeland for
Palestinian people. The more nomadic and desperate the Palestinians are, the
more tension is put upon Israel. But Israeli weapons are inadequate to defend
against desperate people who will either use kamikaze or terroristic methods as
a way of fighting back. We have an interest in the nonpartitioning of and the
territorial integrity of Lebanon. The normalized ties with all Arab nations.

Q. How is President Reagan not pursuing policies which adhere to those three
interests?

A: When the President, in a negotiation with Mr. Shamir, did not link that
negotiation with a commitment on Golan Heights, West Bank occupation, expanded
settlements, and the offensive use of American weapons in the invasion and
occupation of Lebanon, by the President of this country not correlating a link
in the negotiations with those violations, it made America a party to the
occupation and to the invasion. In effect America helped to finance that
invasion and occupation which robbed America of any innocence or any moral
authority. It took away from America the role of a neutral peace-keeping force
and therefore made our boys the object of the hostility, more so than against
the other nations that were there. And that's why our marines were the object of
the raid. I think that we should support either nonaligned nations or U.N.
peace-keeping forces to be there. America can not serve the role of an effective
peace-keeping force in Lebanon. So much so that President Reagan has now shifted
the role of American marines there from peacekeeping forces to combat forces
without authorization from Congress and therefore stands in violation of the War
Powers Act. Because he did not get permission from the Congress he's asking the
marines to fight a war with inadequate equipment or materiel or manpower. Thus
the Syrians have us terribly outmanned in that arrangement. We're trying to
offset the lack of manpower by increasing technical warfare, which has bombs
dropping terribly close to Syria, which has us about 75 miles away from a major
war with Syria, which could trigger the Soviet Union in a most direct way.

We have an obligation to support Israel's right to exist for security, not to
support her right to occupy and expand. And America ought to be the first to
take the initiative to get out of Lebanon and to prevail upon Israel to go back
with a guarantee of keeping Israel's borders and boundaries secure and then use
our diplomatic leverage to get Syria to go back to Syria.

Given the Gemayel Government, this Government and Israel and Syria and Lebanon
should go to Geneva and come out of the Druse mountains of Lebanon. Presently,
Mr. Reagan is escalating tensions there with his threats and increased materiel.
When last month Mr. Shamir went back to Israel with an armful of weaponry and a
commitment to more weaponry and Mr. Gemayel went back empty- handed, it further
tilted American Middle East policy and it was provocative and therefore the
fighting with Syria was predictable. The bottom line is more Americans were
killed and now Lieutenant Goodman is a prisoner of war, an undeclared war in
Syria.

The paradox is that the best way to defend Israel is to relieve Israel of having
so many enemies. And you bring about some of this relief by bringing about a
measure of fairness and justice in those relationships.

If America used its strength to get the P.L.O. and others to recognize Israel to
exist and Israeli leaders to move toward a mutual recognition policy which I'm
convinced forces like the Peace Now and the Labor Party would go for. If Israel
were relieved of the tension that comes as the result of being the object of the
anger of so many people, Israel could become the capital of commerce in the
Middle East. Israel would be exporting talent and businesses and training. The
flower in the desert could bloom all over the desert. Because Israel really is
the most brilliant flower in God's garden.

Q. Would that flowering of Israel as a force in the Middle East simply come
about by these kinds of approaches? Wouldn't we have to rewrite a lot of fairly
recent history for that to be possible?

A. No, I have a lot of confidence in the power of the American President
operating with a moral mandate. One would have thought it was impossible to get
Egypt and Israel around a bargaining table at Camp David, and surrogates
couldn't bring that meeting about - only an American President.

And that's why the no-talk policy toward the P.L.O. has been a bad policy,
because it has deprived the American President of the ability to reduce Israel's
enemies. If Carter could not have talked to Sadat because Egyptians had killed
some Israelis, he couldn't have had Camp David, and so - the Israelis maintain
the right to talk to the P.L.O. They may choose not to. Apparently they did talk
with Arafat to get the prisoners of war released and to get the Palestinians
freed. So when they talked, when the Israelis and the P.L.O. talked, in fact,
lives were saved. Some Israelis were released from prison - some Palestinians
were released from prison. When they talked lives were saved. In the absence of
talk lives are almost always lost, and I'm really convinced that an American
President could be the negotiating force via the economic, military and social
security that both parties need to have a mutual recognition policy. And that is
at the heart, the Palestinian question remains at the heart of the Middle East
agony.

Central America Policy

Q. What do you think of President Reagan's policy in Central America, and what
would you do differently?

A. First of all, we should see Central America as our next door and not our back
door, which would end the contemptuous attitude toward them. Second, we must
have a good neighbor policy - a next-door neighbor policy - and see Central
America as essentially our allies.

Q. What do you mean, contemptuous attitude?

A. Well, essentially as when Reagan says that they're in our back door. It's our
next door. That language - psycholinguistically it expresses a certain measure
of contempt - no different than Meese not seeing hungry people or some of the
things that finally got Watt run out.

We believed that we could finance the rebels to overthrow the Government of
Nicaragua, the Sandinistas. We are now losing - we're losing that war, and
losing prestige and respect because of our identification with the rebels. We as
a nation know too well that we helped the reign of terror and tyranny of the
Somoza regime upon those people. Rebellion by the peasants was inevitable.
Although the Sandinista Government is less than perfect - I met with their
Minister of Culture just two weeks ago; they're moving toward having free
elections early next year, in February or in March. America could use its
strength there to accept that Government even where it's possible to overcome
the friction of the rebels and the Sandinista - even be a part of helping to
referee or negotiate a relationship that would maximize the security of all
forces involved. But the people have a right to self-determination. They have a
right to their own Government, and governments in transition often have military
phases. I mean this country first started - not with a democracy - it was with
General George Washington. Our own Government started under military rule and
grew into a democracy. Democracy is the most mature form of government. It takes
time to get there. When this Government embraces the landed gentry of El
Salvador, we're misreading history. And to separate aid - I mean to not link aid
with a human rights policy - sends a signal around the world of our
noncommitment to fairness.

We should again use our strength to negotiate and use our aid as a leverage in
bringing about more peaceful relations in El Salvador. The approach of gunboat
diplomacy, big- stick diplomacy, nuclear threat, military exercises off of the
coast, is a bad approach. And it is the assumption in time that we can
officially oppress an idea whose time has come, but it will not happen. If
there's any message that Christmas has it is that you may lock hope out of the
inn, it can even flourish in the stable. An idea whose time has come can live
under the most adverse of conditions, and the people who have been victims of a
banana republic - their time for independence and self-determination and
self-government has come.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Rev. Jesse Jackson

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              358 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 28, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WESTMORELAND, CBS TRADE CHARGES

BYLINE: By DAVID SHRIBMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 793 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 27


Gen. William C. Westmoreland has made public a series of documents involving his
$120 million libel suit against CBS, including a network memorandum in which a
CBS producer wrote to Mike Wallace, the network correspondent, shortly before
Mr. Wallace interviewed the general: ''Now all you have to do is break General
Westmoreland and we have this whole thing aced.''

General Westmoreland disclosed the documents at a news conference here. He
charged that CBS had, in its 1982 documentary ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam
Deception,'' tried to portray an internal intelligence debate as a conspiracy,
and he criticized the network for continuing to reaffirm its conclusion that the
general's command purposely underestimated enemy troop strength before the 1968
Tet offensive.

Both sides in the lawsuit disclosed sworn testimony and issued charges here
today, at twin press briefings conducted within 100 yards of each other on the
same floor of a downtown Washington hotel. Their statements added to the dispute
that has been building since the broadcast of the television documentary on the
Vietnam War nearly two years ago - and 15 months after the filing of General
Westmoreland's suit, which is expected to go to trial in nine months.



Affidavits Are Filed

George Crile, the producer of the documentary whose memo to Mr. Wallace was
disclosed by the general, responded by saying that his language was intended to
insure that Mr. Wallace was ''prepared to present General Westmoreland with the
enormous bulk of the evidence so he could address this and not avoid it.''

The news conferences were conducted yesterday at the same time as the filing by
both sides of a series of affidavits in United States District Court in New York
City. The sworn statements include testimony from more than two dozen of the
leading military and political figures of the Vietnam era.

General Westmoreland disclosed sworn testimony of such figures as Robert S.
McNamara, former Secretary of Defense; Dean Rusk, former Secretary of State;
McGeorge Bundy, former National Security Adviser; Richard Helms, former Director
of Central Intelligence, and Ellsworth Bunker, former United States Ambassador
to South Vietnam.



No Conspiracy Seen

These statements testified to a continuing internal intelligence dispute about
the levels of enemy strength before the Tet offensive and, in the words of Mr.
McNamara, included strenuous denials of the ''faking of data.''

Mr. McNamara continued: ''I do not believe it would have been possible for the
military command in Vietnam to engage in a conspiracy to suppress or fake
intelligence on enemy troop strength and, if such a conspiracy had existed I do
not believe it could have been kept secret from myself or the President.''

Shortly thereafter, CBS opened its own briefing with the comment of John
Scanlon, a public relations consultant for the network, that CBS ''fully
endorses the substance and the conclusions of the documentary.''

Mr. Scanlon, referring to the testimony released by General Westmoreland, added:
''It should not come as any surprise to you that the military command - the best
and the brightest, if you will - are rallying together, yet again, to defend
these decisions and policies.''



'Political Impact'

In its packet of documents, CBS included a sworn statement from Gains B.
Hawkins, who in 1966 and 1967 was the Army officer responsible for estimating
the strength of the enemy in Vietnam. Mr. Hawkins said that in the spring of
1967 he presented General Westmoreland with an analysis indicating ''far higher
enemy strength than was being reported in the official reports on enemy
strength.''

''Gen. Westmoreland refused to accept the updated figures,'' Mr. Hawkins
continued. ''He voiced concern about the political impact these higher enemy
strength figures would have in the United States, and told me to take 'another
look' at the figures. In an effort to conform to the unmistakable command
position, I then arbitrarily reduced these figures to levels below those
indicated by the best available evidence. I presented these reduced figures to
General Westmoreland, but he rejected them as well.''

Earler, General Westmoreland was asked whether he had been damaged by the CBS
program. ''If I were guilty as indicated by the broadcast,'' he responded, ''I
could have been court- martialed on a number of counts. Thirty-six years in
uniform, when I served my country honestly and loyally and sincerely, were
attempted to be destroyed by that broadcast.''

In response, David Boies, the lawyer representing CBS, said, ''If this is
something he could be court-martialed for, I would suggest that it makes it ever
more critical that it be open to press inquiry.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              359 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 29, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

RUSSIANS SKILLFULLY EXPAND INFLUENCE AT U.N.

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 996 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Dec. 28


A common sight in the corridors and lounges here is of an impeccably dressed
Communist diplomat speaking perfect English who moves from group to group,
clasping hands, smiling, joking and shaking his head in what appears to be
good-humored despair about the latest foreign policy pronouncement of the United
States.

The diplomat is Oleg A. Troyanovsky of the Soviet Union, by most accounts, one
of the most skillful and knowledgable delegates in the 158-nation world body.

Mr. Troyanovsky, who went to high school in Washington when his father was the
first Soviet Ambassador there, heads the largest mission to the United Nations
and, by common consent, one of the most successful.



'Cultivate the Third World'

The Soviet Union, weak and isolated in the first decade or so of the United
Nations' existence, has over the years made adept use of the organization,
becoming perhaps its single most powerful and influential member.

''The Russians are very skillful here,'' a Western diplomat said. ''They have
taken the U.N. seriously and pursued a long-range strategy. They send dozens of
specialists in multilateral diplomacy here. They cultivate the third world. They
know the procedures and mechanisms, and they use that knowledge to shape the
agenda to suit their purposes.''

A senior United Nations official said Soviet diplomats had become more
sophisticated over the years.

''I've seen it in such things as the cut of their pants,'' he said. ''Years ago,
you could always tell a Russian by his wide, unstylish trousers.''

To be sure, the Soviet Union does not win every vote. The General Assembly, for
example, by a huge majority, has been calling regularly for the withdrawal of
Soviet troops from Afghanistan. In September, after a Soviet plane shot down a
South Korean airliner, Mr. Troyanovsky vetoed a Security Council resolution
condemning the act.

Delegates also say that in some areas the Russians play a minor role. In the
General Assembly's committee discussing economic relations between industrial
and developing countries, ''the Soviets are not much of a factor,'' a Western
diplomat said.

Nonetheless, the Soviet Union by all accounts enjoys enormous strength. Its main
accomplishment, delegates say, has been to help shape an agenda that by and
large is unfriendly to Western values and interests.

There are what may be called bedrock issues on which the Russians not only vote
with large majorities but also play a major role in shaping the language of
resolutions. These issues include Palestinian rights, criticism of Israel and
South Africa, and the transfer of wealth to the poor countries.

Delegates and United Nations officials give several reasons for the Russians'
success. One important element is that the Soviet Union can count on virtually
complete support from a group of 20 or so nations, including the Eastern
European countries, Cuba, Vietnam, Angola and Nicaragua.

One voting group often exchanges support with another, and the Russians have
significant leverage, more than the United States, which does not belong to a
united voting group.

Third-World Issues Identified

At the same time, diplomats say, the Russians have skillfully identified issues
of concern to the third world, which constitutes a 101-member majority in the
United Nations. Some Western delegates contend that the Soviet Union has sought
to encourage the developing countries to take anti- Western positions.

In committees dealing with such subjects as Palestinian rights and
decolonization, the active states generally include the Soviet Union and its
close allies. The Western nations, by contrast, are underrepresented.

''The whole process is gerrymandered against the West,'' the European diplomat
said. ''The Eastern bloc invents the tone and controls the process.'' He added
that in many cases, the debates and resolutions emerging from the committees
constitute a ''huge propaganda jamboree'' focusing attention on what is
described as the responsibility of the West for the problems of the developing
countries.

Some at the United Nations, particularly those from third world countries, argue
that the Soviet Union has not so much actively forged a strongly anti- Western
agenda here as it has taken advantage of the anti-Western sentiments of the
third world countries. The great majority of those countries are former colonies
of the Western powers.

''It isn't the Russians who shape the agenda here,'' a third world delegate
said. ''It's the third world taking the lead and the Russians following them.''

One analyst, Richard L. Jackson, in a recent book, ''The Nonaligned, the U.N.
and the Superpowers,'' says the third world nations voted with the Soviet Union
an average of 83.4 percent of the time in the 1982 General Assembly and 20.4
percent of the time with the United States.

Twice Size of U.S. Mission

The Russians maintain by far the largest mission here. With 111 listed
diplomats, it is nearly twice the size of the American mission. Nine Soviet
diplomats posted here are of ambassadorial rank, a sign, some delegates say, of
the importance Moscow attaches to the organization.

By contrast, the United States representative, Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, has said
the American Foreign Service has no special programs leading to diplomatic
careers in international organizations. The average time a United States chief
delegate remains in the post is 19 months, according to officials at the
American mission.

Delegates here say the Russians, many of whom speak English and other languages
fluently appear at virtually all of the parties and receptions that are part of
diplomatic life here.

''The Soviets as a people are much friendlier than the Americans here at the
U.N., which is not the way I thought it would be,'' Giovinella Gonthier, the
delegate from the Seychelles, said in an interview, echoing a common view.
''Oleg is much friendlier and easier to deal with than Jeane.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Oleg Troyanovsky

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              360 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 29, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MEMBERS OF THE PENTAGON'S COMMISSION

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 538 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 28


Following is the section of the report on the Oct. 23 attack on the Marine
barracks that describes the commission's members:



Adm. Robert L. J. Long U.S. Navy, retired Chairman

Admiral Long retired as the commander in chief Pacific in July 1983, after 40
years of commissioned service which included combat duty in World War II and the
Vietnam conflict. He has commanded the U.S.S. Sea Leopard; U.S.S. Patrick Henry;
U.S.S. Casimir Pulaski; the Submarine Force, U.S. Atlantic fleet; Submarines,
Allied Command; and Submarine Force, Western Atlantic area. Admiral Long has
served as executive assistant and naval aide to the Under Secretary of the Navy;
Deputy Chief of Naval Operations (Submarine Warfare), and Vice Chief of Naval
Operations.



Robert J. Murray

Mr. Murray is on the faculty at Harvard University. He is a former Under
Secretary of the Navy and former Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense
(International Security Affairs) with responsibilities for U.S. policy toward
the Middle East. Mr. Murray has served in various positions in the Defense and
State Departments since 1961.



Lieut. Gen. Joseph T. Palastra Jr.  U.S. Army

General Palastra is currently the deputy commander in chief, and chief of staff,
United States Pacific command. The commander in chief, United States Pacific
command, is responsible to the President of the United States and the Secretary
of Defense, through the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and is the U.S. military
representative for collective defense arrangements in the Pacific theater.
General Palastra's 29 years of commissioned service include multiple combat
tours in Vietnam, among them duty as an infantry battalion commander. During the
past eight years, General Palastra has commanded an air assault infantry brigade
and a mechanized infantry division. He has served as senior military Assistant
to the Deputy Secretary of Defense.



Lieut. Gen. Lawrence F. Snowden U.S. Marine Corps, Retired

General Snowden retired as chief of staff, headquarters, U.S. Marine Corps, in
May 1979, after 37 years of active service which included combat duty in World
War II, Korea and Vietnam. General Snowden served as a regimental commander in
Vietnam; director of the Marine Corps Development Center; chief of staff, U.S.
forces, Japan; and operations deputy of the Marine Corps with the Joint Chiefs
of Staff. Upon his retirement, General Snowden joined Hughes Aircraft
International Service Company in Tokyo where he is currently vice president, Far
East area.



Lieut. Gen. Eugene F. Tighe Jr.  U.S. Air Force, Retired

General Tigh retired from the Air Force and as director of the Defense
Intelligence Agency on 1 September 1981 after 39 years of active and reserve
U.S.A.F. and U.S. Army duty, which included service in the Southwest Pacific,
Korea and Vietnam. General Tighe served as director, Defense Intelligence
Agency, for four years and as deputy director and acting director for two years.
He also held the senior intelligence position at headquarters, United States Air
Force; Strategic Air Command; the U.S. Pacific command, and headquarters,
Pacific Air Force.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              361 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 29, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MCGOVERN SEEKS EFFECT ON PARTY POLICY DEBATE

BYLINE: By FAY S. JOYCE

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 701 words


Sitting in George McGovern's cramped, one-room campaign headquarters in
Washington, George Cunningham remarked: ''This borders on fantasy. I look in the
mirror and say 'George, what am I doing here?' ''

What Mr. Cunningham is doing there, at least until he decides whether to seek a
Senate seat from South Dakota himself in 1984, is keeping up spirits among the
staff of 15 and running the show. The longtime aide to Mr. McGovern admits it is
a low-budget operation; the campaign has raised only about $210,000 so far.

But Mr. McGovern rivals the Rev. Jesse Jackson for a distant third in the polls
among Democratic Presidential contenders, and because he was the party's nominee
in 1972 he has name recognition some other candidates have been unable to buy.

Mr. McGovern recognizes the odds are against his winning the nomination. But he
does think he stands a chance, and he hopes to influence the public policy
debate by forcing the other candidates to think about certain issues. Despite
his overhwhelming defeat at the hands of Richard Nixon, he appears to be the
beneficiary of both liberalism in the electorate and nostalgia. To some extent,
he is the ''Big Chill'' candidate, finding favor, according to a New York
Times-CBS News poll, among those who were of college age when he ran for
President on a platform to end the war in Vietnam, the generation portrayed in
the movie ''The Big Chill.''

Warm Receptions

Taking stands on some issues that differ sharply from most of the other
Democratic candidates, such as calling for a 25 percent cut in the defense
budget, Mr. McGovern appears to be making the most of this opportunity to speak
his mind. He has received warm receptions among college students and Democrats
in the states where he has been stumping.

Mr. McGovern plans to concentrate until mid-March on the Iowa caucuses and the
New Hampshire and Massachusetts primaries. He said recently that if he does not
rank among the top four finishers in those states, ''I might as well get out.''

''If I were to come in fifth in Iowa, I'd probably quit right then,'' he
continued. ''Certainly in the following week, if I came in fifth in New
Hampshire, I would quit.'' He said he would also have to finish among the top
three contenders in Massachusetts, the one state he carried in 1972, to attract
the press attention, support and money he needs to stay in the race past that
state's March 13 primary.

Beyond mid-March, the McGovern strategy rests in part on the chance that former
Vice President Walter F. Mondale will stumble. If Mr. Mondale does not lock up
the nomination by March 13, either because Mr. Jackson has drawn black votes
away from him or because Senator John Glenn has won a great many votes in the
Southern primaries, the race will be opened up again, Mr. Cunningham believes.



Trying to Erase an Image

Mr. McGovern's image as a fuzzy- headed liberal was one of his chief drawbacks
12 years ago. ''I think the fuzzy-headed liberal image persists to some
degree,'' Mr. Cunningham said, ''but that can be overturned; not with ease, but
it can be overturned.''

Already the McGovern campaign has had to overcome lesser problems. To quell the
rumor that not even his wife, Eleanor, supported him, his staff had Mrs.
McGovern endorse her husband at the opening of his headquarters in Des Moines.

After he announced he was running, Mr. McGovern was unflatteringly likened to
Harold Stassen, the perennial Republican Presidential candidate. But at least
some observers have revised their thinking. In an editorial entitled ''On second
thought,'' The Des Moines Register welcomed him to the race as a Democrat who is
presenting controversial and even unpopular ideas that might force his party to
think hard about effective alternatives to Reaganism.

The candidate is said to be at peace with himself, and he brings a sense of
humor to the campaign. ''There are worse things than losing,'' he often tells
audiences. ''That landslide, victorious team of '72 was sentenced to a total of
180 years in prison, and the President resigned in disgrace. I want you to know
I didn't even have to check with a probation officer before I came here today.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              362 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 29, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AN INTERVIEW WITH FORMER DAKOTA SENATOR GEORGE MCGOVERN

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 3520 words


Following are key questions and answers from an interview with George McGovern
by Fay S. Joyce:

Q. What do you think is the most important problem facing the United States over
the next decade, and what new ideas do you have for dealing with them?

McGOVERN. I think the developing world, where most of the people live, is the
most serious challenge to the United States. And that this becomes a serious
problem because our leadership doesn't have a glimmer as to what's going on.
Ronald Reagan is in the dark as to the revolutionary currents that are moving in
Central America, the Middle East and Africa, Asia. It's a great tragedy that
just at the moment when we needed a President who understood the revolutionary
third world, we have one who is almost completely ignorant of these forces. And,
as a consequence, he believes that the problems that confront us in Central
America and in the Middle East, in Africa and elsewhere, are caused by the
Russians.

The Russians are probably as confused as he is as to what's going on, but he
seems to think that if we just confront them at every turn, and accuse them of
stirring up this ferment, that somehow he's doing his job as the leader of the
United States and the Western world. But actually he's compounding all the
problems, both for us and for the developing world, as well as permitting
Soviet-American relations to sink to their worst level since World War II. By
accusing the Russians of all of the problems in Central America, he not only
misses the appropriate response to those problems but he aggravates our
relations with Moscow.

Ties to Developing World

Q. What do you see as the proper response to those problems? How would you treat
the developing world?

A. I would cooperate with these revolutionary governments like the Sandinista
group in Nicaragua and the insurgency in El Salvador. I wouldn't back the
insurgency in El Salvador. I think there, since revolutionary movements are
sometimes unpredictable and sometimes fall into the hands of people who aren't
friendly to U. S. interests, the best thing to do is to be neutral while they're
going on. I would neither back the Government in El Salvador nor back the
revolution, but let it run its course and then try to come to terms with what I
think will be a revolutionary victory there.

The same thing with Grenada. I mean, instead of invading that country I would
have tried to come to terms with Maurice Bishop months ago, try to work out some
kind of accommodation. I thought that we followed an intelligent course 35 years
ago with Yugoslavia that should have been a model for dealing with revolutionary
or Marxist governments. Instead of trying to boycott them or overturn them, try
to work out a diplomatic and economic relationship that would at least be
partially satisfactory.

Q. What would you do differently than President Reagan to seek an overall Middle
East settlement? A. I would recognize that the Palestinian claim to a homeland
is legitimate. At the same time, I would insist that as a condition of dealing
with that problem seriously, the Palestinians must recognize not only the
existence of Israel but her right to live permanently as an independent Jewish
state. That's what the Israelis want, they want an independent Jewish homeland
that will be recognized as such. And that recognition means a great deal to
them.

And any Arab or Palestinian who doesn't understand that, I would think would
have difficulty understanding the Palestinian desire for a homeland. But we have
to insist on both rights.

How to Persuade Syria

Q. How would you persuade Syria to take that view?

A. Well, one way would be to recognize that they have certain legitimate
aspirations, too, that aren't addressed when we are as insensitive as we've been
recently in hailing this new strategic arrangement with Israel at precisely the
moment when we probably should have been somewhat more reluctant to go into that
kind of an arrangement. I think that following the Israeli invasion of Lebanon,
and this aggressive settlement policy on the West Bank, it was probably a
mistake at that moment to ease off on the terms of aid to Israel. We probably
should have moved the other way into somewhat tougher requirements on Israel as
a means of making clear to them that we're very serious about the necessity of
concessions on the West Bank.

Whether or not Syria's claim to Lebanon can be adjusted short of war, I don't
know. That worries me that they continue to press their claim on Lebanon. But I
don't see any hope of all of getting into negotiations with them unless we
indicate our willingness to put some pressure on the Israelis to come to terms,
too.

View of Marines in Lebanon

Q. Your position on deployment of U. S. Marines in Beirut is that they should
not be there, is that correct?

A. That's correct. I don't think that soldiers from either superpower can play a
peacekeeping mission. If that, in fact, was their mission, to be peacekeepers,
which is what we were told, it's a great mistake to draw the soldiers from any
country that has a heavy economic or political interest in the Middle East. It
would have been much better to have soldiers from Sweden, Ireland, Austria and
Australia, countries like that without any deep emotional or economic interest
in the Middle East.

It's probably not a coincidence that the Italian forces are the ones that
haven't been hit in these terrorist raids in the Middle East. There would have
been less danger if the whole peacekeeping force had been composed of Italians
and people from other countries that are more or less neutral on the Middle East
issues.

Growth of U.S Deficit

Q. How serious do you think the growing Federal deficit is, and specifically
what would you do to reduce it?

A. I think the deficit is a deadly serious matter. It's the first time in the
nearly 30 years I've been in politics that I've really worried all that much
about the Federal deficit, because it's always seemed to me in the past that it
was manageable. It's sometimes been substantial, but never just wildly out of
control like it is now.

It's going to hit $300 billion by fiscal year of '88, which is tomorrow, if we
continue on this present course. The interest rate on it at that point will be
$200 billion a year, which is more than double the entire Federal budget when I
first came to the Senate. And I think that's serious. It inevitably means higher
interest rates in 1985, fiscal '85, and a slowing down of the recovery, if in
fact we have any recovery going. I'm not sure we're really in a recovery at the
present time.

But if, in fact, there is some kind of a recovery going on, that'll be stalled
by sharply rising interest rates in '85 and beyond, according to the economists
I respect - Martin Feldstein being one.

I think there are three things we have to do to address the deficit. Number one,
slash military spending. And I think I'm the only candidate calling for that. I
would cut it about 25 percent below the level recommended by Reagan. He's
calling for a $275 billion military budget in this current fiscal year; I'd put
that at not more than three-fourths of that level. It'd still be above $200
billion.

Secondly, I think the '81 tax law should be repealed and replaced by something
like the Bradley-Gephardt fair tax bill.

End of Most Tax Write-Offs

Q. What is that?

A. Well, it would cancel out most of the tax write-offs. It would leave the home
mortgage interest write-off and philanthropic giving, but virtually everything
else would be canceled out. Then it would lower the overall tax maximum but not
more than 30 percent. No individual and no corporation would pay more than 30
percent. That would eliminate a lot of the incentive now to avoid paying taxes.
I think if corporations and individuals knew that nobody would pay more than 30
percent, they wouldn't spend billions of dollars on tax lawyers and tax
accountants and tax experts to devise all these elaborate shelters. We'd
probably recover at least $80 billion that's now going through tax loopholes in
the way of write-offs of one kind or another.

So those two things alone would bring the deficit under control. Instead of a
$200 billion deficit, you'd cut that by $68 billion on military expenditures and
about $80 billion on lost tax revenues. In a sense, it's a tax increase but not
an unbearable one since it would fall primarily on high- income individuals and
corporations.

The third thing would be to put people back to work by public works projects.
Now that would eat up some of the tax reduction that we're talking about.

Q. What kind of changes would you make in entitlement programs like Medicare and
Social Security?

A. I would put a cap on them for three or four years until we get the gap under
control.

Q. A cap on the benefits payout?

A. Yes.

Q. And the dollar amount?

A. I'd just freeze any increase, any cost-of-living increases, or anything
that's automatic under entitlements, I would freeze for three or four years.

Q. At present levels?

A. Yes. I think that politically you have to have that kind of a trade-off in
order to persuade Congress to cut back on military outlays. If you say, ''Well,
I'm not going to do anything about domestic spending'' - which is my
inclination, that's what I'd like to do - but I think politically, in order to
sell that, to the Southerners in the Congress, particularly, like Hollings, you
can't really get them to say, ''Well, let's freeze military spending or cut it''
unless you also include entitlements.

Cutting the Military Budget

Q. Are there some specific defense programs you'd like to see cut?

A. Well, the MX and the B-1. And then on the missiles in Western Europe, I'd
call for a one-year moratorium; no missile deployments at all for the next year
while they make further efforts to cut a deal with the Russians. I think the
Russians are terrified about these Pershing 2's and the ground-launched cruise
missiles because for the first time, it brings sophisticated missiles that can
hit their command and control centers within six minutes of those targets.

Q. Do you think there should be any growth at all, after inflation, in the
military budget?

A. In some areas, yes. Maybe not in the total budget, but within the budget I
think we have to do more in terms of training and maintenance, in those areas. I
think the effectiveness of military personnel is deteriorating, partly because
of training and partly because of the maintenance of their equipment.

Tensions With Soviet Union

Q. What steps would you take to reduce tensions with the Soviet Union, and what
concrete proposals do you have for reaching an arms control agreement with the
Soviets?

A. Well, first of all, I would recognize that the Soviets demonstrated more
willingness to agree to arms control than we have.

I would recognize that arms control is a function of improving political
relations with the Soviets, improving diplomatic relations. You can't negotiate
an arms control treaty in a vacuum.

pik up first add mcgovern q and a


Q. What would you do to improve those relations?

A. Well, I would not overreact to things like Grenada, to the Mayaguez incident,
to the Afghanistan occupation. Those are unfortunate, but they're not crucial in
terms of Soviet- American relations. I think the Soviets, for example, went into
Afghanistan to consolidate security on their own border; I don't think it had
anything to do with a march to the Persian Gulf, which was the Carter
Administration's interpretation.

And so we greatly overreacted to those things. I think that Nixon and Eisenhower
had a much more realistic assessment of the Soviets, and I would tend to go back
to the approach that both the Eisenhower and the Nixon Administrations took,
which is one of practical accommodation. Eisenhower called it coexistence; Nixon
called it detente. But in neither case were they under any illusions that the
Soviets agree with us ideologically or that they're always going to take the
same view of third-world problems as we do.

Nixon understood they had a different view of Vietnam than we did, but
nonetheless he negotiated the SALT I treaty right in the middle of the Vietnam
War, and pushed it through the Senate on the grounds that we had a larger
interest in accommodation with the Soviet Union, notwithstanding our differences
on Vietnam. The Soviets were sending arms to the Vietnamese to the North, and to
the Vietcong that were killing American soldiers, but still Nixon was realistic
enough to see that the possibility of arms control and international trade and
the exchange of scientific information was more important to U. S. security
interests than our differences on Vietnam. And that's the approach I would take.

I would try to divorce some of these third-world differences from the over-all
necessity of coming to terms with the Soviets. I think if we go on with the
Reagan approach, we will sooner or later go to war with the Soviets.

It's not necessary for us to go to war with the Soviet Union. I think they're as
fearful of it as we are. But sooner or later, if we continue to confront them as
militantly as the Reagan people have, I think you'll get an accident or a
miscalculation or a paranoid outburst from the Kremlin, or the Pentagon, that
means war.

Policy in Central America

Q. What do you think of the Reagan policy in Central America, and what would you
do differently? Specifically, would you cut off aid to rebel groups in Nicaragua
and accept the presence of the Sandinistas, or continue aid and continue
pressure for change? Would you even continue pressure for change?

A. No, I would cut off all military operations in Central America forthwith. I
would halt any further shipments to the government in El Salvador of a military
nature, even the economic aid I would cut back drastically unless there's a
change in those death squads and the other human rights violations.

In Nicaragua, I would terminate the so-called covert operation. It's the poorest
guarded secret in the world, everybody knows that we're arming and equipping a
force of 10,000 or 12,000 men for the purpose of overthrowing that Sandinista
Government. I would give up on that effort and try to come to terms with the
Sandinista Government on both the diplomatic and the economic front.

Helping Families in Poverty

Q. Millions of women and children and single-parent households live in poverty.
How would you help them?

A. I would not cut back on the food stamp program and the school lunch programs
and other nutritional programs. I'd be more inclined to expand those programs.
They're not all that expensive, in any event, and they're consuming things that
are in surplus here in the United States. We're actually paying farmers now $12
billion a year not to produce in order to work down the surplus. I would end
that program today, and divert some of those funds into expanding the domestic
hunger programs, the feeding programs, and also the overseas food programs.

Secondly, I would provide public service employment for the people who can't
find jobs in the private sector. I think there are a lot of poor people,
unemployed people, who would take jobs if they were available.

Position on Israel

Q. How and why do you differ from the other candidates in your position on
Israel?

A. I would take a more even-handed approach, I would not give Israel a blank
check unless they make more effort than I've yet seen on compromising on the
West Bank and keeping open the door to eventual settlement of that area by the
Palestinians.

Having said that, we do have a special commitment to Israel. I don't think there
ever would have been a state of Israel without the American guarantee and
American encouragement. We helped bring that state into being and we have a
special obligation to make sure that it survives. So that I would be willing to
enter into a defensive arrangement with Israel, that if they were attacked we
would instantly go to their aid - even including the commitment of American
forces.

Motives for Running

Q. Why are you running for President? Do you genuinely think there's a chance
lightning will strike, or are you primarily interested in shaping the debate?

A. It's both. I think there's just a chance. Nobody would probably go through
this without a feeling that there's some chance.  But even if I had been
convinced that there was no chance to win, I might have done it anyway on the
feeling that I could influence the debate. And I think I have.

Readiness of the Country

Q. If the country wasn't ready for a liberal Democratic President in 1972, and
South Dakota wasn't ready to re- elect a liberal Democratic Senator, what makes
you think the country would be ready to elect a liberal Democratic President in
1984?

A. I think the one thing that might make them ready is they're fearful about the
economy under its present management; and also fearful about war, constant
conflict and confrontation. Those two things. And it's in those two areas where
I think Reagan is clearly vulnerable. His management of the economy, or
mismanagement of the economy, this wild deficit.

I've got to be candid with you - I never thought that issue would work for the
Democrats, the deficit issue, but I think it will this time. For the first time,
maybe, in American history.

And then the other thing is his warlike stance of just bypassing diplomacy and
going right to troops every time. I think that's got to worry a lot of people.

Rules for Delegates

Q. You were able to reform the delegate selection rules for 1972. Now that these
rules have been unreformed to give a greater share of power to party regulars,
is that going to make it that much harder for to win the nomination?

A. Well, I don't object to the part that did give greater power to the party
leaders and the office holders. What I do object to is the way the rules have
been manipulated to go back to the winner-take-all concept that eliminates every
voter, and the candidates who get less than a plurality. It isn't even the
majority that's necessary to get a winner-get-all concept. It's conceivable that
you could get all the delegates in a state by not having more than about 20
percent of the vote - assuming the rest of the candidates got 19, 18, 17, they
couldn't get a thing out of that state. A one- point margin would give you
everything. I think that's wrong.

Secondly, I don't like the bunching of primaries and caucuses in one week. I
think that defeats the purpose of the primary system. That's why I've always
been against a national primary. But we virtually have a national primary in
that third, fourth and fifth weeks, you've crowded it into about two weeks. But
it really front-loads the thing to the point where the front-runner has an
enormous advantage over the late starters.

Q. Can any of that be changed at this late date?

A. No. Jesse thinks it can, but it can't. I mean, you'd have to buck the whole
party establishment, you'd have to buck the front-runners and their supporters,
you'd have to buck the A.F.L.-C.I.O., the N.E.A., the Congress, the Governors,
all the party - oh, it'd be impossible and I'm not even sure it's wise to change
the rules once the race has started.

But Jesse's absolutely right in what he's saying about the impact of these rules
- they do favor the front-runner and the guy with the money.

Views on the Eagleton Episode

Q. Looking back now, you've had a long time to think about this, the Eagleton
episode and the impact it had on your candidacy, are you able to forgive Tom
Eagleton, and should you?

A. I have forgiven him, but it's the saddest chapter in my political life
because it prevented us from a real test on whether these new ideas could be
sold to the American public; whether we could get away from the cold war in the
direction of detente, whether we could get away from intervention in third-world
revolutions and civil wars, and whether we could redistribute wealth in this
country to reach the people at the bottom so that they could be elevated to a
higher quality of life, and whether we could do something about the environment
in a substantive way, whether we could have a just tax system. Those were the
kind of issues that I wanted to take to the American public and, unfortunately,
the Eagleton incident got more attention than all these other things combined.

I was doing very well the day I was nominated, and then we hit the Eagleton
thing and, like that!, everything turned around.

Q. Is it nice to hear the cheers again?

A. Yes, it is nice. I've had a good time in this campaign. If it weren't for
this crazy walking pneumonia that sort of knocks you a little off stride, it
would have been just a sheer joy all the way. But that'll be behind me by
another week.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of George McGovern

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              363 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 29, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

JUDGE TELLS EASTERN AIRLINES TO REHIRE TRANSSEXUAL PILOT

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 640 words


Bv E. R. SHIPP

CHICAGO, Dec. 28 - A Federal district judge ordered Eastern Airlines today to
reinstate a pilot who underwent a sex change in 1980.

''But for being a transsexual and for having the operation and assuming a life
style of a woman, the plaintiff would not have been discharged,'' said the
judge, John F. Grady. The pilot, who flew for the airline as Kenneth Ulane for
12 years, is now known as Karen F. Ulane.

In an oral opinion, Judge Grady said that Eastern was guilty of sex
discrimination and that the justifications it offered for not reinstating Miss
Ulane were ''a pretext and a sham of the first order.''

Eastern's main argument was that, despite a lack of evidence to support its
view, it believed Miss Ulane's presence in the cockpit posed safety hazards.

Judge Grady responded, ''Ignorance, prejudice, discrimination and hatred have
throughout history been justified by saying, 'I don't know. We can't take a
chance.' ''

'Image Problem' Cited

He said that more than legitimate concerns for safety, Eastern feared that ''it
had a real image problem with a transsexual in the cockpit.''

Eastern had also argued that Miss Ulane, while still a man, had concealed the
fact that she was taking female hormones. But Judge Grady noted that Eastern had
not complained when it learned that 30 pilots had concealed alcoholism.

Judge Grady, who based his decision on the Civil Rights Act of 1964, said Miss
Ulane's case was reminiscent of what happened when blacks asserted their rights
in the 1950's and 1960's. At that time, he said, ''bigots'' cited a litany of
dire consequences that could result from accepting blacks in the mainstream of
society.

''The American public is a lot smarter than the bigots gave them credit for
being,'' he said. ''Some transsexuals, just as some tall people and left-handers
and fat people and Irishmen, are not good pilots. It can't be said with any
rationality that transsexuals cannot be good airline pilots.''

Appeal of Ruling Planned

Eastern plans to appeal what it called Judge Grady's ''novel view of the law''
in holding that transsexuals are protected under the Civil Rights Act.

In Miami, James R. Ashlock, a spokesman for Eastern, said, ''Eastern remains
confident that its position in this case is correct under the law.''

Kenneth Ulane joined Eastern Airlines in 1968. He had previously been an Army
pilot and had been decorated for valor in connection with the combat missions he
flew in Vietnam, according to lawyers in the case. He was twice married and
divorced and has a 16- year-old child.

The decision to go ahead with the sex change, performed in April 1980, followed
years of consultations with doctors, Miss Ulane said today.

U.S. Certified Her to Fly ''I did consider all the ramifications as far as my
job, and, of course, had to weigh that against what I thought would be the
positive outcome of the surgery itself,'' she said. ''I feel I am the person who
I was meant to be before.''

In January 1981, after what one lawyer called ''a rigorous battery of
psychological and physical tests,'' the Federal Aviation Administration
certified Miss Ulane as fit to fly.

''In terms of sexual discrimination, Karen Ulane was kind of a perfect control
group,'' said Fay Clayton, one of her lawyers. ''As a male pilot, Eastern's own
witnesses acknowledged that she was one of their better pilots. When she changed
her sex, she was all of a sudden not acceptable. Eastern was willing to retain
one sex in their employ, but not willing to retain the other.''

Mr. Ashlock said two of Eastern's 4,200 pilots were women.

Judge Grady has ordered Eastern to reinstate Miss Ulane with back pay and full
seniority but held his order in abeyance pending appeal.

''I'm ready to start tomorrow,'' Miss Ulane said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: phto of Karen Ulane

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              364 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 29, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: SAROYAN SET TO MUSIC

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1270 words


In ''Hair,'' his first musical at the Public Theater, Galt MacDermot wrote about
a hemorrhaging America, torn apart by its most unpopular war. It's a jolt to
return to the Public 16 years later and discover that the same composer has now
fashioned a musical from ''The Human Comedy,'' William Saroyan's idyllic fable
of a united America fighting World War II. But once the shock wears off, we find
a lovely show that is far closer to ''Hair'' than one might expect.

Both Saroyan and Mr. MacDermot share a rhapsodic, Whitmanesque vision of this
country; both men set that vision to warming idiomatic music. In the end, the
small-town Californians of ''The Human Comedy'' and the earnest ''peace-and-love
tribe'' of ''Hair'' all subscribe to the same fairy-tale dream of democracy:
wars come and go, but justice is their only ideological creed.


Saroyan first wrote ''The Human Comedy'' as a screenplay for M-G-M, then
retooled it into a novel, published in 1943. In any form, it's as simple as
apple pie - and often just as sweet. Set in Ithaca, Calif., the work is a string
of anecdotes centering on the poor and loving Macauley family - a widowed
mother, three sons (one enlisted) and a daughter. More important than any
character, however, is the good will that binds the Macauleys and their
neighbors together. To Saroyan, Ithaca is a place where even the poor give to
charity, where thieves are disarmed by kindness, and where ethnic and racial
differences are a cause for celebration. Yet this storybook land is haunted by a
disturbing subliminal beat: the persistant tap of the telegraph key, carrying
War Department messages to those Ithaca families whose sons are killed in
action.

In adapting ''The Human Comedy'' to the stage, Mr. MacDermot and his director,
Wilford Leach, have created what might be called a pop-folk opera. Virtually the
entire show is sung, and the large cast is usually assembled en masse on the
stage of the Public's arena-shaped auditorium, the Anspacher. Everyone is
dressed in crisp period costumes that the designer, Rita Ryack, might have
culled from the pages of old Life magazines; otherwise the black stage is
decorated only with a few chairs and props. The result is a ''Human Comedy''
with the feel of ''Our Town'' - and that sentiment is upheld by the ensemble
fabric of the company and the all-American heterogeneity of the music. The cast
encircles the audience until finally Ithaca is indeed our town, embracing us in
what might be a communal campfire singalong.


But Mr. MacDermot's music is far more sophisticated than the ambience suggests.
What usually prevents Saroyan's novel from becoming saccharine is its style: the
riffs of language and the edgy, eccentric narrative events. The composer
preserves that tone in his score, which is written in the true operatic manner,
recitatives included. As befits Saroyan's pantheistic sense of community, the
music is also highly eclectic: it encompasses gospel, jazz, swing, hymns,
barbershop harmonies, blues and plaintive lullabies that almost might have been
written by Woody Guthrie.

The composer's orchestrations are as invigorating as the music. Because the
vibrant band conducted by Tania Leon is dispersed around the playing area, the
score seems to whip through the space like the oldtime train so essential to
Saroyan's iconography: the feverish blare of hot horns reaches a crescendo on
one side of the house, then crashes aurally against a wall of pure strings
across the way. And the musical counterpoint reinforces the drama. When young
Homer Macauley (Stephen Geoffreys), the fastest telegraph messenger in town,
delivers a tragic cable to a war mother, the recipient's aria of grief is set
against the honky-tonk giddiness of two jitterbugging bobby-soxers comparing
notes on their first innocent amorous adventures.

Not all of the score is at the same level. Sometimes Mr. MacDermot's high
aspirations outstrip the music - much as Saroyan's classical character names add
excess grandiloquence to his novel. Nor is William Dumaresq's sometimes
confusing libretto always up to the score. Mr. Dumaresq can strain for rhymes,
and, on occasion, slip into the bald greeting- card homilies that Saroyan
managed to avoid. At the same time, the libretto eliminates some of the novel's
darker notes - including the deathly image of a store-window robot and the one
bigoted character. One misses such somber counterweights in a work so sunny that
even its dead characters can at least figuratively return to life.


Under Mr. Leach's sensitive and lyrical direction, the cast usually joins with
the music to take up any slack: the Saroyan spirit seems to flow directly out of
the performers. Though there's really no lead role, the show's bedrock is Bonnie
Koloc, the Chicago-based folk-pop singer who makes her theatrical debut as the
Macauley family matriarch. With her pure soprano and a round earthy face out of
a Dorothea Lange photograph, Miss Koloc removes the curse of corniness from an
archetypal mother. When she comforts her children as they confront the specters
of death and loneliness, her humble, tranquil radiance seems to draw the entire
audience into her lap for a good cry.

No less affecting - and strong- voiced - are Mr. Geoffreys as Homer, whose
growth to maturity is the evening's principal focus; Don Kehr, doubling as the
family's late father and soldier son, Marcus; Caroline Peyton as the girl who
waits for Marcus to come home; Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio as Bess Macauley, the
sister whose own romantic longings are answered by a G.I. Joe tenderly set forth
by Joe Kolinski; Delores Hall as a gospel singer aptly named Beautiful Music;
Rex Smith as Spangler, the charitable telegraph- office manager, and Gordon
Connell, as his old assistant.

The dominant motif of the evening involves two other excellent performers - the
very young Josh Blake, who plays the littlest Macauley, Ulysses, and David
Johnson, as the phantom black trainman who waves to the boy every time his train
passes through town. It's from the trainman that Ulysses learns that the only
place worth going to is home - and it's the sweetest idea of ''home,'' not flag-
waving jingoism, that always fuels the wartime sacrifices of ''The Human
Comedy.'' Perhaps that ideal American community never really existed as Saroyan
and Mr. MacDermot have imagined it did - whether in a small town of World War II
or in the Vietnam-era communes of ''Hair'' or anywhere else in our history. But
in ''The Human Comedy,'' you can go home again - at least for a while - and
rediscover what a happy place it was meant to be.

The Cast

THE HUMAN COMEDY, from the novel by William Saroyan; music by Galt MacDermot;
libretto by William Dumaresq; directed by Wilford Leach; costumes by Rita Ryack;
lighting by Stephen Strawbridge; musical director and orchestrator, Mr.
MacDermot; conductor, Tania Leon; associate producer, Jason Steven Cohen.
Presented by Joseph Papp. At the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street.
TrainmanDavid Johnson UlyssesJosh Blake MotherBonnie Koloc HomerStephen
Geoffreys BessMary Elizabeth Mastrantonio HelenAnne Marie Bobby Miss HicksLaurie
Franks SpanglerRex Smith ThiefChristopher Edmonds Mr. GroganGordon Connell
FelixDaniel Noel Beautiful MusicDelores Hall Mary ArenaCaroline Peyton Mexican
LadyOlga Merediz Voice of Matthew and MarcusDon Kehr GirlLisa Kirchner BoyLouis
Padilla TobyJoe Kolinski SoldiersKenneth Bryan and Michael Willson A
NeighborKathleen Rowe McAllen Diana SteedLeata Galloway Townspeople Donna Lee
Marshall, Grady Mulligan and Vernon Spencer


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Josh Blake and Bonnie Koloc

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              365 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 30, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
FOREIGN POLICY FAILURES

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 802 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Dec. 29


This has been a year of harshness between the U.S. and the Soviet Union.

Both, if they take candid stock, have registered a year of foreign policy
failure.

For all their mighty arsenals, Washington and Moscow are left with grave
weaknesses as they face each other across a frightened world.

Installation of the first intermediate-range American missiles in Europe was a
clear failure for Soviet diplomacy, focused on preventing it for four years.

Most NATO officials involved now think the 1979 ''either/or'' decision,
negotiate or deploy, was a bad mistake. Moscow's was worse. Alternating threats
and blandishments, it achieved neither/nor, neither agreement nor effective
intimidation of the alliance. The gamble lost.

Now the men of the Kremlin must reassess their position. Top European officials
who deal with them are convinced they haven't a new plan.  The Russians are
committed to ''retaliatory'' action besides breaking off Geneva arms talks. They
would consider it demeaning and dangerous to their prestige to back down. But
they are facing increasing resistance from their East European domains,
especially East Germany and Czechoslovakia, where they plan to put new missiles.
Moscow can doubtless force through these deployments, and exact payment for
them. But it is at the cost of official friction and popular discontent. It
makes the goal of reviving detente, still proclaimed, all the more difficult.
To backtrack and return to negotiations, even in a modified context, requires a
critical decision changing basic policy. It means admitting the grievous error
of churning out SS-20's far beyond military logic.  This crossroads comes at a
time of serious leadership uncertainty. Yuri Andropov's standing seems to have
been strengthened by recent Politburo changes, but he remains too ill to appear,
even seated. That undermines Soviet capacity.

The economy has picked up a little, but not as vigorously as the U.S.'s. It is
still sorely ailing. Confidence in Nikita Khrushchev's time that the Russians
had the momentum to overtake the West was jettisoned. It not only can't catch
up, it is falling further behind.

Ideological appeal has vanished, not only in developed countries but in the
third world. Moscow has to rely on arms supplies, involvement in unrewarding
local quarrels and support for often unreliable people who give priority to
their own grievances against the U.S. in order just to maintain clients, let
alone to win them. It is expensive, and precarious.  The Middle East is a
quagmire. Iran remains hostile, more so than in the Shah's day. Iraq is tilting
further Westward. To abandon Syria would be a huge defeat, but to support a more
adventurous policy would bring enormous risks with little prospect of gain.  The
war in Afghanistan drags on. Moscow's relations with China have eased a little,
and Vietnam remains loyal. But there have been no advances.

To the Kremlin, the U.S. appears determined to withdraw the coveted recognition
of equal status, which it thought was won from President Nixon in 1972. The
foreign policy report card can bring no cheer.

The U.S. report is no better. Euromissile deployment brought serious domestic
strains for European allies. NATO is awash with arguments about its future and
its basic strategy, how to raise the nuclear threshold. No one is satisfied now,
and no proposals for change attract substantial support.

Middle East policy has brought nothing but more trouble, with no successes to
claim and mounting domestic attack. Costly new promises have been made to Israel
for no gains toward a settlement either in Lebanon or the larger Arab-Israeli
conflict. The Marines are stuck in a limited but painful no-win engagement.

Central America is increasingly militarized, with no glimpse of a way out.
Nicaragua made signs of interest in a deal, especially after the invasion of
Grenada, but Washington can't make up its mind whether to probe or shove harder.

Salvadorans keep murdering each other with U.S. involvment, which hasn't
tempered either side. Even a Namibian solution, promised two years ago, isn't in
sight. President Reagan said: ''We have tried turning our swords into
plowshares. Well, our days of weakness are over. Our military forces are back on
their feet and standing tall.'' But he wonders why allies doubt his serious urge
to negotiate. His military chiefs warn him that forces are getting dangerously
overstretched.

Worst of all, his first term is entering its last year and he has done no better
than Mr. Andropov in his first year at finding a basis for mutual talks.

The parallel failures show once more that Soviet-American relations are not a
zero-sum game. Nobody wins, both lose when they hamstring themselves with
adamant shortsighted maneuver. So does the world.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              366 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 30, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition


;
REAGAN'S ERROR ABOUT LIEUT. GOODMAN'S STATUS

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 549 words


T o the Editor:

In his latest news conference, President Reagan denied that Lieut. Robert
Goodman, the U.S. Navy flier held captive by Syria, is a prisoner of war. ''I
don't know how you have a prisoner of war,'' said Mr. Reagan, ''when there is no
declared war between nations. I don't think that makes you eligible for the
Geneva Accords'' (transcript Dec. 21).

The applicability of the Geneva Prisoners of War Convention of 1949 does not
depend on declarations of war; it depends on the existence of an ''armed
conflict . . . between two or more of the High Contracting Parties (which
include all the countries currently active in the Middle East), even if the
state of war is not recognized by one of them.'' And even in situations in which
nobody has ''recognized'' a state of war, as in the Vietnam and Korean wars, the
United States insisted that its captured military people were entitled to the
protections of the convention.

Indeed, the position of the United States since the foundation of the Republic -
and regardless of the 1949 conventions, which do not overrule custom-based
general international law in this regard anyhow - has been to apply the laws of
war to all our military actions regardless of declarations. Our very first two
''wars,'' against France (1798-1800) and against the Barbary state of Tripoli
(1802-1806), were undeclared, and we insisted in both cases on the applicability
of the laws and customs of war.  Our Civil War was likewise ''undeclared,'' yet
we applied the law to give prisoner-of-war treatment to captured ''rebels'' and
hanged the Confederate Captain Henry Wirz, commandant of Andersonville, for his
maltreatment of Union prisoners of war, among other things.

Now, if Lieutenant Goodman is not a prisoner of war, just what law does apply to
govern Syrian treatment of him? Is he a tourist who dropped bombs? If so, I
suppose he is a criminal under Syrian or Lebanese law and should be tried for
the crime. His official position as an agent of the United States won't help:
Spies do not escape criminal liability because they are sent as agents of a
foreign government to violate the laws of the state in which they act, and
neither do terrorists.  Or do we assert that President Gemayel, who cannot even
control his Phalangist military supporters, is the legal authority in all of
Lebanon and enforces Lebanese law in the Syrian- occupied areas? If Syria
mistreats Lieutenant Goodman, will we protest to President Gemayel his failure
to enforce Lebanese law against Syrian trespassers?  In sum, the position
expressed by the President is not only wrong as a matter of law, it seems
removed from any reality in attaching legal labels to the facts. Is it any
wonder that our Lebanese policy is incoherent?  Or are we to assume that the
President and his advisers did not anticipate the question about Lieutenant
Goodman, and the President replied in ignorance? Worse yet, is it possible that
the President's advisers did anticipate the question, and his remarks reflected
legal advice? If so, it would be interesting to know the advisers' credentials.

ALFRED P. RUBIN Medford, Mass., Dec. 21, 1983

The writer is professor of international law at Tufts University's Fletcher
School of Law and Diplomacy.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              367 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 30, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AN INTERVIEW WITH ALAN CRANSTON, SENATOR FROM CALIFORNIA

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 3785 words


Following are key questions and answers from an interview with Senator Alan
Cranston by Frank Lynn:

Q. What do you think is the most important problem facing the United States over
the next decade? And what new ideas to you have for dealing with it?

CRANSTON. I think two issues are really paramount. One is the incredible cost of
the arms race, the strain on the economy and the society, and the danger that it
will culminate in a nuclear war.

The other is the state of the economy, the need to straighten it out and achieve
a stable, dynamic growing economy that can lead to full production and full
employment, a job for every American who wants one.

Those issues are really, I think, rather inseparable and they overwhelm all
other issues in significance. Many other issues are important: education, the
environment, equal opportunity, housing, health care. But if we blow ourselves
up in a nuclear war, other issues won't matter, and if we fail to straighten out
the economy, we won't have the capacity to cope effectively with many other
issues. So peace and jobs really are paramount.

A Call for New Approaches

Q. And what new ideas do you have to tackle these problems?

A. Well, I don't know that we need brand new ideas to cope with the rest of the
problems that plague us. I think we need some new approaches. On the arms race
and the nuclear war threat, first of all, we have to make sure we're only
investing in military matters what is really needed. I think we're overspending
rather extravagantly under Ronald Reagan's budget. We could dispense with the MX
and some other unneeded aspects of the arms race in order to cut spending.
Ronald Reagan's budget exceeds $2 trillion in five years and I'm convinced
that's more than we need for our security.

I think we do need a new approach to the Soviet Union. We need to have arms
control not left to the so-called arms control experts. We need a President that
will immerse the Presidency in the process.

Presidents have delegated the negotiating responsibility too much to others. I
think we need an approach analogous to what Jimmy Carter did at Camp David. He
decided that he wanted to bring Sadat and Begin together to try to end war
between Egypt and Israel. His advisers said, no, you've got to let us negotiate
first - otherwise, you risk having no agreement and embarrassment, humiliation
and failure. And he said no, I'm willing to take that risk because I don't think
it will work unless we get the principals together. He got them together and
after 12 days of Camp David a peace was forged between Egypt and Israel. Sadat
and Begin had never had a serious talk - one fleeting encounter at Jerusalem
before Camp David. That's never been the approach on arms control matters with
the Soviet Union.

I think only an effort at the top will work. Previous negotiations have been
left to others by the President and by the Soviet leader and then when
something's worked out, it's the lowest common denominator agreement. We've
never had a really significant breakthrough. The heads of state just come
together for a sort of show-and-tell session.

So, I would initiate a meeting very shortly after taking the oath of office with
the Soviet leader, accompanied of course by our top aides. I'm convinced that's
the only way we'll make the sort of a breakthrough that is needed and we'll do
it fast enough before the arms race gets totally out of hand, and new weapon
systems supplant the old. While we're negotiating about the old, new come along
with new problems.

Deficit 'Totally Out of Hand'

Q. How serious is the deficit and specifically what would you do to reduce it?
Would you raise taxes, cut domestic spending, cut defense spending, or what? And
specify by how much?

A. The deficit is very serious. It's totally out of hand. It's ironic that
Ronald Reagan, who calls the Democrats spendthrifts and profligates, has run up
the biggest deficits in American history. We've had two Presidents now, one
after the other, first Jimmy Carter, then Ronald Reagan, has said, I will
balance the budget in my term. Both failed. I'm not so rash as to say when I
believe the budget can be balanced. But I do believe that we must start moving
in the direction of a balanced budget to establish confidence and to get
interest rates down.

Q. And where would you cut?

A. Well, first, I think there should be some restoration of taxes, particularly
on those in the very high income brackets who I think got premature and
excessive tax reductions under Reagan's Kemp-Roth. We should explore any other
sensible ways to raise revenues that don't stifle the economy. Secondly, we
should cut back on military expenses where we can, even before successful
negotiations with the Soviets and much more deeply if we can work out mutual
agreements to cut with them under verifiable procedures.

Third, the best way to cut entitlements and to reduce domestic expenditures is
to get Americans back to work. When we do that, revenues rise as they earn
salaries and wages and pay taxes and expenditures fall because they no longer
need assistance.

Specifically the entitlements that would be cut, if you got Americans back to
work, are unemployment insurance, food stamps, Medicaid and Aid to Families with
Dependent Children. A rough rule of thumb that's accepted by most economists is
that for every 1 million people put out of work, the deficit grows by $30
billion, because revenues decline and expenditures increase.

Q. On the military expenses, is there any kind of rule of thumb you could put on
that? Would you put a growth factor in?

A. I don't think a growth factor or a percentage figure is a sensible way to do
it. I think we have to consider what can we dispense with. And, how do we get a
better handle on expenditures, how do we prevent some of those outrageous recent
examples of items that cost very little on the market being bought for excessive
prices? I think we also should move to much more competitive bidding. Less than
10 percent of the contracts are let by competitive bidding, and at a cost plus
the present general factors. The more something costs, the bigger the profit, so
there's no incentive for those expenditures in so far as the contract is
concerned.

We should not go off into the ''Star Wars'' adventure that Ronald Reagan
foresees with antiballistic missile expansion and deadly rays, which I don't
think will add to our insecurity, it will cost conceivably trillions by the time
we get done and take the arms race off into a new dimension in the heavens. Our
task is to eliminate it on earth and not set it off in space. We make savings in
chemical and nerve gas, which I don't think we should be investing in. There's
another specific - the Bradley Infantry Fighting Vehicle, which doesn't seem to
be needed.

Three Elements of Policy

I think to deal with the economy and achieve full production and full
employment, we really need three policy elements. One, the fiscal policy that
will move us in the direction of a balanced budget. Second, I think we need a
Federal Reserve Board policy that will focus on getting interest rates down and
permit a slow steady growth of the money supply, a predictable growth. Never
again should we let the Fed really wring out the economy to the degree that it
did with high interest rates in order to quell inflation. We've paid a terrible
price for that in lost production and bankruptcies, foreclosures, unemployment,
poverty, broken families and suicides. There are better ways to deal with
inflation. That did not get at the root causes of inflation. It helped quell it
for a time and it's not the only reason that it was reduced. It was reduced for
two more reasons that Reagan had nothing to do with; one, an oil glut and two,
good weather and consequent bountiful crops that checked food prices.

The way to deal with inflation in my view lies in a third policy which is an
industrial policy. When the Government focuses on jobs and the human element in
the economy, business and industry will always focus on profits naturally.
Government should provide some balance by focusing on jobs and on the human
element. That means job training, retraining, education. We give credit and
inducements of all sorts to those that invest in new machinery in their plants.
We should have like inducements to invest in the human capital through job
training and so forth.

And a further way is to have the Government do what it can to promote
opportunities for the work force to share in the bounty they produce through
stock, profit sharing, bonuses from productivity. An example is the nature of
the settlement of the Eastern Airlines strike. The workers are given 20 percent
of the profit. A number of studies have indicated that when workers share in
that way, they become more productive and there can be greater restraint.

Q. How does government actually help that, or how does it promote that?

A. Write laws and to make it a condition of government aid to an industry, some
of the stock should be given to the workers. I think there should be a national
development bank like the Reconstruction Plan Inc., that will provide
low-interest rate loans to those capable of bringing production jobs to
communities, central cities, states and regions where production and jobs are
needed, both new industries and an effort to revive old ones.

Cuts in Social Welfare Plans

Q. Do you think right now we're entering an era where we going to be maintaining
social welfare programs rather than expanding them or going into new areas
altogether?

A. I think we've cut about as deeply as we can cut the assistance for those who
need assistance. The way to reduce the cost is to get those people on their own
feet. Another way is by programs that help on health, so that you have a
healthier society. If you do have a push to help, it leads to a healthier
society. You cut back on four other entitlements, Medicare, Medicaid, Social
Security Disability and disability of S.S.I.

Q. So you don't see, if you were President, any striking new programs in that
whole area?

A. I think we need one new program - day care for children. One of the reasons
that women are suffering from what is called feminization of poverty is that
they have no place to put children. So they have to stay home when they would
like to work, or are only able to work only short hours while very young kids
are in kingergarten or school. And we need a day care program not only for
working mothers, but for some working fathers.

Deterrent and First Strike

Q. Do you have confidence that we now are not vulnerable to a first strike that
would just wipe out our nuclear capability?

A. Yes. We have a deterrent capacity to strike back, a devastating force even
though we might lose tens of millions of people at a first strike. The intent of
course is not to ever have to do that, but we possess that capacity so that
there will be no deliberate attack upon us. The basic problem is that while I
don't believe that we or the Soviets are foolish enough to start a nuclear war
deliberately, there's the danger of an accident or a miscalculation.

Q. Is there anything else you want to say about reducing overall tensions?

A. Immediately upon taking the oath of office, I would announce two things: that
we will not test or deploy nuclear weapons as long as the Soviets do not test or
deploy. That doesn't require negotiations. We would know the moment they did
test and deploy by our satellite targets, the seismographs and infared, other
devices and secret agents. That would be one way to slow down the arms race, not
stop it totally, but significantly slow it down because if you don't test
nuclear weapons, you don't want to deploy them because you're not sure they'll
work. And the second thing I would do on Inauguration Day would be to
communicate with the Soviet leader and suggest we have a meeting very soon to
come to grips with this problem, this common problem.

I do not expect the Soviets to reform from our point of view. If they behaved
like the Canadians and the British we wouldn't be in an arms race, we wouldn't
be targeting each other with nuclear weapons, we wouldn't need arms control. We
need it because of our deep differences; philosophy, purpose, principle and
system. The objective is to handle our relationship in a way that reduces, and
if possible, ends the danger that our differences will lead to a nuclear
confrontation.

Military Crisis and Response

Q. On the Middle East: What would you do differently? Specifically, the marines
in Beirut - what would you do about them?

A. I would not have put the marines there without consulting Congress
beforehand. I expressed misgivings at the outset about their being there. I felt
it was a violation of the War Powers Act. The President said when I and others
met with him the day after he sent the marines in, the Congressional leaders met
with him in the Cabinet Room at the White House. We said you should report to us
under the War Powers Act. He said no, or his aides said no; we do not expect the
marines to land in hostility.

Plainly they were wrong. They have been in hostilities. We've lost many, many
lives and suffered many, many casualties. I felt that sending the marines in in
the original mission, which was peacekeeping, placed them in double jeopardy.
Any peacekeeper is in some danger. But a peacekeeper viewed by some of the
participants as on one side invites attack from the other side. And the Arabs
view us as tilted strongly to Israel. Now the jeopardy is even worse because the
mission is changed and we're participating on one side in a civil conflict. So
now, we're not only backing Israel, we're backing the Gemayel regime, the
Christian regime in a Moslem country.

Three Options for Mideast

I think we have three very unpleasant options now. President Reagan didn't look
before he leaped and he got us into a total mess. One option is to leave 1,600
marines there, their hands tied, no clear enemy. We wouldn't know who to declare
war upon if we were going to declare war. They've been assigned a murky, muddled
mission. Now under those circumstances if we're going to go on having them
picked off one by one or by the dozens, that's untenable. I reject that option.

The second option would be to send in overwhelming reinforcements, say 50,000
troops, take over Lebanon. We wouldn't know what to do with it when we had it.
We'd still be subjected to terrorist attacks, loss of life and casualties, and
we'd eventually have to leave and the violence would still be there. On the way
to trying to take over Lebanon, we've encountered Syrians backed by the Soviets
and that could lead to the worst catastrophe. So that option I reject.

The third option is to pull out. And it's very difficult to recommend that when
we're under fire. The fact is, we will be under fire as long as we stay. Very
early in the Vietnam experience it was said, well, we can't pull out because
we're under fire. So we stayed and we lost over 50,000 lives and eventually we
withdrew under fire. I think the wisest course is to extricate ourselves as
quickly as we can for the safety of the men as we withdraw them.

Q. Is there anything else on the Middle East?

A. Well, I favor going back to the original Camp David concept. Which has been
subverted by Ronald Reagan. The original plan was that the West Bank would
remain affiliated to Israel for five years with local autonomy for the
inhabitants with Israel in charge of security. Reagan now suggests that the West
Bank be affiliated with Jordan for five years with the inhabitants autonomous
and with Jordan in charge of security. I do not believe that's acceptable to
Israel.

And I'm not sure that it's desirable from Jordan's point of view. King Hussein
already has more Palestinians in his country than he is comfortable with and I
think he might fear for losing his throne if he has to absorb more. Furthermore,
Jordan was in there from 1947 to 1967. They came in by force and they left by
force. And during that time they did nothing to give the Palestinians the right
to handle their own affairs.

If we pulled out of Lebanon, we plainly would not be pulling out of our
interests in the Middle East, our real interests. I don't think we have a deep
national interest in Lebanon. And we would maintain our close relationship with
Israel and continue to be committed to Israel's security and survival.

Reagan and Central America

Q. On the Reagan policy in Central America, What would you do differently? Would
you cut off aid to the rebel groups and Nicaragua and accept the presence of the
Sandinistas?

A. I would do everything very different than the way Ronald Reagan's doing
things. I would not have invaded Grenada. I'm convinced that was not necessary
to save the lives of Americans. I would stop the covert aid to those trying to
overthrow the Government in Nicaragua. And I would halt military aid to the
regime in El Salvador unless it shapes up on human rights and civil rights and
economic opportunities very swiftly. I'd give them an absolute deadline. I would
basically follow the Contadora plan. The Reagan Administration gives lip service
to it but its actions belie its devotion to that plan because the Reagan
Administration seems bent on a military solution and the Contadora plan calls
for a negotiated solution.

I went down to the Contadora countries recently, met with the heads of state,
secretary of state, others, not to test the plan, and I came back convinced that
it's a very sound one. In essence it calls for outsiders - meaning us and the
Cuban mainly - to stop intervening militarily and withdraw military advisers.
Second, it calls on Central American countries to stop permitting their
territory to be used as a base to attack a neighbor or destabilize a neighbor.
Third, it calls for progress towards human rights and democracy for countries
there. And fourth, it calls for economic assistance from ourselves and European
nations and Japan to help deal with the poverty and the economic problems that
underline much of the difficulties there.

In both the Middle East and Central America, I think in some ways the most
dangerous thing that Ronald Reagan does is view each of these problems as
basically an American- Soviet power in its origins, and its basically improper
actions by the Soviets. The Soviet hand is there and the Cuban hand is there in
Central America, but so is our hand there. But the cause in Central America of
the real chaos and bloodshed and revolution lies in poverty and in tyranny. And
too often we've been indifferent to the poverty and backed the tyranny, and
that's basically what Ronald Reagan is doing.

And in Lebanon, to suggest that the basic problems there are caused by the
Soviets is to overlook the fact that there's been trouble there since biblical
times and that now its Moslems are fighting and killing Moslems and Moslems
killing Christians and Moslems killing Jews and vice versa. It's incredibly
simplistic and superficial to suggest that's some kind of a Communist plot
behind all that. And the danger is that if you look upon each conflict in the
world as Soviet-American, that may lead to a Soviet-American real conflict.



Americans in Honduras

Q. Would you take our troops out of Honduras too? A. I think we should
definitely do that. That's inviting trouble. And it's leading to greater power
for the military and lesser power for the civilian authorities in that country.

In the same way that our tensions with the Soviets, which I don't blame us for
entirely by any means - the Soviets, in my view, have a far greater
responsibility for those tensions - but these tensions that enhance the military
dimensions of our nonrelationship enhance the role of the military in the Soviet
Union as they enhance the role of the military for other reasons in Honduras. If
we were discussing trade and cultural relations and like matters with the
Soviets, the military wouldn't be involved in every decision. The more our
relationship takes on a military character, the more the military gets involved.
It isn't all bad to have the military involved. The military people have more
knowledge of what nuclear war would be really like than some amateur civilians.

The Candidate and the Issues

Q. Ideologically, where do you place yourself on the spectrum with the other
seven Presidential Democratic candidates?

A. I've never tried to do that. I have a liberal voting record. The issues I'm
running on are not liberal, they're conservative. I don't think it's liberal or
conservative to think it would be wise not to be blown up in a nuclear war. And
if anything, it's conservative to believe that we should make the free
enterprise system work so that it's stable, fully productive and promotes full
employment.

Q. How much of a problem has George McGovern been for you, considering you both
are perceived as liberal and the Gallup Poll shows him higher than you or Gary
Hart?

A. Polls mean nothing since the front-runner of the polls in the year before the
election has not won the Democratic nomination since 1957. So thank God I'm not
yet the front-runner.

Q. What do you think you have to do to improve your standing?

A. I think when the campaign begins, my first goal is to establish in Iowa and
New Hampshire that I'm the alternative to Mondale and Glenn. I think when the
actual votes start we're no longer paying attention so much to opinion polls
taken before any contest starts that it will become apparent that that's the way
the race is.

On Mondale's Chances

Q. What do you think are your chances of stopping Mondale, realistically?

A. Well, based on historical precedent that front-runners never win, I think
they're excellent. It's also because he does not have a clear strong message.
He's in effect saying I'll do everything from A to Z. I don't think the
President can do everything from A to Z. I'm concentrating on A and B - peace
and jobs. Success there would affect all the other key issues. I of course
wouldn't neglect the other issues, but I'm just saying you need the President
who can focus; as Franklin Roosevelt focused on coping with the Depression and
stopping Adolf Hitler; as Abraham Lincoln focused on checking slavery and
preserving the Union.

A President who doesn't focus has no sense of direction, no leadership. The
President just becomes a manager of whatever forces its way onto the agenda.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Alan Cranston

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              368 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 30, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

A MAIN CRANSTON GOAL: KEEP PARTY ON COURSE

BYLINE: By FRANK LYNN

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 682 words


Senator Alan Cranston of California is among the first to acknowledge that he is
69 years old, bald and not charismatic: in short, not the usual stuff of
Presidential hopefuls.

Indeed, he has run television advertising in Iowa and New Hampshire that asks
why anyone should vote for such a candidate. It is a classic way of handling a
politician's warts. It also serves, said Thomas M. Pazzi, the candidate's deputy
campaign manager, to get voters to focus on the Cranston message rather than on
the messenger.

Mr. Cranston answers his own question in the commercial: ''Because what
separates my candidacy from my opponents is that I won't promise everything and
I won't let the Democratic Party drift.''

''The Cranston Presidency,'' the commercial continues, ''will have two clear
purposes - ending the arms race and full employment - because that's how you
beat Ronald Reagan even if you're bald.''

The commercial points up another Cranston tack, emphasis on the Democratic
Party, which is particularly unusual from a candidate who began his political
career as an insurgent party battler.

'Pragmatic Guy,' Aide Says

''He's a very pragmatic guy,'' said Mr. Pazzi, a former Presidential campaigner
for Edward M. Kennedy. ''We're not trying to rend the party; we are determined
not to come out of the convention, if we are victorious, like George McGovern in
1972 with major portions of the party holding their noses.''

Mr. Cranston the pragmatist has also toned down his image as one of the most
liberal candidates, an image that gave him a majority of the liberal New
Democratic Coalition in New York but not an advantage in Iowa and New Hampshire.

''I have a liberal voting record,'' the Senator said in an interview in
Washington, adding, ''The issues I'm running on are not liberal or conservative.
I don't think it would be liberal or conservative to think it not wise to be
blown up in a nuclear war.''

However, the proposal for a mutual freeze on nuclear weapons, which Mr. Cranston
has made a campaign keystone, has become an ideological litmus test, with
conservatives generally asserting that a freeze would not be the best means of
avoiding war.

Still, Mr. Cranston said of his home state of California, ''I have not had a
strong Republican opponent for two straight races because a good many
Republicans and many business leaders feel I have a practical, sound approach to
the issues that concern them.''

Home Is the Font of Funds

As a Senator, he has been able to walk a fine line between liberal and business
interests in his state with his positions on nuclear arms, Vietnam War veterans'
benefits, his membership on the Senate Banking Committee and sponsorship of
legislation helping California banks and businesses.

His home state has been a major source of campaign funds. He has raised about
$2.5 million this year, considerably more than the other ''second-tier''
candidates - all the candidates except Walter F. Mondale and John Glenn. But Mr.
Cranston will receive the second highest Federal Election Commission allotment
next week, $1.2 million, because he has received more contributions than Mr.
Glenn.

However, most of the Federal funds will go to paying off a $1 million campaign
debt, and so current fund-raising will have to pay for the critical Iowa and New
Hampshire tests as well as a national staff of 130 paid workers.

Mr. Cranston acknowledged in the interview that ''my first goal is to establish
in Iowa and New Hampshire that I am the alternative to Mondale and Glenn.'' He
accentuated ''the.''

His campaign manager, Sergio Bendixen, put it more bluntly. ''It will be close
to impossible to do poorly in those two states and continue.'' He rated anything
less than third place as a poor showing.

Last week Mr. Cranston underwent minor surgery on the lining of a lung. He was
released yesterday in ''excellent health,'' according to Dr. D. M. Billig,
chairman of cardiothoracic surgery at the United States Naval Hospital at
Bethesda, Md. The Senator, who is at home, will resume campaigning Monday.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              369 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 30, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

EX-REP. WILLIAM B. WINDALL; SERVED IN HOUSE FOR 25 YEARS

BYLINE: By JOAN COOK

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 588 words


William Beck Widnall, a New Jersey Republican who represented northern Bergen
County in the House of Representatives for 25 years, died Wednesday in a
Ridgewood nursing home after a long illness. He was 77 years old and lived in
Saddle River, N.J., until he became ill.

Mr. Widnall suffered from Parkinson's disease and arterial sclerosis, among
other ailments.

''He went downhill very slowly and surely'' after his loss to a Ridgewood
Democrat, Andrew Maguire, in 1974, his wife, Marjorie, said yesterday. ''It kind
of broke his heart.''

Mr. Widnall went to Congress in February 1950 by winning a special election,
representing what was then New Jersey's Seventh Congressional District. The seat
had become vacant when Representative J. Parnell Thomas, a Republican, was
convicted of corruption.

At that time the district included Hunterdon, Warren and Sussex Counties as well
as half of Bergen and Passaic Counties. Mr. Widnall was re- elected 12 times,
always easily.

A Critic of President Nixon

Regarded as a moderate, he became a critic of President Richard M. Nixon's
conduct of the Vietnam War in 1970, breaking with him for the first time in 20
years because of the Administration's bombing of Cambodia. In 1974, he supported
a move for Mr. Nixon's impeachment.

Late in 1972, when a heavy bombing campaign against North Vietnam was approved
by the President, Mr. Widnall sent Mr. Nixon a telegram that read: ''For God's
sake, stop looking for a place in history. The only way that can be achieved is
by a cease-fire.''

At the time of his defeat, he was the ranking Republican on the House Banking
and Currency Committee, with a reputation for achieving important legislative
compromises in housing and community development.

Republican Party officials attributed his defeat to voter disillusionment
following Watergate and President Gerald R. Ford's pardon of Mr. Nixon.

A Native of Bergen County

In his Congressional career, he pressed for investigations of mortgage and sewer
programs and played key roles in mass-transportation and flood- insurance
legislation.

Although he was named a director of the Federal Home Loan Bank of New York and
chairman of a national commission on electronic fund transfers in 1975, he was
not active in his later years, according to his wife.

Mr. Widnall was born in Hackensack. He graduated from Brown University in 1926
and New Jersey Law School, now part of Rutgers University, in 1931. He was in
private law practice from 1932 until he went to Congress.

In 1940, he helped organized independent clubs in Bergen County for the election
of Wendell L. Willkie, the Republican Presidential candidate. He was elected
four times to the State Assembly, resigning in January 1950 to run for the House
seat.

Winner of Special Primary

In a special primary, Mr. Widnall defeated the Republican organization
candidate, and 30 days later he was elected to fill the unexpired term.

Mr. Widnall was a co-sponsor of legislation limiting contributions to
Presidential campaigns and barred all cash contributions to his own campaign in
1974, saying he would not accept more than $100 from any individual. Mr. Maguire
outspent Mr. Widnall by more than 2 to 1.

In addition to his wife, Mr. Widnall is survived by a son, William S., of
Lexington, Mass.; a daughter, Barbara Williams of Annandale, Va.; a brother,
Douglas, of Saddle River, N.J., and four grandchildren.

A memorial service is to be held at a later date.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of William Beck Windall

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              370 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 31, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BEIRUT'S ENVOY DOUBTS VALUE OF MARINES' ROLE

BYLINE: By JOEL BRINKLEY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1020 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 30


Lebanon's Ambassador to the United States said this week that his Government
wished the United States Marines had never been sent to Beirut. But he added
that if the Marines were to be withdrawn now, his Government ''may really
collapse.''

The envoy, Abdullah Bouhabib, speaking in an interview, said of the marines that
''if they hadn't been put there to start with, then it wouldn't have made any
difference'' in the course of Lebanese affairs.

He said that even though the Lebanese believed the marines' presence was now
doing little to help bring stability to the nation, ''we can't ask for their
removal because now they have a political role.'' Still, he said, ''we know the
danger of having them there.''

The danger to Lebanon, Mr. Bouhabib said, was that now, when he talks to
Congressmen and other officials in Washington, ''they are only interested in
discussing the Marine issue. They don't discuss Lebanon anymore: national
reconciliation, strengthening the central Government.''

He added, ''The issue has become just the Marines, not Lebanon.''

'Worst Month in Nine Years'

Asked if he thought the Marines' presence had helped to avert fighting among the
various factions in Beirut, Mr. Bouhabib, speaking of United States forces,
said: ''You were there in September, and that was the worst month in nine years
of war in Lebanon. It was never as bad as that, and the Americans were there.''

At the Lebanese Embassy today, the spokesman said the Ambassador's views on the
Marines also applied to the other members of the international force, Britain,
Italy and France.

The embassy spokesman stressed today that Mr. Bouhabib was speaking for the
Government. ''We would not like to see the Marines get out of Lebanon, for the
time being,'' he said.

At the same time, the embassy spokesman expressed anxiety today about
indications that Congressional leaders were reassessing their backing of the
Administration's policy in Lebanon.

'The Wrong Signals'

''We are very concerned about these moves on Capitol Hill,'' the spokesman said.
''It could give the wrong signals to other parties in Lebanon.''

In recent interviews, Congressional leaders, military commanders and Reagan
Administraton officials have said that a number of costly misassumptions were
made when the Marines were first deployed at the Beirut International Airport 15
months ago.

Meanwhile, the White House spokesman, Larry Speakes, said today that President
Reagan did not plan to make ''any major policy changes as far as the Middle East
is concerned.'' He added, ''The President is very strong on that, very
adamant.''

In a report issued this week, a special Defense Department commission that
investigated the bombing of the Marine headquarters in Beirut said ''there is an
urgent need for reassessment of alternative means to achieve U.S. objectives in
Lebanon.'' The report's authors, most of them current or former military
officers, also said their six- week investigation convinced them the
Administration had relied too heavily on ''military options'' instead of
''diplomatic alternatives'' in Lebanon.

Review of Lebanon Policy

Mr. Speakes said today that an ''ongoing'' review of policy in Lebanon was under
way, but no fundamental reappraisal was planned.

Partly in reaction to the Defense Department report, Congressional leaders,
including several who have supported Administration policy in Lebanon thus far,
said on Thursday that Congress would try to change the Marines' mission in
Beirut if President Reagan did not.

The Speaker of the House, Representative Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., Democrat of
Massachusetts scheduled a meeting of Democratic leaders for next Tuesday to
discuss proposals to pull the Marines out of Beirut before the 18-month deadline
that Congress had set this fall. Today, however, Mr. Speakes reiterated that the
President did not want to change the timetable for the Marines' deployment. He
called it ''an essential ingredient'' of the Administration's Middle East
policy.

Rather, Mr. Bouhabib said, the Lebanese now find themselves regretting that they
requested United States military assistance in the first place.

Lebanese Request for Aid

The Lebanese Government did officially request military assistance from the
United States, Italy and France in late September 1982. In fact the Lebanese
wanted even more troops than the United States was willing to send, but at that
time Beirut was in chaos. The President-elect, Bashir Gemayel, had been
assassinated in a bombing attack on Sept. 13, and two days later as many as 800
Palestinian refugees were massacred.

In recent weeks senior military officials have said that they opposed the
deployment of American forces in Beirut from the beginning. The reason, they
have said, is that they feared the Marines would become caught in a Vietnam-like
quagmire.

But a senior Administration official, who was directly involved in the initial
discussions over the Marine deployment, said he recalls that the Joint Chiefs of
Staff had a different objection at first.

''The Joint Chiefs' concern was that old business about being overextended, not
having enough men for the job - the same thing the Pentagon always says,'' he
said. ''Well that just drove us up the wall.''

'Trillions for Defense'

The senior official added, ''The thinking was, 'We spend all these trillions on
defense, and they can't even put one battalion some place?' ''

A Pentagon spokesman said it was Defense Department policy not to discuss the
advice the Joint Chiefs give to the President.

When the Joint Chiefs agreed to deploy a force, the decision had to be made on
what force to send. Robert C. Dillon, who was the United States Ambassador to
Lebanon until last October, recalled that the Marines seemed the logical choice
largely because ''they looked right, they looked temporary. It was a political
job.''

He added: ''They aren't like the Army that has to build a headquarters. The
Marines keep all their logistics offshore. Within 24 hours, they could be packed
and gone.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              371 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 31, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AN INTERVIEW WITH ERNEST F. HOLLINGS, A 'CENTRIST' IN POLITICS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 3621 words


Following are key questions and answers from an interview with Senator Ernest F.
Hollings by William E. Farrell:

Q. What do you think is the most important problem facing the United States over
the next decade? What new ideas do you have for dealing with it?

HOLLINGS. The most important problem facing the country this very minute, and
probably will persist for the next two to three years, is the economy. We must
get the deficits down; the best industrial policy, the best job skills, the best
trade policy is to bring the deficits down so America's private sector can
invest, capitalize and re-employ one's respect in our economy.

Then we must prepare our next generation to compete educationally with day care
centers and professional teachers and prepare our economy's productive capacity
both industrially and agriculturally to compete in the international economy by
enforcing our trade laws.

And this will require the next three to five years. In this light of course you
pay foremost attention in your foreign policy with respect to your relations
with the Soviet; you cut out the stridency, the confrontational approach
employed by Reagan and instead you, with a serious intent of purpose, sit down
and negotiate true arms control.

Q. How serious is the growing Federal deficit and specifically, do you have any
ideas on how to reduce it? Would you raise taxes, or cut domestic spending, or
cut defense spending?

A. You do it all. I've proposed, and I'm the only candidate that has proposed,
an alternative to Reaganomics, and that is a spending freeze of social spending,
a freeze of entitlement spending, a freeze of defense spending, a freeze of tax
spending.

Q. That will include Medicare, Social Security, Federal pensions,

A. Yeah.

Q. How specific a freeze?

A. The only exemption, of course, is what we call S.S.I., Supplementary Security
Income, and food stamps, because the exact amount is not a controllable item.
It's through the eligibility.

Not Cut, but Freeze Spending

Q. Do you have any specific ideas for cuts - I mean, how much in specific areas
you would cut?

A. I didn't say cut, I said freeze spending. If we had done that this year we'd
have saved a hundred billion dollars. I think therein is your dilemma and reason
for failure. There's been no shared sacrifice, or a program where everyone would
have to give, and as a result there's been a standoff of one saying it's got to
come from defense and the other one saying it's got to come from revenues,
another one saying it's got to come from social programs. And the truth is the
200 billion bucks has got to come from everywhere.

Q. What about the defense field?

A. At the moment; we are overprepared for nuclear defense and underprepared for
conventional. We should be holding up on the MX, cancel the B-1, move forward
with the stealth bomber. I've got a list of items that I proposed in the budget
committee and on the floor of the Senate. I'd flesh out the Rapid Deployment
Force in the Persian Gulf. I'd buy more F-15's, F-16's, attack submarines; I'd
provide the National Guard and Reserve with equipment; with 400,000 short in the
Guard and Reserves, I would have more scheming hours, flying hours, maintenance.
About $20 billion on that and you would reallocate the rest. either to the
deficit or whatever was needed.

Q. What about your position on a volunteer army?

A. I have opposed a volunteer army from the word go. I stated at the time,
looking at the casualties, you asked if the war was being - casualties in
Vietnam - that the war was being fought by the black, poor, and the
disadvantaged, and I said that what you'll end up with is an army of the black,
the poor, and the disadvantaged.

To me defense is everyone's business, and, more than a demonstration of military
power, we need a demonstration of will power in this country. I'm confident at
this very minute if you had a draft you wouldn't have any marines at the end of
the runway. In fact the Senate would still be in session.

We'd have all the students on the capital steps, we'd have the parents in the
outer office, and we'd be doing something about it. But right now you have this
riot spectacle of marines being killed for no reason at all and not many people
caring that much about it because they're not subjected to that threat.

Change in NATO Structure

Q. You recently had published a paper saying that the whole NATO structure
should be changed, if I recall it correctly, and include a greater involvement
of French and British military.

A. That's in the next step. I submitted a comprehensive approach to arms control
before the editors and publishers in the early summer.

Q. This is the paper that was published recently by an institute --

A. That paper was an addendum to it stating that now, at the intermediate range
level, we should include the British and French missiles. Because they build
enough fast. And to be realistic for arms control we need to go about it with
all of us involved.

Q. How much growth after inflation do you think there should be in the military
budget?

A. In the military budget you don't go necessarily with growth in the light that
now you put in 130 billion in three years; that's more than anyone can spend
wisely or economically in a short period of time, so you're not just looking for
a percentage of growth. Having infused it I would, to answer your question, say
3 percent real growth. Three percent is a good commitment right now.

Q. Are there any weapons proposed by President Reagan that you would alter or
delete?

A. I wish I had the list here now. I don't have those with me but I mentioned
the E-64 helicopters. I'd hold back some on the FET purchase, M-1 tanks and
otherwise, because we're just going overboard. And certain equipment purchases
that we cannot sustain.

Q. You mentioned reducing the strident rhetoric regarding the Soviets; do you
have any concrete proposals for reaching an arms control agreement with them?

A. I had that concrete proposal that I submitted before the editors and
publishers. The way I drew down on that was from what Brezhnev had said; what
Andropov Dec. 12 last year had stated, what was stated could be agreed to by the
Soviet in the walk-in- the-woods. I took all the realistic inferences of items
that could be agreed to by the Soviet and by us, and fed them off on an equal
balanced way. And submitted that as a first step and right to the point.

Of 108 we'd go down 50 - just have 50 Pershing 2's deployed. And then none would
be deployed in the Netherlands where they're objecting. I would go down. Instead
of the 484, I think it is, cruise missiles, we'd give up 384 of those and only
have 100. In turn the Soviet would come down to 120 SS-20's and one squadron of
FD- 111's. We could balance it off and Gen. George Sieglitz, who was the
ambassador for arms control under the Carter Administration, said that this was
the best first step.

Mideast and the Marines

Q. What would you do differently than President Reagan to seek an overall Middle
East settlement? And also, specifically, what's your position on the marine
deployment in Beirut?

A. I opposed the marine deployment in Beirut at the time of the deployment; I've
opposed it consistently throughout the year; I've opposed it when they were
killing one a week. Now 241 have been killed in the barracks disaster - they
should have been withdrawn immediately to avoid the eight others and so forth
that have been killed from time to time.

They do not have a mission, there is no peace to keep, we cannot force- feed the
Lebanese Government with 1,600 marines. I said at the time when they were
deployed and were put there to fight, there were too few, and if they were put
there to die there were far too many.

With respect to the Mideast I would have given direct attention to the Camp
David accord. I feel that the Reagan Administration has given it benign neglect.
They had Philip Habib over on the question of Lebanon but they should in turn
have had also an additional special ambassador like Sol Linowitz giving
attention to the Camp David accord from the very beginning of the Reagan
Administration to get Mubarak and Menachem Begin together on what comprised the
autonomy; what to do with the West Bank. In these kind of things we'd have kept
the conversation going and developed a peace process. As it is now, we've lost
three years.

Q. So that if you were elected then you would go back to the basic tenets of
Camp David?

A. Right.

Q. That gets into another troubled area. What do you think of the Reagan policy
in Central America? And what would you do differently with it? Would you cut off
aid, for instance to the groups - rebel groups in Nicaragua or accept the
presence of the Sandinistas and continue to hope for change?

A. Well, the rebel groups or the contra - I would cut that off. That overt
covert operation is not effective. It should be cut off. I would try to work
with the Contadora Group both in Nicaragua and El Salvador. They've had a
proposal on the table. Ten points. Generally speaking. Considered a valid
approach and I would work with them to try to bring about a settlement in
Nicaragua and I'd put time, goals and time schedules for El Salvador because we
did not keep the pressure that President Carter had on with respect to land
reforms and stopping the death squad, and more or less considered it recessed
once Reagan was elected.

They could dance in the streets and didn't have to do any of these things. They
don't get back and bring the proper pressures. Till they stop the death squads I
wouldn't have anything to do with El Salvador.

Influence of the Polls

Q. With regards to the campaign, how are you trying to convey your ideas as the
campaign goes? How much influence in the early stages of the campaign are the
polls having?

A. Well, polls have no indication at all other than name recognition. By way of
emphasis, the other day they said that we're now having all the national news
media at this meeting we had in Alabama, and even had the Public Broadcasting
covering the news as they covered the candidates. I said, well, if that's the
case all they needed was The New York Times and The Washington Post. We could
disregard everybody else because they were the two front-runners and that's
about the way the Presidential candidates have been covered.





PICK UP ADD

HOLLINGS Q.&.A


They haven't paid a bit of attention to anything we've ever said. They just run
to the polls, see the mechanism, see who's got the organization, who's a
pollster, who's a manager, who's quit, who's left, how much money they've
collected; it's all the mechanics or mechanisms of politics and not the issues.
We've been struggling for a full year to bring out positions on the issues
themselves and now that people are finally turning their attention to the
issues, I think we'll come out strong.

Q. Are we getting closer to dealing with issues now as we head into the caucuses
and the primaries and also, how important are Iowa and New Hampshire to your
candidacy?

A. Well, they're both important. Iowa though being a caucus and me having
limited financial means, we're not going to be able to make the full effort that
we'd like in Iowa. We have volunteers there and we're still in that Iowa race.
But the main vote, of course, is in New Hampshire, where they have a secret
ballot, the primary vote. It's a control vote in Iowa in the caucus system
particularly when you have the participation of powerful organizations like the
N.E.A. and the A.F.L.-C.I.O. all coming in and financing the candidate's
efforts, and that's a controlled situation in a caucus.

Campaign 'Shakedown Cruises'

Q.You've been spending a lot of time in New Hampshire?

A. Oh, yeah.

Q. What about the issue of financing and staffing? I gather there's been a
considerable amount of turnover in your own staff. Right?

A. Oh, they turned over Reagan's staff after the New Hampshire primary and he
won the Presidency. All campaigns go through those kind of shakedown cruises and
we're tight, we're economical, we are effective.

Q. And financially right now, how would you describe your campaign?

A. I'd express my gratitude to you and all the other taxpayers of America. I'll
get about $550,000 here and in matching funds I'll pay off a few hundred
thousand dollars that we owe and we'll have enough money to go into New
Hampshire in the first primary.

On Special Interest Groups

Q. Are you aiming in any way at any of the interest groups or are you aiming
away from involvement with them?

A. Necessarily I'm interested in the particular interests of the groups, but I
don't address them on a single interest. They have to fit into the overall needs
of the common good. Specifically, when I talk about a freeze, I have to tell the
senior citizens they're a part of it. We're not going to cut Social Security,
but they'd not receive that all for one year. I've had to tell, with the freeze
and other needs, the defense establishment that they could not have their 10
percent or 5 percent that they were asking for at the beginning of the year; I
could not support the MX and the B-11; I've told church groups I could not
support their tuition tax credits, I've told the students that they ought to be
subject to the draft, in order to make our country strong.

And I've told the black leadership at the PUSH conference that as between
seniority and affirmative action I would choose seniority. And I've taken those
stands for the good of the country. Talking sense to the American people than
just overpromising every interest group what they want.

Q. There recently was a convention of a group that, for want of a better term,
called themselves neo-liberals who are questioning the traditional Democratic
approach - party approaches - to various groups. Labor; issues such as
education. Do you regard yourself as affiliated with them or at least in
sympathy with some of the views? A. Some of those views. I have a sympathy for
some of the views of all these particular groups. But I think more than new
ideas I'm looking for old ideals on industrial policy to be specific. A
neo-liberal and I bouncing around the file talking about governmental approach
of a board of government industry, and labor sitting around the table in
Washington and picking out winners and losers, of retraining America and
financing it.

Financial fund - the Government Fund, I should say - to finance all the winners.
I think that that's ridiculous and undesired; would hurt us. What we really need
is to bring the deficits down. We can get industry to invest; even basic
industry is retooling; they're computerizing, they're robotizing, they're coming
into the modern age of competition and more than anything else we don't need to
retrain America.

We've got all the skills you can possibly use. I can train you for any job and
I'm looking for the job opportunities. So they don't understand; they think
high-tech is high-skilled and they don't know what they're talking about.

Message Is Getting Across

Q. How does this message you're trying to convey of sacrifice across- the-board
to get stabilized economy - how's it going down?

A. It's going down better now. It just wasn't listened to at first because no
one really saw the need. Now there's a realization as each day passes that we're
cheating our children.

There's no question that we might say we'll not believe in a military draft in
Washington, but we believe in drafting our children's financial future - $200
billion deficits, $200 billion, $200 billion once they graduate from college and
come up to compete the interest costs from the national debt would achieve the
total cost of government. And you'll be finding that whatever they do or learn
or prepare themselves for, they'll have the heavy burden of extravagance of our
generation here in the early 80's.

We're just spending like there's no tomorrow; we're not paying the bills; and we
loading all of this debt on our children. And it's a dirty shame and more people
every day are not just looking at the unemployment rate and whether Reaganomics
is or not working, they're trying to look at the actual fact of what we're doing
in Washington. And this is just outrageous waste.

Q. In Washington people involved in politics say you've enjoyed a very good
reputation as an administrator, as an idea man. How do you find yourself being
able to convey this talent to the public?

A. Well, it's not colorful. We try to make headway rather than headlines. And on
a campaign where you're a centrist; you're more or less a Jackson Democrat,
strong on defense and liberal on social issues, and you also believe in paying
the bill for all these programs, that's not dramatic, it's not dynamic, it's not
a new idea, it's an old ideal. And in the early part, people think of political
campaigns as flag-waving and set songs and phrases. They are not attracted to
it, but as it becomes more serious and it moves towards these primaries, I'm
coming on strong. That's why we're picking up so well right now.

Polls and Political Process

Q. Do you think polls have in some way damaged the political process if
consistent with your belief, for instance, that the press and the media take a
look at them and pay attention than to the candidates who have the name
recognition and then ideas get washed back? Has this made a major change in the
whole American process in campaigning?

A. That's right. They more or less pick the outcome of the election. And they do
not have a full discussion of the issues. And it's only when I say something
that John Glenn copies it it is finally printed. I started talking in June of
1982 at the Democratic convention in Philadelphia about the marketability of the
Democratic Party and special interests. Now you find Glenn talking about it. I
asked long ago who was going to pay for Mondale's bills; now you find Glenn
talking about it. I'm the one that got on Glenn for supporting Reaganomics; now
you find Mondale talking about it. But no one knows that I raised these
particular points; they only know when the front-runners raise those points.

Q. And so the poll have had a tremendous influence, then.

A. Oh, yeah, they keep them up there and everything else like that and the
people who want to get a stable government and competent leadership said, well,
we like you a lot but, according to the polls, you don't have a chance. It cuts
your contributions. If I had the contributions I'd open up five offices in Iowa.
Right now. I got the people who can staff them.

But you don't have the money and yet you done well - we haven't done badly. You
see I've already collected and spent more than Jimmy Carter had collected when
he'd taken the New Hampshire primary. He'd only collected $934,000; I've already
collected over a million and spent that much.  Q. Is your reputation for candor
and acerbic wit going to help or hinder?

A. It's just part of me; it's the candidate himself and I've been in public
office 32 years and people in my own backyard expect me to be forthright and
that's the only way I know how to campaign. That's why I've been elected to the
Senate four times. No use to change around and try to change your record for a
national candidacy.

As Vice President? 'Never'

Q. Given a long look down the road and say the Presidential thing becomes a
nonreality. Would you entertain the notion of running as Vice President?

A. No. Never. I said at the time that if were offered me I'd escape to Mexico
and fight extradition. I'm not in the least interested. I'm ninth-ranking
Senator and I have a better job and I can be far more effective on all of these
issues that we're talking about as a United States Senator rather than Vice
President riding around in a Cadillac.

Q. Anything else we haven't touched on?

A. I look upon Jimmy Carter who had a governmental program for every problem -
he tried to spend us into prosperity - I look at Ronald Reagan at the other
extreme. He thinks that government is the enemy; government destroys initiative
and other than defense we should get rid of the Government. I think neither
extreme is on target, rather, there's a middle ground of valid, affordable,
governmental endeavor with respect not just to defense but feeding programs a
coast-to-coast system we ought to have in this country, to give every child in
America a head start and a full-time professional teacher; to give every child a
quality finish.

U.S. as Partner, Not Policeman

I think we ought to have our White House and State Department on the side of
America's businessman overseas as a partner rather than a policeman; and bring
us into the real world of international competition. And on this basis in order
to maintain our standard of living, we need someone who can work with the
national Congress, who has had experience not just as a Governor administering
programs but has been in the field of foreign policy and defense for the past 17
years not only debating but deciding, voting, on everyone of these issues.

And on that basis what a man will do in public office is best told by what a man
has done. Performance is better than promise. We'll promise you anything while
we're running.

See how many can put out how many issue papers in all. It's hard work; it's
discipline; it's sacrifices what's needed in America today. It needs somebody
who can do that in a convincing and in a fair way.



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Ernest Hollings

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              372 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 31, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. WILDS HIDE SCARS OF VIETNAM

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 692 words

DATELINE: FORKS, Wash., Dec. 30


Living a solitary life in Washington's wilderness, the war veterans are almost
never seen. But a few are there, shunning society and living by the skills they
learned in the jungles of Vietnam, according to Randy Fisher, the state
veterans' affairs director.

State officials call them ''trip- wire'' veterans, recalling the phrase American
servicemen used for the deadly unseen traps the Vietcong laid along trails to
snare and maim G.I.'s on patrol. It also applied to certain soldiers who
developed a knack for finding those traps and dismantling them.

Now state officials say a very small percentage of veterans who, unable to cope
with the stress of their war memories and the disapproval they faced on
returning home, have disappeared into the woods to live the only way they felt
comfortable.

''Out there in the woods are wonderful, loving people who just want to be left
alone, who are saying, 'I don't want a world where I am going to be spit on and
have tomatoes thrown in my face,' '' said Bruce Webster, a psychologist in Port
Angeles, Wash., who works with veterans.

85 Return to Society

About 85 trip-wire veterans have re-entered society since the State Veterans
Affairs Department began a program to reach them, said Mr. Fisher, director of
the department. He said he did not know how many more there might be.

With a $100,000 grant from the state, Mr. Fisher and Mike McWatters, a private
consultant who says he hid for two years in New York's Adirondacks after
returning from the war, began the counseling service in August.

Last summer Mr. McWatters did a survey to determine how many of the state's
100,000 veterans from the Vietnam era needed counseling but lacked programs. He
found about 1,000, and a number of them were veterans whose existence resembled
that of 19th-century mountain men.

Marvin, a 33-year-old former marine who did not want his last name published,
says he lived as a woodland shadow off and on for 10 years, tracking and
trapping animals, wearing buckskin clothes, sleeping in caves and hollow tree
stumps.

He was one of several trip-wire veterans interviewed by The Tacoma News Tribune
for a series of articles this week.

''There's a lot the public don't know, and probably will never know, about what
happened in 'Nam,'' he said. ''The only job skills I have are those that might
be useful to a hit man for the Mafia.''

Marvin said he spent four years in Vietnam as a Special Forces scout before
being wounded in 1971. When he returned to the United States he headed for the
woods, holing up in Colorado, Wyoming and Montana and ending up in Washington.
He avoided all human contact, he said, because ''I couldn't stand to be
touched.''

He said he suffered from paranoia and nightmares. Since he sought counseling a
year ago, Mr. Webster has diagnosed him as a victim of post-traumatic stress
disorder, a psychological illness in which symptoms appear years after the event
that caused them.

Bill Maier, 35, says he was also a trip-wire veteran. The former marine, who saw
heavy combat in Vietnam, said he had sought refuge in the woods from his
recurring nightmares.



'Afraid of Everything'

But his sanctuary became his torment, for the isolation became too much. ''I
became afraid of everything,'' he said. ''I had to get out. Everything was
closing in on me.''

Mr. Maier sought help from Mr. Webster, his former high school track coach, and
now says, ''I feel I'm getting well again.'' He spends much of his time going
back to the woods to find other trip-wire veterans and to urge them to seek
counseling.

Trip-wire veterans are not ''loonies,'' Mr. Fisher said. They are troubled and
confused men who cannot come to terms with their post-traumatic stress disorder.
In a demanding and complicated society, they cannot control their feelings, he
said, but in the wilderness, where they know they can survive by their wits,
they feel secure.

''I know of one vet who went into the woods naked, came back out later with full
leathers,'' Mr. McWatters said, referring to animal hides for clothing, ''had
gained 40 pounds and was armed'' with weapons he made.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Marvin

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
