
                               1 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 3, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NO GAIN FOR INTERNATIONAL LAW IN THE GULF OF SIDRA;
THE WORLD'S POLICEMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 226 words


To the Editor:

Since the end of the Vietnam War, the United States has displayed a reluctance
to reassume its role as a military superpower. Although almost one-third of our
Federal budget goes to the military, there is a widespread perception that
military power is to be used only as a deterrent or as a means of protecting
Americans when directly endangered.

It comes as no surprise, therefore, to hear people questioning the wisdom of
military exercises in the Gulf of Sidra. No one denies that Colonel Qaddafi was
wrong to claim these waters beyond the recognized 12-mile limit. Yet people
think that by sending the Sixth Fleet into this territory, President Reagan
merely wanted to provoke the Libyan leader into a military confrontation.

Clearly, the result of the exercise was a military confrontation. However, the
purpose of sending the fleet, and the American interest that was being served,
was to show the world that the United States is once again prepared to act as an
international policeman. We alone possess the military capability to assume this
role; by conducting these exercises, the President has made it quite clear that
once again we possess the resolve that is needed. It should be realized that our
actions in the Gulf of Sidra were over a decade in the making. LAWRENCE B.
PELLEGRINO New London, Conn., March 27, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 4, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WORLD'S A STAGE FOR '49 CLASS

BYLINE: By TAMAR LEWIN

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1196 words


For Harvard Business School's class of 1949 - dubbed ''the class the dollars
fell on'' in Fortune magazine's 25th-reunion profile -media attention is old
hat.

But even for them, the party that Marvin Traub (class of '49 and chairman of
Bloomingdale's) gave Wednesday to celebrate the publication of a new book, ''The
Big Time: The Harvard Business School's Most Successful Class and How It Shaped
America,'' must have been a bit much.

About 15 of the 695 class members turned up - Mr. Traub said he invited only
those who lived in the New York area - but at least two times that many press
and publicity people came to talk to them.

''I didn't know the press was invited,'' said James E. Burke (class of '49 and
chairman of Johnson & Johnson). ''What did I think when I saw them all?
Awesome.''

There are good reasons why the press is so interested in the class of '49, the
business school's first full postwar class. The class includes more than its
share of business notables, and chairmen are a dime a dozen. Besides Mr. Traub
and Mr. Burke, there is Sumner Feldberg at Zayre's, C. Peter McColough at Xerox
(chairman of the executive committee) and Thomas Murphy at Capital Cities/ ABC,
not to mention John S. R. Shad at the Securities and Exchange Commission.

But it is not just the big names that define the group. The class has come to be
seen as the embodiment of the values that define American business.

''I'm still as naive about the world, and as optimistic as ever,'' said Mr.
Shad, who, according to ''The Big Time,'' made an estimated $16 million as vice
chairman of E. F. Hutton before joining the S.E.C. ''This is a group of guys
that's all great and straight, and as enthusiastic and full of beans as ever. I
look at our class, and how we've done, and I know that the system works.''

Almost everyone in the class was a veteran, more than three-quarters of them
getting some help from the G.I. Bill. And they were the vanguard of scientific
management in corporate America. There were only 50,000 living M.B.A.'s in the
nation at the time, and those who went to graduate school to study business
management, then a relatively arcane field, acquired a special prestige.

''American management had such strong wind behind its back at the time that we
went out into the world that we could hardly fail,'' said Sidney J. Weinberg
Jr., a partner at Goldman, Sachs & Company. ''Of course the wind changes
sometimes, and you have to tack, but I still believe in the principles I
believed in then.''

Right Place, Right Time

Others, too, say the class's success has largely been a matter of being in the
right place at the right time.

''It was obvious to us when we came back from the war that the country was going
to boom,'' said Mr. Burke, who has been seen as the star of the class because of
his effective response to the Tylenol poisonings that plagued his company.
''After the war, we all believed that good can prevail. And we really worked
hard, but we also recognized that there was a lot of opportunity out there.''

But some members of the class said their success was more than that.

''We had to be a special group,'' said Stanley Greenfield, a consultant and
former advertising man who classmates say was probably the one that took the
first class survey back in 1949, and whose continuing eye for publicity has been
part of what makes the class special. ''They had five years' worth of applicants
to choose from, since the program had been suspended during the war effort.''

These days, there are more than 60,000 new M.B.A.'s every year -and, with rising
foreign competition and the post-Vietnam distrust of the military-industrial
complex, the idea that American management can save the world has lost much of
its luster.

But Harvard's class of '49 is still dazzlingly upbeat. ''We went to school with
a set of values forged by the war, and life has reaffirmed those values,'' Mr.
Burke said.

A Classmate in the Movies

To be sure, not every member of the class is a corporate kingpin - and some are
not even in business.

''I wanted to do something more creative,'' said Paul Ames, who must have leaned
toward show business even back in 1949, when he did the voice-over for
''Tomorrow's Leaders Today,'' an 8-millimeter film the class produced.

''I went to Harvard primarily because it was impossible to get into,'' Mr. Ames
added. ''I was at Notre Dame, I'd been a prisoner of war and I thought I was
pretty good, so I applied. Now I play the part of the old sea captain in the
Viceroy cigarette ads. I think I'm the only member of the class that's in the
movies, but it's a great bunch of guys.''

Most of the men in the class - and they were all men - seem thoroughly
comfortable with all the publicity they have gotten.

''I think publicity is one thing that has made the class so cohesive,'' said Mr.
Greenfield, who added that Laurence Shames, the author of the new book, had done
an excellent job of chronicling the class. (Mr. Greenfield did say the book's
opening anecdote was wrong in describing his conversation with a roommate as he
clicked down the hall in shoes with taps before going to ask the dean of the
business school to admit him. ''I never wore taps,'' he said. ''Never. And I
didn't have a roommate. But you have to do that kind of thing to write a book
like this, and, basically, the book is true.'') Class Appears Cohesive Whatever
the reason, the class does seems very cohesive. The book party was not terribly
well attended, it is true, but members of the class committee pointed out, only
half kidding, that it was not an officially approved event. The official
reunions, they say, have an unusually high turnout.

''We have a very deep affection for each other,'' said Mr. Burke, who takes
frequent ski trips and river trips with Mr. Murphy, Mr. Weinberg, Mr. McColough
and others. ''My closest friendships are from the class of '49. A lot of us had
interrupted college careers, so these took the place of college friendships.''

The class is older now; their median age is 63, a statistic they all seemed to
know as well as their median salary on leaving the business school ($3,600,
compared with $45,000 for 1985 graduates) and the percentage of their class that
went directly to Wall Street (less than 1 percent, compared with 28 percent of
the 1985 class.) They are now the generation that runs the nation, but not, some
of them noted at the party, the generation that will have to reshape American
business in response to increasingly threatening foreign competition - or
provide the entrepreneurship that will create new jobs.

''The large, established companies like Johnson & Johnson are not the ones
creating jobs,'' Mr. Burke said. ''We are not the entrepreneurs.'' ''When you
get to this age, some people begin to think about retiring,'' Mr. Traub said.
''And some talk a little more about helping the community. We have a little more
time to think about that now.''

But while the class of '49 may be nearing retirement age, it's not bowing out
quite yet.

''To the world at large, we just want to say, you ain't seen nothing yet,'' Mr.
Cowett said. ''We're just getting rolling.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Harvard class of '49 business graduates (NYT/Jim Wilson)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 5, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

LEADERS IN PUSH AGAINST SOUTH AFRICA HOPE FOR BROADER CAMPUS ACIVISM

BYLINE: By GENE I. MAEROFF, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1244 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, April 4


College students observed a National Divestment Protest Day today, aimed at
getting trustees to discontinue investments in South Africa, and their leaders
are hoping the movement will be a springboard to involvement in other issues.

Today's protests, timed to coincide with the 18th anniversary of the
assassination of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., were part of a campaign
that has become the biggest campus issue since the end of the Vietnam War.

Educators who saw student activism unfold in the 1960's think the circumstances
were different and that the current protests are not likely to gather the same
momentum. Among the many colleges that have not divested themselves, including
seven of the eight Ivy League schools, are trustees who maintain that they can
be more effective in helping blacks in South Africa by owning stock in companies
that do business there.

Wider Movement Envisioned

But some students feel that the opposition to the racial separation policy of
South Africa could be a first step toward building a movement to confront such
concerns as American involvement in Central America, domestic race relations,
environmental control and nuclear disarmament.

''Branching out to deal with other issues may mean losing the support of some
students involved only because of their concern about South Africa, but to limit
the movement to only one issue is to miss the point,'' said Scott Nova, a
20-year-old junior from Greenwich, Conn., who is active in the divestiture
campaign at Dartmouth College.

Alyson Cole of Scarsdale, N.Y., a senior at Smith College who was involved in a
sit-in over divestiture last month, agrees: ''The reason why an issue like South
Africa is winning support is because it is so blatant, but it is about
imperialism and racism and that is what Central America is about, too.''

The Yale Divestment Campaign, formed by 20 student groups last fall, includes on
its agenda ''questions of institutional racism on campus and in New Haven,''
according to Matthew J. Countryman, a senior from Philadelphia who is on the
group's steering committee.

Early this afternoon, a group of about 75 students constructed two shanties on
the plaza in front of Yale's main administration building ''to protest the
continued intransigence of the Yale Corporation on divestment.''

Linking of Issues Sought

This week at Columbia University, where trustees last fall became the first in
the Ivy League to authorize full divestiture, there were demonstrations that
sponsoring groups said were aimed at ''drawing a link between poverty and racism
in South Africa and the United States.''

Educators maintain that despite such efforts to widen the movement a repetition
of the 1960's is unlikely because universities have experience in coping with
protests, and students are compelled by the economy to think more about the
future. Furthermore, the experts say there was an unusual confluence of events
in the 1960's and the impact of the military draft in prodding activism cannot
be overlooked.

''I don't think apartheid will be the issue that triggers a bigger movement,''
said Alan E. Guskin, president of Antioch University in Ohio who was a
participant in the 1960's protests. ''Students today are worried about their
future, which they weren't in the 1960's, and that has a calming effect. Also, a
lot of university administrators made errors in the 60's that they won't make
again.''

Riesman Skeptical on Support

David Riesman, the Harvard sociologist, is skeptical about how many of today's
students would support issues beyond divestiture, which for some he said is a
morally acceptable way to assuage their guilt ''before they go out and make a
great deal of money.''

Experts say the readily gained consensus on the morality of opposing the South
African Government is what made divestiture the issue that galvanized students
after a decade of quietude.

Student divestiture campaigns date to the late 1970's, but not until the last
couple of years did very many campuses agree to dispose of investments in South
Africa. That may be a reason that only now are students reaching out to embrace
other issues.

As talk of a wider movement spreads, there are inevitable comparisons with the
1960's. The current demonstrations have a familiar flavor.

Lately, there have been hunger strikes at Brown University and Smith College,
sit-ins at Brandeis and Boston University and arrests at Plymouth State College
in New Hampshire and at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Panel of the 60's Revived

Harvard University has revived its Committee on Rights and Responsibilities, a
creation of the 1960's that was allowed to lapse after 1975, to discipline
students involved in two demonstrations that caused disruptions.

At Sproul Plaza at the University of California at Berkeley, where the student
movement began in 1964 with demands for more student freedoms, a new round of
protests against South African racism led to the arrest of more than 150
students this week.

''We haven't had an episode such as this since the end of the Vietnam War,''
said Ray Colvig, public information officer at Berkeley.

Robert M. O'Neil, president of the University of Virginia who was a law
professor at Berkeley in the 1960's, said he has been thinking about that era
lately in light of the divestment protest, which he said ''could become a
catalyst for other issues.''

He feels a big difference, though, is that there is now a sense of dialogue
between protesters and universities that often did not exist in the 1960's.

Another difference, according to students, is the less militant nature of
today's protests.

''Most of us see this movement as nonviolent, which the 60's was not,'' said
Nadine Dolby, a senior at Boston University. ''We also have a little
tolerance.''

An appeal of divestiture to students seems to be that it is a tangible goal.

''There is a clear and present target: the college administration,'' said
Jennifer Nessel of New York City, a Harvard sophomore who was called before a
disciplinary panel for her role in demonstrations. ''You can't stand in the
middle of Harvard Yard and shout against something the U.S. Government is doing
because that just doesn't make sense.''

The campaign for divestiture is symbolized not by clenched fists, but by the
primitive shanties that students have erected on campuses across the country to
represent the housing of oppressed blacks in South Africa.

The latest wave of protests began last week with the start of the National Weeks
of Anti-Apartheid Action, sponsored by the American Committee on Africa. The
demonstrations culminated with the protests today in cities including Boston,
New York and Washington. In New York City, a rally at 53d Street and Lexington
Avenue was followed by a march past Rockefeller Center and east on 42d Street.

At Brandeis University, in nearby Waltham, an abandoned cardboard and wood
shanty in front of the administration building attests the tenacity of the
protesters now observing the Weeks of Anti-Apartheid Action. Students last month
scuffled with maintenance workers who removed part of a 40-foot, jerry-built
wall in front of the administration building.

''Almost everyone realizes the economic impact of divestiture wouldn't be that
great, but it is important to make a moral statement,'' said Ronnit
Bendavid-Val, a sophomore from Washington who helped organize a teach-in last
week.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of demonstrating students at Columbia University in Manhattan
(AP); Photo of students constucting a shanty (NYT/Rollin A. Riggs)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 5, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

PROGRAM FOR JOBLESS FAILS TO HELP THEM ECONOMIST REPORTS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 319 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 4


A tax credit enacted in 1978 to help the hard-core unemployed get jobs may
actually hurt their chances of employment, according to a study published by the
Brookings Institution.

The economist who conducted the study of the program, the Targeted Jobs Tax
Credit, said recently that the study had found that companies discriminated
against job seekers who identified themselves as eligible for the program.

Gary Burtless, an economist with the research institution, who conducted the
survey in 1981, when he was with the Labor Department, said he believed the
stigma associated with Government assistance deterred employers from hiring
participants.

His findings are expected to be cited by opponents of the tax credit when it
comes before Congress this year for possible renewal. The program expires Dec.
31.

Eligibility Requirements

Advocates of the program do not dispute Mr. Burtless's findings, which were
published by the Brookings Institution on March 11, but they contend that they
should not be the basis for dropping a plan that has enabled thousands of people
to get jobs.

Those eligible for the program are welfare recipients, people 18 to 25 years old
who are poor, Vietnam veterans who are poor, former convicts, disabled people
and teen-agers seeking summer jobs who are poor.

Last year more than 622,000 people were hired under the tax credit program,
including more than 51,000 in New York State, according to the Labor Department.

Job seekers in the program obtain vouchers from state employment agencies and
present them to employers. The companies that hire them are eligible to deduct
from their Federal taxes an amount equal to half the wages for the first year of
employment and a quarter of the wages for the second year, up to a total of
$4,500 for two years.

Mr. Burtless conducted his survey in Dayton, Ohio, among 808 people who received
welfare or were young and poor.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 5, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

FILM: 'P.O.W. THE ESCAPE'

BYLINE: By CARYN JAMES

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 417 words


There are a couple of curious twists in ''P.O.W The Escape,'' an action film in
which a group of American prisoners shoot their way out of Vietnam just before
the war ends. Early on, a North Vietnamese officer shows a sunny family
photograph to the P.O.W.'s leader, the tough, terse Col. Jim Cooper (David
Carradine). ''I have relatives in Miami,'' the Vietnamese soldier says proudly,
and suggests that Cooper help him and his stolen gold get to America. There is
also a bad good guy, one of the Americans not only selfish enough to desert his
buddies and steal a rucksack full of gold, but stupid enough to think he can
escape on his own.

We know, of course, that he can't survive alone, for this is a predictable genre
film, though the action is slower and even the fireballs less explosive than
usual. A veneer of politics (the Pentagon is blamed for messing up the rescue
mission that sets off the plot) and patriotism (a tableau shows Mr. Carradine
with the American flag draped over one shoulder) provides the pretext for
Vietnamese bodies being blown in the air and American soldiers crawling through
the mud. Mr. Carradine, looking weathered and wrinkled since his days as the
star of television's ''Kung Fu,'' is the middle-aged commander who calls his men
''Son'' and, lacking Rambo's brawn and high-tech arsenal, is still able to
survive suicidal missions. There is minimalist dialogue, prisoners who seem to
have $1OO haircuts and villains who shouldn't be this hard to outwit. When the
corrupt Vietnamese captain claims he is taking his prisoners to Hanoi, a
suspicious guard inspects the truck and announces, ''Hanoi is the other way!''

The film opened yesterday at the UA Twin and other theaters. The Cast P.O.W. THE
ESCAPE, directed by Gideon Amir; screenplay by Jeremy Lipp, James Bruner,
Malcolm Barbour and John Langley; story by Avi Kleinberger and Mr. Amir;
director of photography, Yechiel Ne'eman; film editor, Roy Watts; music by
various composers; produced by Menahem Golan and Yoram Globus; released by the
Cannon Group Inc. At UA Twin, Broadway at 49th Street; UA East, 85th Street at
First Avenue; Olympia, Broadway at 107th Street; RKO Coliseum, Broadway at 181st
Street, and Essex, Grand Street off Essex. Running time: 90 minutes. This film
is rated R. Colonel CooperDavid Carradine SparksCharles R. Floyd Captain
VinhMako JonstonSteve James AdamsPhil Brock ThomasDaniel Demorest WaiteTony
Pierce ScottSteve Freedman McCoyJames Acheson General MorganRudy Daniels

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 6, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Press Freedoms Under Pressure in Southeast Asia

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 20, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 656 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 5


Journalists in non-Communist Southeast Asian countries have come under growing
pressure from governments worried about unauthorized disclosures of information
and the preservation of ''national images.''

The pressure is being felt by local journalists and resident foreign
correspondents in Malaysia, Singapore and Indonesia.

The freest of the countries in the area are the Philippines and Thailand. In
Thailand, however, journalists outside Bangkok are often subject to political or
police pressure, harassment and sometimes violent attacks, according to Thongbai
Thongpao, a leading human rights lawyer.

The Communist Governments of Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos have no independent news
organizations, only official press agencies. The countries restrict the entry
and freedom of movement of foreign reporters. Vietnam is the most accessible of
the three; Laos is almost completely closed to Western news organizations.

Cambodia rarely permits visits to the Phnom Penh area. When it does, it usually
restricts the reporters to the city, since much of the countryside is vulnerable
to guerrilla attack.

Burma, which has been isolated from the rest of the world for more than two
decades, does not allow journalists to enter the country on business, but
permits them to come in on seven-day tourist visas.

In the rest of Southeast Asia, governments are open to visiting reporters. But
full-time, resident journalists are finding it more difficult to work freely.

In Malaysia, the Government of Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad is preparing
legislation that will carry a mandatory jail sentence for reporters convicted of
possessing unauthorized Government material.

Last year two reporters, a Malaysian and a foreign correspondent living in Kuala
Lumpur, were arrested and fined under a secrets act. Malaysian journalists'
associations, backed by some legal organizations, have begun a campaign to
dissuade the Government from strengthening the legislation.

The Malaysian news organizations -with the exception of a lively daily
newspaper, The Star - are already circumspect by free-press standards because of
Government sensitivities.

In neighboring Singapore, where news organizations are also careful not to
create problems with the Government of Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew, a reporter
for Reuters was expelled last month for an article authorities said ''had
blemished Singapore's image overseas.''

The reporter, Marilyn Odchimar, had interviewed one of the survivors of the
collapse on March 15 of the New World Hotel. She wrote that the survivor told
her of a rescuer who had demanded money from a dying victim.

The Singapore Government, describing the survivor as ''incoherent and in a
delirium'' at the time of the interview, accused Miss Odchimar of
''irresponsible reporting'' because she had not checked the story with
officials.

Last month, Indonesia refused to renew the visa of the resident correspondent of
The Far East Economic Review. The reporter, Lincoln Kaye, an American citizen
who will now become the magazine's Bombay correspondent, had written articles on
the Indonesian armed forces and on a major subversion trial.

Two issues of the magazine were withheld from circulation in Indonesia, where
all foreign publications are subject to censorship before distribution.

On Friday, Indonesia expelled a second reporter for the Far East Economic
Review, Paul Handley, who is also an American citizen. Mr. Handley, a freelance
writer, was planning to become a part-time correspondent in Jakarta for the
Italian news agency Ansa.

Indonesian journalists are regularly and publicly warned - sometimes by the
armed forces Chief of Staff, Gen. Benny Murdani - about their coverage of
matters of national security, particularly concerning trials involving Islamic
radicalism or political subversion. Some editors say they expect the pressure to
mount as a national election scheduled for 1987 draws nearer.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 6, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REBELS STILL WAGING FIERCE WAR IN CAMBODIA

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 21, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 653 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 5


A year after the Vietnamese overran guerrilla camps along the Thai-Cambodian
border, rebels are increasing their activity in almost every Cambodian province,
according to guerrilla leaders and diplomats.

Reports reach Thailand of guerrilla strikes, some close to Phnom Penh. Several
diplomats suggest that the Vietnamese face problems familiar to United States
forces in South Vietnam, who were secure in garrisons but did not control the
countryside.

No one suggests, however, that Vietnam, which has recently rejected a guerrilla
proposal for talks, is likely to end the war soon through negotiation -even if
promised a pro-Hanoi regime in Phnom Penh. Nor will the Vietnamese be driven
from Cambodia. But controlling the country is difficult for Hanoi, which now
maintains about 150,000 troops.

After a yearlong, barricade-building program along the Thai border that refugees
say alienated many Cambodian civilians recruited as forced labor, Vietnamese
troops and soldiers of the Heng Samrin regime have not been able to close the
frontier.

Guerrillas on the Move

Guerrilla forces continue to move back and forth to the frontier for resupply
and rest, although guerrilla leaders admit the trip is now more arduous and
dangerous. The Thai military says that the Vietnamese have laid thousands of
mines in the area, and guerrillas report wider Vietnamese use of helicopters.

Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger is to visit the Cambodian border next
Tuesday for a first-hand look at refugee camps and Thai villages affected by
military activity.

An unusual confirmation of the seriousness of the situation inside Cambodia has
come from the Soviet newspaper Pravda. A report from the Cambodian press agency
said that Soviet economic aid will be doubled over the next five years.
According to Soviet figures, aid last year totaled $138.6 million.

Disruption caused by the guerrilla war is adding to already severe economic
problems of Cambodia, it was reported in Pravda, which added that in the
countryside, the Cambodian Communist Party was attracting few members despite
programs of ideological education.

During the last two months, the increase in guerrilla activity has been most
marked among the forces of the Khmer Peoples' National Liberation Front and the
army of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, according to diplomats and international relief
workers who stay in touch with events in Cambodia.

The Liberation Front had been paralyzed for months by a struggle for leadership,
which has now been reduced to an uneasy alliance, leaving Son Sann in overall
charge of the organization, but giving military leaders considerable autonomy
over troops.

A Loose Coalition

The Front and the Sihanoukists, who operate mostly in the northwestern section
of Cambodia because of limited numbers and supply lines, are joined in a loose
political coalition with the Khmer Rouge, which fields a much larger and more
effective force.

All three groups, supplied by China, say they are also getting Soviet military
equipment from defectors or contacts within the Cambodian army. They say fellow
Cambodians also tell them about movements and concentrations of Vietnamese
troops.

In a recent interview, Prince Norodom Ranariddh, the son of Prince Sihanouk and
his representative in Thailand while the elder Prince is at his home in Peking
or Pynogyang, said that the Khmer Rouge were aided by sympathizers or secret
agents.

Although most Cambodians questioned about the Khmer Rouge are fearful of the
consequences of their return to power, diplomats in Phnom Penh and Hanoi say
there are are still parts of the countryside where the Khmer Rouge commands a
following.

Vietnam's campaign in Cambodia is supported by Moscow, which supplies much of
the heavy artillery and tanks used by Hanoi's and Phnom Penh's troops. Military
experts say Moscow may be preparing to give the Cambodians MIG-21 aircraft.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 6, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Kent State Memorial To Honor Dead of 1970

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 22, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 161 words

DATELINE: KENT, Ohio, April 5


Four large circular depressions in the earth will represent Allison Krause,
Sandra Scheuer, Jeffrey Miller and William Schroeder, the Kent State University
students who were shot to death by National Guardsmen on May 4, 1970.

On Friday university officials unveiled a model for the memorial, which will
include nine smaller impressions to represent students wounded in the
demonstration against the invasion of Cambodia.

In 1970, after two days of student protests against the invasion, Gov. James A.
Rhodes ordered the guardsmen to the Kent campus. On May 4, the students
confronted the guardsmen, who opened fire.

The university president, Michael Schwartz, said, ''With this announcement
today, Kent State University formally acknowledges its own history and its place
in recent American history.''

The model was submitted by the architectural team of Ian Taberner of Ann Arbor,
Mich., and Michael Fahey of New York, and selected from among 698 entries.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 6, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PARLEY REFLECTS CONCERN ON COPING WITH DISASTERS

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 28, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 659 words

DATELINE: BALTIMORE, April 4


A conference here has made it clear that part of the medical profession is
concerned about how Americans might cope with an act of terrorism, a major
earthquake or another large-scale disaster.

The concern is fueled by disasters abroad like the two earthquakes that killed
thousands in Mexico City in September. The Reagan Administration has focused
attention on planning by developing its National Disaster Medical System. But
doubts were expressed at the three-day conference of 150 medical professionals
this week over Washington's contingency plans.

Dr. Alexander Kuehl, vice president of the New York City Health and Hospitals
Corporation, said in an interview that ''maybe'' his city's health workers and
hospitals could cope with 1,000 casualties from the collapse of a tall office
building or its destruction by terrorists. He also questioned Federal
coordinatiion of medical responses to an earthquake or a nuclear accident
involving several states.

Disasters and Killings Studied

American and foreign doctors and other experts at the Second International
Assembly on Emergency Medical Services presented papers on the the earthquake in
Mexico City, floods in Bangladesh, the recent volcanic eruption in Colombia and
the killings of hundreds of people at a time by terrorists in Lebanon.

By the late 1970's, American emergency procedures were being modified in light
of the advances made in the Vietnam War in the use of mobile surgical teams and
evacuation by air. Doctors, nurses and technicians were influenced by their more
recent roles in relief operations abroad.

Two other factors said to have raised medical consciousness about disasters are
doctors's public discussions of the medical and psychiatric aspects of nuclear
war and President Reagan's personal concern over the possibility of a gigantic
earthquake in California.

Reagan Role on Disaster Plans

Thomas P. Reutershan, director of the study group working on the National
Disaster Medical System in the Department of Health and Human Services, said he
assumed that Mr. Reagan, Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d and other Californians
in the Administration were concerned over warnings of a big earthquake. Other
areas mentioned as conceivable disaster zones are Charleston, S.C., and the
Mississippi River Valley, which had major temblors in the 19th century.

The National Disaster Medical System originated, Mr. Reutershan said, in the
late 1970's when the Department of Defense sought a way to cope with large
numbers of military casualties in the United States that would be cheaper than
building new hospitals. Plans were made to borrow 100,000 beds in private
hospitals. The plans were later modified so that Washington would pay the
hospital bills.

Since 1985 the system's managers have been organizing 150 medical assistance
teams to be flown to a disaster scene, and they are now looking into borrowing
commercial airliners, Amtrak coaches and school buses.

Plans vs. Reality

Federal officials say this system would be part of a larger bureaucracy run by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, but several conferees questioned how it
would work. They suggested that all local, state and Federal officials would get
involved and that who was in charge might be obscure. They added that it was
unclear if the small agency could command governors and local officials from
Washington.

Mr. Reutershan and other Federal officials, including Gen. Julius W. Becton Jr.,
who heads the Federal Emergency Management Agency, said state and local
officials would not be displaced.

The conference was organized by the Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical
Services Systems and co-sponsored by the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and the State Department's
Foreign Disaster Assistance Office. The participants included doctors from
Honduras, Mexico, Peru, Bangladesh, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 6, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MAN AND MYTH ON WALL STREET

BYLINE: By WINSTON WILLIAMS

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 3233 words


PETER M. DAWKINS, Heisman Trophy winner, Rhodes Scholar and Army hero, arrived
at Lehman Brothers nearly three years ago, bringing with him the resume of a
lifelong overachiever. It was enough to inspire envy, if not fear, in the hearts
of his Wall Street competitors. There was the childhood triumph over polio,
followed by a brilliant academic and football career at West Point. A
quarter-century stint in the Army brought yards of combat ribbons for service in
Vietnam; at 43 he was named brigadier general, and he seemed on the way to
fulfilling his football coach Earl Blaik's early prediction, ''He's a cinch to
make Chief of Staff.''

But at 45, General Dawkins tossed his military career aside and moved to the
lucrative world of investment banking. Since his abrupt announcement in May 1983
that he would retire from the military, Dawkins-watchers have been waiting for
their hero to make his mark on Wall Street. The going has been slow.

''Has it been three years already?'' asks Howard Cosell, a fan since Mr.
Dawkins's West Point glory days in the late 1950's. Surely Mr. Dawkins would
have been publicly acclaimed by now, said the sports announcer, if he had
followed his Army resignation with a career in politics. Mr. Dawkins's old
sports fans have heard little from him lately, as he struggles to master the
demands of his new life. Wall Street has been relentlessly separating the man
from the myth as Mr. Dawkins has labored to unravel the technicalities of
municipal finance and the intricacies of corporate debt instruments.

The adoring crowds, colorful parade grounds and occasional Life magazine stories
have been replaced by a ruggedly demanding schedule, competition from a
sharp-elbowed investment banking community and hard-ball office politics. (See
box.) By his own acknowledgement, he is not a winner at the new game - yet.

Many of Mr. Dawkins's fans still think he will take the financial world by
storm, and then, perhaps, the political world, too. Some say that Lehman, now a
part American Express's Shearson subsidary, is merely a way station for Mr.
Dawkins, a place to shore up his finances and nurture his contacts until he can
make some bold move into the political arena. Recently he was mentioned as a
possible Republican challenger to Governor Cuomo, but the idea died aborning
because Mr. Dawkins did not meet the five-year New York residency requirement.

During his peripatetic military career, he impressed politicians of both
parties. Virginia Democrats tried in vain to draft him into a Senate race.
Republicans in Michigan, his native state, and Tennessee were equally
unsuccessful.

While acknowledging he is a Republican, Mr. Dawkins describes himself as a
''private person,'' and refuses to discuss future goals. ''I don't want to vent
my personal aspirations in the public domain,'' he said, a slight Middle Western
accent still coloring his voice. He insists he is satisfied with his ''quick and
dramatic change'' from military life.

Certainly his new incarnation is more lucrative - brigadier generals earn about
$61,000. He retired to Wall Street as a bonus baby, lured to Lehman with a
string of perks - including the title of partner, a $1 million low-interest loan
to buy an East Side Manhattan apartment and 500 shares of the firm's stock. His
timing was fortuitous: A mere eight months after he joined Lehman, the partners
were bought out by Shearson/American Express. For his stake, the newcomer netted
$1.6 million.

The sizing-up of Mr. Dawkins is still underway. ''He's more successful than the
cynics thought he would be; but less than his supporters thought,'' says one
former associate. Others who work with him say that Mr. Dawkins's celebrity
status has definitely brought in business, but some wonder whether, given his
substantial compensation, he has brought in enough.

Says Mr. Dawkins, with an icy stare from his legendary blue eyes: ''I'm
learning. This isn't something you read about in a book and master. I sure feel
I'm carrying my load and earning my way.''

''He has proven he's a winner,'' says Jeffrey Lane, Shearson's vice chairman and
chief operating officer. ''He's brought in business where business did not exist
before. I would be happy to see Pete stay here for the rest of his business
career.''

Indeed, he seems quite at home greeting visitors in the Shearson-Lehman
executive dining room, pointing out the view of Ellis Island from his 19th-floor
aerie in the sparkling new World Financial Center. The gut-in, chest-out
military bearing has not relaxed, but the wide-open grin flashes easily, making
other people comfortable. He says he works long days, travels often and mixes a
lot with clients - entertaining at Broadway shows, jetting to London to call on
British Aerospace one week, holding court the next at the swank Houston Country
Club with business elite from the oil patch.

He does not pretend to be a technical expert. ''Obviously I'm not going to be
the financial genius who is going to come up with a step-up coupon bond,'' he
acknowledges. When talking about the company's myriad financial instruments, he
sometimes refers to typewritten notes, careful to get the details correct.

Do fans still stop him on the street? The 48-year-old acknowledges he remains a
hero to some who are 15 years older or five years younger. ''For the fun of
it,'' he recently accepted an offer to model Hathaway shirts in one of a series
of advertisements featuring successful businessmen. His 6-foot-1 frame has
thickened only slightly since ''Super-Duper Dawkins'' was an All-America
halfback. He plays tennis and skis to keep in shape, but music is his chief
avocation. He recently bought a piano, and plays eight different instruments.
JUST as he started his West Point football career on the bench, so Mr. Dawkins
began his career at Lehman on the fringes of the action -as head of municipal
finance, a relatively unglamorous area in the high-stakes world of investment
banking. The retired officer, accustomed to voicing big ideas and accomplishing
great dreams, spoke to a reporter of ''repairing a rusting America'' and raising
funds ''to fix an infrastructure that was built in the 19th century and allowed
to deteriorate in the 20th.''

The nation's infrastructure remains pretty much in shambles, but much else has
happened since those words were uttered, including the slight rebounding of
Shearson's municipal finance division. The combined companies' ranking in
municipal underwritings went to No. 3 in 1985 from a hypothetical No. 6 in 1983,
before the firms were merged.

Last May, moreover, Mr. Dawkins won a starting position on the Shearson varsity
when he was promoted out of municipal finance to be director of business
development for investment banking, charged with bringing new clients to
Shearson.

His promotion puts him on the team at an exciting time. After an infusion of
$100 million in capital by American Express and with a growing emphasis on
aggressiveness, Shearson is on a roll. Its share of corporate underwritings has
gone to 9 percent in the first three months of this year from 7 percent last
year. Since late last year it has co-managed two of the largest initial public
offerings in history -the $900 million offering of Fireman's Fund (previously an
American Express subsidiary) and Rockefeller Center's $750 million stock sale.

His characteristic modesty about his financial skills fades when he talks of his
special value to Shearson. ''In a number of circumstances I can help get a
hearing where one otherwise might not be available,'' he says measuredly. ''I'm
expected to be a spokesman for the firm.''

But if he opens doors for the firm, he insists that he is more than a public
relations man. The challenge of his assignment, he says, ''is marshaling the
resources of the firm in an orderly and aggressive manner and bringing these to
the attention of decision makers in corporate America.''

Asked about specific accomplishments, Mr. Dawkins mentions the financing of an
expansion of the Kentucky jail system as being innovative and truly satisfying.

The $34 million deal attracted widespread attention because the bonds were
backed by future revenues from a $10 surtax that the state courts would begin
levying on misdemeanor convictions. Mr. Dawkins says he has worked with Arizona
and Michigan to fashion legislation permitting a similar plan. But Kentucky
officials deny that Shearson played a central role in formulating the idea.
''They took credit for it, but the legislature came up with that on their own,''
says Donald Morse, treasurer of the state agency that builds prisons.

Mr. Dawkins has a history of overcoming slow starts. In his senior year at West
Point the football team was carrying an undefeated record into the final game
with Navy, its arch-rival. In front of noisy throngs in the stadium and before
millions of viewers on national television, the gangling young captain fumbled
the opening kickoff, setting up a score by Navy.

Even though Mr. Dawkins failed to score, Army won the game, 22 to 6. And he took
the Heisman Trophy as the season's outstanding player. He was the first cadet to
hit the so-called Big Four jackpot as first captain, brigade commander, class
president and captain of the football team. He was graduated 10th in a class of
500 and won a Rhodes Scholarship, studying for three years at Oxford
University's Brasenose College, where he was a rugby ace, introducing the
American forward pass to the game. Later he earned a Ph.D. in international
affairs from Princeton and served as a White House Fellow, a one-year honorary
appointment that allows military officers to work in the civilian side of
government.

At Shearson, too, he appears to be turning a tentative beginning into a positive
venture. When Mr. Dawkins arrived at Lehman, the vicious intra-office
skirmishing that resulted in the eventual sale to Shearson was erupting into
full-scale civil war. He and his recruitment perks became cannon fodder for the
group fighting Lewis Glucksman, Lehman's chairman and Mr. Dawkins's sponsor.
Some partners sneered at the appointment, saying that little in his past had
prepared him for investment banking.

But Mr. Dawkins, his thinning blond hair now showing gray strands, stayed above
the fray. And when his ''baptism by total immersion,'' as he puts it, was over,
his former adversaries were extending him grudging respect. He still sees Mr.
Glucksman from time to time.

After the 1984 union of the retail-oriented Shearson brokerage with the old-line
investment banking firm of Lehman Brothers, the combined company went through
the obligatory post-merger shake-up. The new organization set out to increase
its penetration of the nation's top 100 companies, and each of Shearson's 30
operating groups had to plot a strategy to help meet that goal.

The Dawkins group researches investment banking opportunities outside the firm.
Then Mr. Dawkins is responsible for matching outside opportunities with in-house
bankers and with sophisticated financial products refined in the Shearson
''laboratory'' - money-market preferred stock and extendable-putable bonds, for
instance. ''We had to arm our senior bankers with a kit-bag of ideas'' and set
priorities to improve the efficient use of their expensive time, Mr. Dawkins
said. ''Neither Shearson nor Lehman had any sort of systematic business
development.''

Such tasks as planning and organizing staff come easily to the former military
man. He enjoys the quick pace of the business world and working with bright
people, he says. They, in turn, acknowledge his considerable charm and say that
he motivates people well. ''He's not the kind of guy to tell you to go shine
your shoes before you come into his office,'' says Eric Claus, an associate at
Shearson.

Initially, however, Mr. Dawkins was shocked by the lack of discipline in the
private sector - people not answering memos and not showing up for meetings on
time. ''

In his new job in business development, he does not consider his lack of
experience much of a handicap. Because of the increasingly competitive
environment, he says, old relationships no longer have their former durability.

''If someone who is not your traditional banker comes to you with a new way of
doing something that's cheaper, you'll go with that person,'' he maintains.

Mr. Dawkins has so immersed himself in the demands of his new job that his
Pentagon years seem far away. ''I ended up as the head of something called,'' he
said recently, his voice trailing off to a mumble. ''What the hell was that
called?'' he asks - then remembers that when he resigned, amid much ceremony, he
was Deputy Director of Strategy, Plans and Policy in the Pentagon, responsible
for a unit that studied everything from military options in Beirut and El
Salvador to material and equipment requirements for the year 2000.

The question of why he left the Army - after being anointed by practically every
political pundit and every national publication as heir apparent to the title of
Army Chief of Staff - continues to dog him. Last year he spoke to the reunion
classes at his civilian alma mater, Princeton's Woodrow Wilson School of Public
and International Affairs.

He gave them the same explanation he has given publicly many times about wanting
to redirect his life while he still had time. It was a decision made when he
was, for the first time in his life, flat on his back, recuperating from a
spinal operation to remove an injured disk.

One cynical alumnus, not believing what he had heard, commented testily from the
audience, ''You don't mean any of that at all. You just sold out for a higher
salary.'' Observers say Mr. Dawkins calmly stuck to his explanation.

Actually, there had been recurring signals throughout his military career that
he was not entirely happy. While still at West Point he wrote a magazine article
about life there, telling of a typical cadet being ''chewed up and bounced
around until he didn't know up from down.''

His Ph.D dissertation at Princeton, entitled ''The Other War in Vietnam: A Study
of Complexity in Implementing Organizational Change'' and completed in the early
1970's, took the Army to task for resisting change. When he was appointed a
White House Fellow in 1973, he wanted to work at either the Treasury or Energy
Departments, but the vice chief of staff, General Alexander M. Haig Jr.,
insisted he come to Defense.

Friends say he was always a little uncomfortable with the demands of being a
symbol for the Army. ''I've always tried to keep some attachment to the world
outside,'' Mr. Dawkins says now. ''I feel it's important for people in the
military to have anchors and guideposts to make sure you maintain your
perspective.''

He may have succeeded too well. ''He's not a compartmentalized thinker and in
the Army you have to accept a bureaucratic way of thinking,'' says Mary Procter,
director of Congressional Affairs for the Office of Technology Assessment and a
former Princeton classmate. MR. DAWKINS'S mythical student years came to an
appropriately romantic conclusion in 1961, after his Oxford stint, when he
returned to West Point to marry his college sweetheart, Judith Wright, a
University of Maryland graduate, in a formal ceremony in Cadet Chapel. In the 25
years since, the couple have moved 23 times - quite different from his own
boyhood. The son of a dentist, he grew up in Royal Oak, Mich., lifting weights
to strengthen his limbs after a bout with polio, and fighting to play varsity
sports at nearby Cranbrook School.

The Dawkinses have two children: Noel, a senior at Manhattan's Dalton School,
and Sean, a student at Hampden-Sydney College in Farmville, Va. Mr. Dawkins does
not regret that his son did not follow in his footsteps as a cadet and a
football player. He explains: ''Eventually he would have had to compete against
the myth. And there is no way he could have lived up to the myth. I certainly
couldn't live up to it.''

The myth lives on, however. The current version caps Mr. Dawkins's career with
ascension to some high political office. It is speculation he feeds by
maintaining some conspicuous political ties. He holds membership in the powerful
Council on Foreign Relations. He is still a member of the prestigious Economic
Club in his native Detroit. Michigan politicians keep an eye on him as a
potential favorite-son candidate.

His interest always seems to come back to politics, municipal as well as
national. When he returned from Europe recently he expressed annoyance at
missing the results of last month's special elections in Chicago.

During the trip, Mr. Dawkins had lunch and dinner with Pierre Salinger, the
Paris bureau chief of ABC News. ''I get the definite feeling that somewhere down
the line he's going to convert himself into some kind of political animal,'' Mr.
Salinger says.

Even if the speculation of a political life after Shearson is correct, Shearson
officials expect him to be around for a few years more. ''Going to Washington is
a very expensive proposition,'' says Shearson's Mr. Lane. ''All he talks about
is making a contribution here and now.''

'SAINT PETER' LEARNSTO SWING THE HATCHET

For most of Peter Dawkins's adult years, his name was a synonym for virtue and
valor. His abrupt exit from the Army reflected these values as well. He resigned
from the military before he even began looking for a new job.

''I had this old-fashioned notion that as long as I was being paid by the Army,
I owed them my time and attention,'' he said recently. ''I had no time to
fashion a new life for myself on the job.''

The business world, however, is introducing him to contentiousness and teaching
him to play the role of the heavy. In the rapidly changing world of financial
services, Mr. Dawkins is increasingly finding himself in situations that
challenge his reputation for nobility and graciousness.

First, there was the acceptance of the Lehman partnership, which was offered by
Lewis Glucksman, the chairman, without consulting his board. The move fueled
rebellion against the chairman's leadership and eventually helped to bring about
the firm's takeover. To make room for the incoming partner, there was a
management shuffle in Lehman's municipal finance group, causing resentment of
Mr. Dawkins within the ranks.

After the merger with American Express's Shearson, the problem of who would head
municipal finance arose again. It was solved by Mr. Dawkins sharing the job with
Albert Bellas, who had been head of public finance at Shearson before the
merger. Duties were divided so that Mr. Dawkins inherited much of the
responsibility for streamlining the merged operation. And for the first time in
his life ''Saint Peter,'' as critics sometimes called him in his military days,
found himself in the unheroic role of hatchet man, having to fire 50 people -
roughly one-third of the public finance employees in the regional offices.

He says now that the decision to swing the ax was a ''tough'' one but redundancy
on the staff left the merged company with little choice. How did he handle the
firings? ''We simply took some people aside and said, 'This is not going to
work. Look, we have more people that we need,' '' he recalls. Mr. Dawkins
insists that doing it quickly after the merger was the best way. ''Bad news
doesn't get better with age,'' he concluded.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Pete Dawkins highlight his career in Army and business
(NYT/Larry C. Morris)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 6, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

THE GUERRILLA NETWORK

BYLINE: By James LeMoyne; James LeMoyne is chief of The New York Times's bureau
in San Salvador.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 16, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5194 words


A REGION IN CONFLICT:

IT IS A WORLD THAT HAS ITS OWN CODES AND knows no national borders. It has
stopping points in Nicaragua, Cuba, Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, as well
as in the theaters of war in El Salvador and Guatemala. Almost all its leaders
are Marxists of one persuasion or another who believe that capitalism and
imperialism are the causes of their countries' problems. Far from being a
passing political fashion, their movement is deeply rooted in the troubled
societies of Central America and can be traced to leftist uprisings more than 50
years ago. They are the armed left - the generation that spent the 1970's
preparing for revolution and is spending the 1980's fighting it.

In one of the most volatile and closely watched areas of the world, the actions
of these guerrilla leaders and their allies in Managua and Havana have an
enormous international impact. The role of the Sandinista commanders in the
area's conflicts, in particular, has long been the subject of intense debate in
the United States. Late last month, as the controversy over aid to the
anti-Sandinista rebels - known as contras - raged in Congress, reports of
attacks by Nicaraguan Army units on contra bases within Honduras resulted in an
immediate Presidential order of $20 million in emergency military aid to
Honduras.

Today, leftist guerrilla movements are active in El Salvador and Guatemala, and
far smaller leftist groups can be found in Honduras and Costa Rica. Virtually
every study of the region, including that of the Kissinger commission appointed
in mid-1983 by President Reagan to make policy recommendations on Central
America, has concluded that the revolutions of Central America primarily have
been caused by decades of poverty, bloody repression and frustrated efforts at
bringing about political reform.

Consequently, those who fight do not need great numbers of combatants to have a
substantial impact, since public discontent runs deep. In El Salvador, the
umbrella organization of the rebels, the Farabundo Marti National Liberation
Front, probably has no more than 4,000 fighters, but it can count on several
thousand unarmed supporters to help them wage a debilitating war against the
Government. In Guatemala, where the guerrillas are battered by a ruthless army
counterinsurgency campaign, they are fielding about 1,500 fighters organized in
four main groups.

The key commanders of these movements probably number in the hundreds. A few are
of peasant origin, but most are members of the urban middle and lower-middle
classes. Many appear to be idealists who were frustrated by the overwhelming
problems facing their countries. Until the last year or so, however, little was
known about the lives of these leaders, how they were trained, or the alliances
between them.

Revealing information came to light a year ago with the capture of Nidia Diaz, a
commander of the Marxist Central American Revolutionary Workers Party (a
Salvadoran guerrilla faction). Miss Diaz had with her a diary that indicated
Salvadoran guerrillas had been sent to training courses in Vietnam, Bulgaria,
East Germany and the Soviet Union.

Recent months have also seen an increasing willingness of former guerrilla
officials to divulge details of their shadowy past. Several high-level
Sandinistas have left the Nicaraguan Government because of what they describe as
their unhappiness with the Sandinistas' dependence on the Cubans and the
Russians and their failure to establish a pluralistic society. In the case of
the Salvadorans, a few commanders have been captured and been persuaded to give
up the fight; others have been ousted over differences on how the revolution is
to proceed.

From interviews with these current and former guerrillas (conducted separately
over a six-month period), a clearer picture emerges of the connections between
the various leftist Central American rebel factions - a picture that reveals a
guerrilla movement that is anything but monolithic. Details were offered, for
instance, on the arms shipments from Nicaragua to El Salvador, on the role of
Cuba in the planning of the abortive ''final offensive'' in El Salvador in 1981,
and on the events leading up to the almost Shakespearean murder-suicide of two
prominent leaders of the Salvadoran guerrilla movement three years ago.

The story behind the brutal killing of Melida Anaya Montes and the suicide of
the man implicated in her murder, Salvador Cayetano Carpio, offers a rare
glimpse of the frequently fractious society of revolutionary leaders in Central
America. In this instance, Mr. Carpio's fiercely Stalinist stance pitted him
against many within his own group who sought greater unity among rebel factions
as well as a negotiated end to the fighting, a position that was strongly
supported by Cuba and Nicaragua.

Although Cuba appears to remain the chief adviser and patron of Central American
leftist guerrilla leaders, the Soviet Union is seen by many rebels to have
abrogated its revolutionary role. ''Revolutions are like people,'' says a
Honduran leftist. ''They lose passion. Russia is old, bureaucratic and
corrupt.''

RECRUITMENT AND TRAINING

JUST AS THERE ARE MANY WAYS TO ENTER the world of the armed left of Central
America, there are many reasons for men and women becoming guerrillas. Often,
these reasons are highly personal.  Salvador Samayoa, a former Minister of
Education in El Salvador, is now one of the leading officials of the rebel
Popular Liberation Forces, the largest Salvadoran guerrilla group. He began
thinking of taking up arms, he says, after watching the Salvadoran Army open
fire on a demonstration in 1975. ''That marked me,'' he says. ''It was grotesque
to see students shot like dogs in the streets.'' Mr. Samayoa is unlikely to have
been the only one affected by such violence. Since the 1970's, Salvadoran
Government security forces have killed thousands of civilians in an effort to
wipe out leftist sympathizers.

Other guerrilla leaders almost appear to have been raised to join rebel ranks.
Plutarco Hernandez Sancho, who now runs a small farm in Costa Rica, is not well
known today, but until he lost an internal power struggle in 1979, he was one of
the top Sandinista military commanders in the revolt against the Nicaraguan
dictator Anastasio Somoza Debayle. Mr. Hernandez's family was active in the
Communist Party in Costa Rica -his father was a Congressman - and Mr. Hernandez
remembers a childhood filled with political meetings and demonstrations. ''I
never had any doubt that I would be a revolutionary fighter,'' he says. His
cousin, Eduardo Sancho Castaneda (better known by his nom de guerre, Ferman
Cienfuegos), is the leader of a guerrilla faction, the Armed Forces of National
Resistance, in El Salvador.

Salvadoran rebels interviewed recently said they entered guerrilla organizations
through student or trade-union front groups. Peasants were recruited directly
from their villages. Those who demonstrated their commitment to the revolution
and a capacity to lead rose to become senior commanders.

Guerrillas with leadership potential were first offered basic military training
(rifle use, squad tactics, indoctrination techniques) at hidden camps in their
own countries. Most of them later appeared to receive more specialized training
abroad - in Cuba, various Eastern European countries and Vietnam. According to a
number of former Sandinistas, some Sandinista commanders went to North Korea for
officer training in the early 1970's and a few went to Palestine Liberation
Organization camps in Beirut in 1969.

The Soviet Union seems to play a limited role in the re-gion. In the past, it
has counseled orthodox Communist parties to avoid military action and to assume
power through alliances with ''progressive'' political parties. With the
Russians becoming a major supplier of weapons and other aid to Nicaragua, and
with the Communist parties in El Salvador and Guatemala joining in the fight
against Government forces, that policy may have changed. But many rebels do not
appear to have forgiven the Russians for their past reticence.

Cuba is still a revolutionary icon. For older guerrilla leaders, Cuba offered
the first evidence that it was possible to fight the United States and win.
''For the first time, young Communists could see a revolution triumph, a
revolution that spoke Spanish,'' explains a Honduran leftist who fought with the
Sandinistas. A young former Sandinista official was overcome with emotion when
he went to Cuba three years ago to discuss relations between the Sandinista
Government and the Cuban Communist Party. ''It's a question of soul, of myth,''
he says. ''Cuba symbolized the success of socialism and the defeat of the
Yankees.''

Rebels say that Cuban embassies serve as refuges and bankers for Central
American leftists traveling abroad. In addition, say several former rebels,
almost all the top Sandinista commanders and most of the very senior rebel
officials in El Salvador and Guatemala have received advanced guerrilla training
in Cuba. The courses given range from intelligence gathering to instructions in
rural and urban guerrilla warfare.

The training there is overseen by the Department of Special Operations of the
Cuban Army and the Department of the Americas, headed by Manuel Pineiro. A close
confidant of Fidel Castro, Mr. Pineiro (whose nickname is Barba Roja, or Red
Beard) draws on two decades of revolutionary experience in the region and
probably has had a profound influence on a whole generation of guerrilla
commanders, many of whom he knows personally.

How senior commanders are selected for training abroad is still a mystery. But
there are telling examples of such training in the recent past and some
indications of how it continues today. A year ago, Salvadoran Army commandos
captured the senior rebel official Nidia Diaz after intercepting a guerrilla
patrol. The diary found in her backpack listed 33 Salvadoran guerrillas who had
been sent to training courses in Vietnam, Bulgaria, East Germany and the Soviet
Union in 1984 and 1985. Miss Diaz herself was slated to go to Vietnam for
training.

Asked to comment on the diary, a current senior Salvadoran guerrilla official
said, ''It is true that we have sent some small groups to various countries for
training. Most of them are socialist countries because they are the ones willing
to help.''

It is likely that the training offered rebel leaders today is similar to that
given to top Sandinista guerrillas, like Mr. Hernandez, in the late 1960's and
70's. A promising young Communist Party activist in Costa Rica in 1965, Mr.
Hernandez was selected by party leaders to attend Moscow's Patrice Lumumba
University, which was established in 1960 to offer free higher education to
third-world students as well as Soviet students. Most of those who attend, says
Mr. Hernandez, are chosen by their local Communist Party. But only a few of
those third-world students become guerrillas. The vast majority complete their
college courses and return home to find jobs.

Mr. Hernandez and a group of fellow students from Central America were
different. They decided to form a study group in Moscow and to spend the long
winter evenings discussing ways of bringing about revolution in their homelands.
(Thirty of the Latin students, recalls Mr. Hernandez, were expelled in 1968 when
they led a demonstration against the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia.) The
years at Patrice Lumumba let the future revolutionaries form friendships with
other young leftists, says a Honduran who studied with Mr. Hernandez and who was
formerly a leading Sandinista. ''It let us see the state of the revolutionary
movement around the world with students from 82 countries.''

A number of the Central American students returned home to join the
still-fledgling Sandinista National Liberation Front because they believed the
Somoza dictatorship could be beaten. The Cubans offered to help by training a
handful of rebels.

At a seven-month intelligence seminar in Cuba, the Honduran learned how to
recruit spies, to maintain security, to establish secret comunications and to
interrogate prisoners. Plutarco Hernandez went through basic military training
in Cuba and, in 1971, took a grueling officer command and staff course in North
Korea, where he met Kim Il Sung. He returned to Central America to become one of
the chief Sandinista military commanders inside Nicaragua, receiving radio
instructions from Havana that, he says, took him all night to decode. His
Honduran classmate became the Sandinistas' chief of counterintelli-gence. Two
other students from Patrice Lumumba, Henry Ruiz and Jose Valdivia, also became
Sandinista commanders and are senior officials in Nicaragua today. DAILY LIFE OF
A GUERRILLA: AFTER COMPLETING their training, rebel leaders begin the arduous
and dangerous work of organizing a rebellion. Their tasks include setting up
political platforms and arranging arms shipments. It is a grim life.

''The brush strokes with which clandestine life has been painted, this aurola of
romanticism, do not correspond to reality,'' says Tomas Borge Martinez, one of
the most hard-line and also one of the most eloquent Sandinista commanders, in
the course of a long conversation in Managua. ''In Nicaragua . . . a man in the
underground lived in very inhospitable places, in very poor houses, suffering
diarrhea, with all you owned beside you.''

A weeklong stay with El Salvador's Popular Liberation Forces guerrillas in the
heart of their operational zone in Chalatenango Department offered a close look
at the continuing hard-scrabble life of rebels in the field. The guerrillas
lived on beans, salt and corn tortillas. They slept in hammocks, if they were
lucky enough to own one, and bathed in rivers. Most were covered with scars from
innumerable fly, flea and mosquito bites. A rebel doctor said that during his
four years working with rebel combat units, he had been immobilized several
times with chronic infections of intestinal parasites. He said he was 35, but he
looked past 40, and he knew it. ''War ages you,'' he said, running his hand
through prematurely graying hair.

Guerrilla commanders sleep with a pistol beside them. They say they expect to be
tortured if they are caught by Government security forces and, if they survive,
they expect to spend years in jail. Many say they have had friends and relatives
killed by the army or police.

Paranoia is an inescapable part of life. A Honduran left-ist who lived
underground for several years describes his morning ritual: ''Each day when I
got up, I went to the window and checked the street. I remembered everything
going on there and I noted anything abnormal. After I bathed, I checked the
street again and after I finished breakfast I checked it again. When I left the
house, I put a towel in the window to tell comrades I was not home. After
walking a block, I stopped to tie my shoes and see if anyone was following me. I
had previously studied every shop and cafe along the street and I knew which
ones had a rear exit, which ones had a bathroom window I could jump through if I
had to.'' Despite these precautions, the Honduran was captured by Somoza's
National Guard while working for the Sandinistas in Nicaragua.

Over time, such a life leads many rebels to develop an us-versus-them view of
the world that is defined by fear of discovery and a belief that they are making
a supreme sacrifice for the common good. A former Sandinista recalls his
feelings during the years he spent carrying a hand grenade 24 hours a day while
he organized clandestine cells in Managua. ''We hated people with normal lives
because we were morally superior,'' he remembers. ''We risked our lives and we
knew we had the power of life and death.'' Even after the war was won, he found
it almost impossible to adjust. ''It was two years before I could make love to a
woman. Fearing human con-tact, I cut off that kind of emotion.''

A deep commitment to the revolution is necessary to endure such physical and
emotional hardships. The guerrillas in Chalatenango spoke of la mistica - a
combination of esprit, elan and absolute belief that is their inspiration. It is
no easier to explain that devotion than it is to analyze other human commitments
based on faith.

Perhaps because their commitment is reinforced by years of struggle, few veteran
rebel commanders have defected or voluntarily quit the fight. A few have been
captured and then coerced or convinced to give up the fight. Several have been
ousted or have chosen to leave after losing power struggles, and some of the
bitterest critics of their past comrades are from this group. Many ''retired''
guerrillas, now in civilian life, refuse to discuss their past for fear of
compromising their friends or aiding opponents of revolutionary change, which
they still support. INTERNATIONAL CONNECTIONS: WHEN REVOLUTION in Central
America became not just possible but probable in the late 1970's, Fidel Castro
offered stepped-up assistance, but he first demanded that the rebel factions in
Nicaragua, El Salvador and Guatemala put aside their differences and become
uni-fied guerrilla movements. This insistence led to the forming of rebel fronts
in these countries between 1979 and 1980.

A number of leftist rebels, however, criticize the Cubans for being overbearing
and for their reluctance to back a revolution decisively until they believe it
stands a good chance of success. They point out that the Cubans never offered
the level of aid to the Guatemalan rebel movement that they gave to the
Salvadorans and the Sandinistas.

In Nicaragua, the Cubans were willing to risk a major increase in assistance in
1979 when it became obvious that a popular insurrection was under way and the
United States would not intervene. As the Sandinistas were about to make their
final push on Managua, Mr. Hernandez says he helped two Cuban military advisers
slip into Nicaragua. Two other Cubans stayed in Costa Rica near the Nicaraguan
border, where, with the acquiescence of Government officials, they oversaw the
unloading of weapons flown in every night from Cuba.

Several senior Sandinista officials have admitted they offered to help the
Salvadoran rebels with their revolution soon after Anastasio Somoza was ousted.
According to a number of former Sandinista guerrilla commanders, the Nicaraguans
were paying off a debt they had incurred in 1978. At that time, the Salvadorans
had managed to amass a remarkable war chest estimated at more than $80 million
from kidnappings, and they decided to invest $10 million in the Sandinista
revolution. The money was handed over in Costa Rica, in cash.

After the Sandinistas came to power, they allowed the five rebel groups in the
Salvadoran guerrilla front to set up their propaganda, communications, financial
and logistics offices in Managua. Men who had worked for three leading
Sandinistas - Julio Lopez, chief of the Sandinista Directorate of International
Relations; Bayardo Arce Castano, then the head of the political commission of
the National Directorate, and Tomas Borge - say that these officials helped
oversee several arms shipments to the Salvadorans. Mr. Borge denies playing such
a role. (Several former Sandinistas say that Mr. Lopez's directorate, which is
modeled after Cuba's Department of the Americas, serves as the foreign ministry
of the Sandinista Front, charged with maintaining ties to other guerrilla
groups.) The Sandinistas offered other assistance as well. According to two
former Sandinista officials, a Central American - who had previously worked in
the United States as a Cuban agent specializing in the workings of Congress and
the American press -moved to Managua where he carried out the same task for the
Sandinistas. He briefed at least one high-level Salvadoran rebel delegation that
was sent to lobby in the United States. ''He told them how to approach a
particular Congressman, what illusions to appeal to, what his likes and dislikes
were,'' says one of the former Sandinistas. ''He also advised them on how to
talk to the American press.''

There was also cooperation closer to home. A Sandinista official who worked in
the Nicaraguan Embassy in Honduras in the early 1980's says he secretly met
Salvadoran rebels there to exchange intelligence about the Honduran and
Salvadoran armies and to arrange arms shipments to El Salvador. The Salvadorans,
he says, bribed Honduran Army officers to let the weapons pass overland to El
Salvador.

As El Salvador slid to the edge of full-scale revolt, Cuba became an important
source of weapons and advice. According to a number of former senior Salvadoran
and Sandinista officials, Cuba helped arrange for the supply of at least 60
percent of the weapons that enabled the Salvadoran guerrillas to equip an army
in record time. American military officials, who say they have checked the
serial numbers of captured rifles, report that many are guns the United States
left behind in Vietnam.

Few of the arms shipments to El Salvador by way of Nicaragua have been
intercepted by Salvadoran or Honduran troops. A former Sandinista official who
says he helped arrange such shipments describes one method of eluding detection.
Rebel accomplices in Panama, Costa Rica and Nicaragua placed guns in sealed
trucks with a manifest describing the cargo as industrial goods bound for Mexico
or Guatemala. When the truck crossed into El Salvador, rebel units there
''hijacked'' the cargo by previous arrangement and removed the hidden weapons.

When the time appeared ripe for the ''final offensive,'' recall two former
Sandinista officials, top Cuban officials - including Fidel Castro and Manuel
Pineiro - took part in strategy sessions with Sandinista and Salvadoran
commanders. The Cubans and most of the Nicaraguans and the Salvadoran rebel
command believed that the Sandinista-style insurrection could be repeated in El
Salvador, and that it was important to act before Ronald Reagan became
President. Eden Pastora Gomez, then the Sandinista Deputy Minister of Defense,
disagreed.

He argued that conditions in El Salvador were very different from those in
Nicaragua. In a manner that has since been duplicated in the Philippines, the
Sandinistas had led a largely middle-class insurrection against a family
dictatorship. In El Salvador, however, not only were the guerrillas waging a war
against a military dictatorship and having to reckon with a potent Salvadoran
Army, but they could not count on the support of the middle class. Mr. Pastora
predicted disaster. The offensive was launched in January 1981. Mr. Pastora
proved correct. THE CARPIO INCIDENT: THE COSTLY MISJUDGMENT increased the
resistance of some key Salvadoran rebel leaders, especially Salvador Cayetano
Carpio, to a heavy reliance on the Cubans and Sandinistas. According to a close
aide, Mr. Carpio set up his own contacts with Vietnam, Algeria and Libya. In
1981, during a meeting in Havana, he reportedly told Fidel Castro to go to hell
because he felt the Cuban leader was meddling too much with Salvadoran affairs.

Another rebel who resisted Cuban and Sandinista influence was Dr. Fabio
Castillo, founder of the Central American Revolutionary Workers Party faction.
The most prominent leftist in Salvadoran electoral politics, Dr. Castillo had
been a member of the leftist junta that ruled El Salvador in 1961 and had run
for president in 1966. Frustrated by the ferocious attacks on his party, he
became a guerrilla organizer in 1972. ''The Cubans are arrogant,'' says Dr.
Castillo, who now lives in retirement in Costa Rica. ''Why should we fight
United States domination only to accept Cuban domination?''

The growing dispute among the Salvadoran guerrilla commanders on the future
course of the revolution and who should lead it ignited old enmities within the
Central American left. The Salvadoran rebel movement was born from a schism in
the Communist Party in the late 1960's over whether to follow Cuba's example and
begin an armed rebellion. The Communists, following the line laid down in
Moscow, called for a ''peaceful transition to socialism.'' The leader of the
dissidents -who believed that a revolution could be waged and won in El Salvador
- was Mr. Carpio, who happened to be the party's general secretary.

In 1969, he resigned, excoriating his fellow party members as ''bourgeois
reformists.'' Within a decade, he appeared to have proved his point by surfacing
as Comandante Marcial, the leader of the Marxist Popular Liberation Forces and
what was becoming a broad-based revolution. In late 1979, the Communist Party
belatedly joined the revolt when it appeared close to success, but Mr. Carpio
reportedly treated his newest ally with disdain.

Over the next few years, the United States bolstered the Salvadoran Army,
insisted on elections and called for some reforms. Had it not been for this
intervention, the guerrillas might well be run-ning El Salvador today. American
pressure on the Salvadoran Government not only blunted the rebellion, but, say
several rebels, caused Cuba and Nicaragua to become concerned that the Reagan
Administration was on the verge of retaliating against them. They counseled that
it was time to consider a negotiated end to the fighting.

Mr. Carpio and Dr. Castillo resisted the counsel. In late 1982, at the age of
62, Mr. Carpio was the most respected guerrilla leader in Central America, a
formidable man who had been fighting Salvadoran dictators for 40 years. Both he
and Dr. Castillo suspected that the Salvadoran Communist Party was lobbying for
negotiations. Mr. Carpio's reaction, recalls a senior rebel official, verged on
the irrational. His dislike of Jorge Shafik Handal, the Communist Party leader,
was intense.

But demand for greater unity and negotiations found wide support among most of
the Salvadoran rebel commanders. As the debate intensified, Dr. Castillo was
ousted from the Central American Workers Party. In January 1983, Cayetano Carpio
was stunned to find that the central committee of his group had agreed, almost
unanimously, that his views had also become obsolete. ''The truth is, Cayetano
had the concept of an orthodox Stalinist party that he would lead,'' says
Salvador Samayoa, a senior official of Mr. Carpio's faction who knew the aging
rebel leader well.

Mr. Carpio apparently believed his chief opponent was Melida Montes, the
second-highest-ranking official in his group. A 54-year-old former schoolteacher
with a keen mind for politics, she had come to support the demands for new
tactics. On April 6, 1983, she was found brutally murdered in her safe house in
Managua, stabbed 83 times with an ice pick by unknown assailants. (Miss Montes
had just returned from a visit to Cuba, en route to a party congress in El
Salvador and a final showdown with Mr. Carpio.) Mr. Pineiro flew from Havana to
help handle the crisis. Mr. Carpio was, at the time, in Libya, preparing to
cover his tracks for a clandestine return to El Salvador. Informed of the
killing, he also flew to Managua, apparently grieving, to join Nicaraguan
President Daniel Ortega Saavedra and Tomas Borge in a final military salute as
the casket holding Miss Montes's body was lowered into her grave.

But within days, convincing evidence was found - according to senior Sandinista
and Salvadoran rebel officials - showing that one of Mr. Carpio's closest
followers, Rogelio Bazzaglia, aided by a handful of accomplices, had committed
the murder. There was also evidence that Mr. Carpio had either ordered Miss
Montes's assassination, or had strongly suggested it. Mr. Borge and senior
Salvadoran rebels deny that the Cubans played a key role in the showdown that
followed. But they concede that they ordered Mr. Carpio to take an extended rest
in Cuba.

Mr. Carpio's aides say he was also ordered to divulge information on the
independent support network he had built for his rebel group. It was too much
for the fiercely independent guerrilla leader. ''They said he should go to Cuba
to take a rest, but he knew people had been jailed in Cuba,'' says one of Mr.
Carpio's followers. ''For us, the independence of the revolution was vital,
vital. We thought this was the triumph of the Cuban-Communist line.'' Rather
than comply, Mr. Carpio went home and shot himself in the heart.

Mr. Carpio - a rebel leader who was known as the ''Ho Chi Minh of Central
America'' - was summarily buried inside a Sandinista Army base. ''I felt
profoundly moved at how this man with such a striking revolutionary history was
being buried practically in silence, in secret, granted nothing more than the
tears of those closest to him,'' says Mr. Borge, recalling his former friend.

Mr. Carpio's followers were purged from the rebel movement. Several were taken
to Cuba, where they were interrogated by Cuban and Salvadoran rebel officials.
As many as 300 guerrillas left the movement. Most now lead civilian lives in
Mexico, Europe and Nicaragua. A few, invoking Mr. Carpio's name, have formed a
small splinter group that still operates in San Salvador.

As his critics had predicted, the removal of Mr. Carpio allowed the rebels to
rapidly improve their military coordination and to maul the Salvadoran Army on
the battlefield. The guerrillas also agreed on a comprehensive peace proposal to
end the fighting, and began forging closer political ties. They even declared
their intention to form a single Marxist-Leninist party.

Those triumphs have now faded in El Salvador. After the United States invaded
Grenada in late 1983, the Sandinistas asked most Salvadoran rebels to leave
Managua. These rebels have now been allowed to return, but the Sandinistas also
outraged the Salvadorans by temporarily cutting arms supplies to them, according
to captured rebel documents.

On the battlefield, the war in El Salvador has become a long test of endurance
between the guerrillas and the American-backed army. A GUERRILLA'S VOICE: LEONEL
GONZALEZ, who looks to be in his 40's, is a soft-spoken guerrilla leader who
chooses his words with care. Like Melida Montes, the murdered Salvadoran rebel
official whom he supported, he is a former schoolteacher, and, he says, he was
politicized by the despair and poverty he saw among the children he taught. Mr.
Gonzalez played a key role in the discussions that led to Mr. Carpio's downfall
and is now supreme commander of the ousted leader's group.

For the moment, Mr. Gonzalez's guerrilla unit is in a Salvadoran peasant village
on the edge of guerrilla territory. It is a forbidding land -harsh and rocky,
the trees and brush in various shades of brown now that the rainy season has
ended. Resting against a stone wall, an M-16 automatic rifle beside him and
surrounded by the central committee of his guerrilla group - all seasoned
guerrilla commanders - Mr. Gonzalez talks of the long war that lies ahead.

''We will take advantage of the discontent here,'' he says quietly, ''and offer
the alternative of the F.M.L.N.,'' referring to the Farabundo Marti National
Liberation Front. ''The roots of this crisis have not disappeared.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 4, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

A caption in The Times Magazine on April 6 with the article ''The Guerrilla
Network'' misidentified a Soviet installation in Nicaragua. The picture showed a
Soviet hospital at Chinandega that was founded in 1982 to help flood victims in
the region.

GRAPHIC: Photo of Salvadoran rebels in Chalatenango, 1984 (Star Black) (Pages
14-15); photo of Tomas Borge (Caselli/SIPA-Special Features); photo of Daniel
Oretego with Salvador Cayetano Carpio of El Salvador (Bosio/SIPA-Special
Features); photo of Soviet camp in Nicaragua (Michael Honorin/Gamma-Liaison)
(Page 17); photo of Cuban advisers embarking on plane in Nicaragua
(Saglietti/SIPA-Special Feature

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 6, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THOU SHALT NOT

BYLINE: By William F. Buckley Jr.; William F. Buckley Jr. is the editor of the
National Review. His current novel is ''High Jinx.''

SECTION: Section 6; Page 34, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 2412 words


A WHILE ago, I advocated licensing drug sales alongside a national educational
effort to persuade potential users, on purely utilitarian grounds, that, on the
whole, they were better off not amputating mind and body in exchange for quick
nervous highs. None of the reactions to my suggestion surprised me, save one, by
Dr. Mitchell Rosenthal. He is the head of Phoenix House, and he said that drugs
should continue to be illegal, pending the day when they were universally
shunned. He explained that the only way to lick marijuana, targeted merely as an
example, was to engender ''societal disapproval'' and bring on ''informal social
sanctions'' of a kind that would make marijuana simply not accepted. His
objective is nothing less than to ''revive an ethos.'' Make drug-taking . . .
''sinful''? What exactly is that?

The development of an ethos can work, and two examples come to mind. I do not
tire of recalling the distinguished and scholarly Bostonian who told me one day
at lunch that he would leave the table if he heard uttered any of the casual
anti-Semitic remarks he routinely heard uttered as a boy in the dining room of
his equally distinguished father. Americans 60 years old or older have lived
through a period during which lackadaisical anti-Semitism all but disappeared.
It happened almost as suddenly as the anachronization of the word ''Negro.''
Nobody uses the word Negro any more, except maybe the United Negro College Fund.
Another example of an evolutionized taboo has to do with garbage on coastal
waters. It isn't yet universal, but it has graduated, in my lifetime, from a
folkway to a mos. You can take the most disorderly, self-indulgent 21-year-old
sailing; he may smoke pot in his cabin while committing adultery, but he will
not throw the trash overboard. How come?

Something moral in character seems to have been vitalized, or revitalized. Why,
and by what? In the matter of anti-Semitism, one can hardly ask for a more
melodramatic propulsive agent of racial tolerance than the Holocaust. With the
exception of the Arab and the Communist worlds, the impact of anti-Semitism, run
rampant under the Nazis, has burrowed itself into the sensibilities of the moral
stylesetters in our culture and, through them, pretty much the population at
large, always excepting, well, always excepting the exceptions - redneckery
never goes away. In the matter of a respect for conservation, the idea of the
vulnerable planet worked its way into the agenda of common concerns. It became,
to be sure, one part fad, but also, one part dogma. And dogmas, strictly
defined, tend to reflect attitudes about sin.

The moral theologians of yesteryear used the term ut in pluribus (perceptible by
all) to tell us that moral laws, if they hoped to grip the moral imagination,
needed to be popularly plausible, and I am here saying that the prospect of
racial genocide, as of a ravaged planet, has actually engaged the moral
attention even of easily distracted people, forming a habit of mind. And such
habits of mind, because they come down to us without mere reference to
pain-pleasure criteria, are of a character that qualifies as moral-theological,
entitling us to say that we feel it is somehow ''sinful'' to transgress on what
one might call commandments: Thou shalt not discriminate against someone because
he is Jewish. Thou shalt not heedlessly exploit nature.

So then, reflection on what it is that ''happened'' begins, I think, by
acknowledging that the capacity to recognize particular habits of conduct as
sinful continues to reside in us. Perhaps I say this as an act of faith,
speaking as a believing Christian. But non-Christians, and even atheists, are,
for the most part, prepared to acknowledge that, whatever the epistemology by
which they reach moral decisions, most people are potential clients of
argumentation that is extra-instrumentally moral. For instance, thoughtful folk
will ponder the moral question whether a fetus is a human being, an intellectual
acknowledgment of which would obviously overwhelm utilitarian arguments about
the sovereignty of maternal inclinations having to do with life or death
questions. What causes us to wonder is the desuetude of the word ''sin.'' It is
as infrequently heard, outside our churches, as the word God, and, of course,
the terms tend to be associated. THE THREE GENERIC sanctions that cause
societies to cohere are social, legal and divine. It is hardly difficult to give
examples of a deed that offends one of the sanctions, but not the other two. One
can arrive tieless at a formal party without arousing the police or, one
supposes, divine displeasure. One can, illegally, transport bottles of Scotch
for sale from Connecticut to New York without affronting one's neighbors or
one's God. And one can take in vain the name of the Lord without incurring civil
or social disapproval.

On the other hand, the three sanctions often make common cause. Murder, rape,
theft are only the most obvious examples. The question before the house,
however, has to do with that category of offenses against which social, and even
legal, sanctions are deliquescent. In most municipalities one can smoke
marijuana with de facto legal impunity; and in most middle- and upper-class
(''progressive'') households, the weed is smoked with scant social oppobrium.
The use of marijuana is not, to my knowledge, specifically proscribed by
Judeo-Christianity, but this is so, one supposes, only because no episcopal
authority of note has got around to the particularization of the generic law
against gluttony: it reasonably follows that to dope the mind is in the same
category of excess as to stuff the body, and, therefore, a deadly sin.

But what if religious sanctions against the use of marijuana were to be made
explicit? Would we . . . well . . . notice it? When Dr. Rosenthal talks about
vitalizing an ethos against the use of marijuana -made explicit by declining to
tolerate young junkies coming to your house to smoke there -he does not mean
that our ministers, rabbis and priests, inveighing against drug-taking, would
breathe life into a social sanction, much as the sanction against throwing
refuse into the water was vivified by the work of Rachel Carson and those others
of the natural ministry who made us conscious of the tenderness of the planet.
If the Pope, speaking ex cathedra, were to declare sinful the use of marijuana,
its use by Catholics would diminish. But in general, an effective ethos needs
nowadays to be engineered by extratheological asseverations. Whatever became of
sin?

The highly touted Playboy philosophy is ever so much in point here. Some years
ago, the chaplain to Yale University, the Rev. William Sloane Coffin, was asked
to comment on the, rampantly, free sex that characterized the Woodstock
generation. Mr. Coffin would rather have bombed the dikes in North Vietnam than
answer the question by saying that the Judeo-Christian code specifies monogamy
as, well, the ''code'' by which one measures sexual behavior which is ''right,''
distinguishing it from that which is ''wrong.''

What Mr. Coffin said was that anything - anything -can be overdone. For
instance, he explained, drinking a beer won't hurt you, but you have got to
guard against becoming an alcoholic. The questioner was supposed to derive from
this that a Yale student should not have more than one concubine at a time,
because out there in the murky psychological world that is the equivalent of
alcoholism of the mind. Take too many lovers or mistresses and you deprive sex
of its sublimer meaning, much as if you chug-a-lug a bottle of Mouton-Rothschild
1959 you dilute the pleasure of it. The Reverend had, of course, some very good
points here - psychological, sociological, and even biological - but they didn't
have very much to do with sin. N HIS ESSAY ON SIN in ''The Great Ideas, a
Syntopicon of Great Books of the Western World,'' Mortimer J. Adler gives us
this conspectus: ''In the pagan and Judeo-Christian conceptions of sin, the
fundamental meaning seems to depend upon the relation of man to the gods or to
God, whether that itself be considered in terms of law or love. The vicious act
may be conceived as one which is contrary to nature or reason. The criminal act
may be conceived as a violation of the law of man, injurious to the welfare of
the state or to its members. Both may involve the notions of responsibility and
fault. Both may involve evil and wrongdoing. But unless the act transgresses the
law of God, it is not sinful. The divine law which is transgressed may be the
natural law that God instills in human reason, but the act is sinful if the
person who commits the act turns away from God to the worship or love of other
things.''

That is pretty straightforward stuff, and would certainly account for the
disappearance of ''sin'' when the word is used other than as a metaphor. It is,
however, worth noting as a sign of latent life in the word that, reaching for
final gravity with which to denounce or describe a particular situation, one
hears such things as, ''John's treatment of Jane was really . . . sinful.'' We
are here suggesting that behavior ultimately offensive is properly described not
merely as illegal or antisocial, but, verily, as opposed to the laws of God
Himself.

And then, too, the idea of expiation is not entirely foreign to our culture. In
formal religious circumstances, Catholics go to confession. There they enumerate
their sins, plead contrition, and are given a ''penance'' and contingent
forgiveness. That penance dissipates their sin partially, and in all cases
removes from the penitent the mortal burden of a mortal sin that would consign
him to eternal damnation. By Catholic arithmetic, there is left owing expiation
in another world - the time spent in purgatory - before one is fit to enter into
the company of God. Judges in criminal law, under pressure to lighten the prison
load and to mete out more imaginative punishments than time in jail, have
recently shown signs of inventiveness - a hundred hours of community service,
that kind of thing. Perhaps one day not far off a judge will give a young man
caught defacing a synagogue, as an alternative to the statutorily permissible
one year in jail, an assignment of a half dozen books of holy Jewish literature
to study, from which it would be hoped that the meaning of his desecration would
dawn on him. That would be an example of the secular law reaching out to help
the divine law. HAT HAS happened to sin is the evanescence of the religious
sanction. Irving Kristol has written that the most important political
development of the 19th century was the wholesale loss of religious faith, the
implication of which was that man's natural idealism turned to utopianism, which
always boils down to ideology. Enter the 20th century. The loss of religious
sanctions imposes on the remaining sanctions a heavier weight than they are
designed to handle, and when that happens, and society gets serious about
something, it has recourse only to force. Nelson A. Rockefeller's solution to
drugs was to take a drug user, put him in jail and throw away the keys. The
great totalitarian triumvirate - Hitler, Stalin, Mao -took the legal sanction
further than Cotton Mather took hellfire; or, put another way, in imposing their
sanctions they reified hellfire on earth.

And, elsewhere, Kristol touched a grace note of piquancy wonderfully, awesomely
grave in its implications. As far as he could figure out, he said, in the United
States a man could have sexual intercourse with an 18-year-old girl on a public
stage just so long as she was being paid the minimum wage. Social sanctions
against disgusting behavior - disgusting? - lose vigor if they go uncodified,
and even then they lose vigor if the ethos that supports the laws is attenuated.
''When one asks how a sense of guilt arises in anyone,'' Freud said in
''Civilization and Its Discontents,'' ''one is told something one cannot
dispute: people feel guilty -pious people call it 'sinful' -when they have done
something they know to be 'bad.' But then one sees how little this answer tells
one.'' Legal constraints surrender, up against the force of massive contumacy.
As well, at this point, as stopping the spread of pornography in America as
during Prohibition one could hope to stop the use of liquor. SIN SITS IN THE
BACK OF the bus. But it is still there, a presence in the conscience, and this
is so probably because it was so intended, by the First Mover, that man - in
pluribus - should harbor the capacity to distinguish between right and wrong,
and that he should feel something between an itch and a compulsion to exercise
that capacity:

There is a famine in the land, and you harbor a supply of grain. But you harbor,
also, a secret: You happen to know that a caravan of supplies is on its way and
will arrive within a few days.

Can you charge for your supply of grain a very high price, as if it alone stood
between your client and starvation?

Yes, you are at liberty to do it, St. Thomas Aquinas said, but it would be
wrong. Wrong?  Why?

Because it is wrong, sinful; Res Ipsa Loquitur! (The matter speaks for itself.)
And you shouldn't need Immanuel Kant to explain it to you. I said over the air
not too long ago that I believed in metaphysical equality, that otherwise there
was no way I could be made to believe that Mother Teresa and Sister Boom Boom
were equal. I have a letter from someone who says he does not understand, and
cannot find in any dictionary, the use of the word ''metaphysical'' to define in
any intelligible way the word ''equality.'' Why, I will write him, it means,
here, equal in the eyes of God, and that is all the explanation I need: equal
beyond measurement. I'd find it sinful to reason otherwise, even about Sister
Boom Boom.

It isn't only Pope John Paul II who speaks of the necessity of a spiritual
revival in order to forward civilized life. Years ago, the late Prof. Richard M.
Weaver pointed out the obvious, which so often so much needs pointing out;
namely, that Marxism and Communism are redemptive creeds, while liberalism has
no eschatology, no ultimate sense of consummation. Lacking that, it is at a
grave disadvantage contending with secular religions which offer absolute
achievements to their flock. The rediscovery of sin would cause us to look up
and note the infinite horizons that beckon us toward better conduct, better
lives, nobler visions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 6, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CAPITALIST CRUSADERS

BYLINE: By Michael Pollan; Michael Pollan is executive editor of Harper's
magazine.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26, Column 5; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 718 words


INVENTING REALITY The Politics of the Mass Media. By Michael Parenti. 258 pp.
New York: St. Martin's Press. $16.95. FREEDOM of the press, A. J. Liebling
wrote, belongs to the man who owns one. Taking Liebling's maxim as his point of
departure, Michael Parenti, the author of ''Democracy for the Few,'' has written
a forceful though flawed critique of the American news media. By documenting
patterns of conservative bias in a dozen major news stories in the printed and
broadcast press, ''Inventing Reality'' provides a valuable rebuttal to the
drumbeat of criticism of the news media from the right. Unfortunately, Mr.
Parenti is so simplistic and doctrinaire in accounting for this bias that he
makes his book easy to dismiss.

The function of the press, Mr. Parenti says, is to ''recreate a view of reality
supportive of existing social and economic class power.'' Major newspapers and
networks accomplish this by advancing the class interests of their corporate
owners, who dictate the politics of the press. Only editors who share their
outlook get promoted; reporters, eager to please editors, censor themselves. The
result is news organizations that favor ''management over labor . . . the
affluent over the poor, private enterprise over socialism . . . anticommunism
and arms-race militarism over disarmament.'' Most of the news is little more
than ''ruling class propaganda.''

''Inventing Reality'' is best when it is most specific, judging the performance
of the press against its own claims of independence, balance and neutrality. In
a strong chapter on reporting from the third world, Mr. Parenti compares news
coverage of the 1984 elections in Nicaragua and El Salvador and finds a double
standard. Both elections were far from perfect, but the news media nevertheless
managed to find democracy aborning in El Salvador, and a Communist sham in
Nicaragua. Following the Administration's lead, the press interpreted a strong
showing by the Sandinistas as proof the fix was in, while citing the heavy
turnout in El Salvador as evidence of democratic vitality. Omitted from
virtually every story, Mr. Parenti found, was the fact that voting in El
Salvador is compulsory.

Elsewhere in the book, Mr. Parenti shows how even the press's putative
objectivity can contribute to unbalanced coverage. In one increasingly common
pattern he examines, the Administration makes sensational charges that receive
prominent and ''objective'' (i.e., uncritical) attention in the news media: for
example, the 1981 white paper alleging Soviet involvement in Central America, or
repeated charges of a Soviet ''terror network.'' Yet as the Administration's
story gradually falls apart, the belated refutations receive only scant
coverage, and rarely get reported on television at all. ''The truth,'' Mr.
Parenti says, ''never catches up with the lie.'' He cites these cases as
evidence of the news media's ''compliance'' in government ''disinformation
campaigns.'' MR. PARENTI paints the press in such broad, Marxist strokes that he
ignores many details. He cannot, for example, adequately account for episodes of
courage and independence, as during Vietnam and Watergate. It is not enough to
say ''the media sometimes tell the truth in spite of themselves.'' Mr. Parenti
fails to see that, in addition to promoting their own political views, newspaper
owners have an interest in selling newspapers, which enforces some degree of
credibility and even populism. Even Liebling said that the influence of the
profit system on the press is not entirely negative. ''There is always important
money to be made,'' he wrote, ''by standing up for the underdog.''

In excoriating news organizations for their failure to challenge the
Administration vigorously, Mr. Parenti overlooks a key feature of American
journalism. For better or worse, the press generally defines the news as what
politicians say. When there are few dissenting voices in the political arena
there are likely to be just as few in the news media. If the press seems less
than vibrant today, the lack of a vibrant opposition party is surely more to
blame than Michael Parenti's ''government-media propagandists.'' Flawed as it
is, the press is probably a truer mirror of our politics than its critics on
either the left or right would have us believe.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 6, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHILDREN'S BOOKS;
Bookshelf

SECTION: Section 7; Page 21, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 236 words


Additional titles of interest:

OAF. By Julia Cunningham.

Illustrated by Peter Sis. Knopf. $10.95. (Ages 8 to 12) On his 8th birthday the
simple boy called Oaf is given three gifts by his beloved aunt: one word
(''fifty-fifty''), one cap (of scarlet leather) and one promise (of a treasure).
With assorted animal companions, including a dog, a cat, a rat and a fox, the
lad sets off on an often perilous adventure that is told with charm and has a
soothing end.

THE ANGEL WITH A MOUTH-ORGAN. By Christobel Mattingley. Illustrated by Astra
Lacis. Holiday House. $12.95. (Ages 8 to 12) As they decorate the Christmas
tree, the children ask their pregnant mother to tell again the terrible story of
her own Latvian family's flight from the terrors of World War II. The story
draws on the illustrator's own experiences, yet the illustrations are more
delicate and less stirring than the text.

MAKING A NEW HOME IN AMERICA. By Maxine Rosenberg. Illustrated by George Ancona.
Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. $10.25. (Ages 6 to 9) This is a photo essay for young
readers about contemporary immigration, looking at the lives of children who
have recently come from Japan, Guyana, India, Cuba and Vietnam in a wide range
of social circumstances. The text is lucid on the differences the children have
experienced and positive about their families' achievements in this country and
commitment to traditional American dreams.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 6, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SELLING TO THE COUNTY'S FOREIGN MARKET

BYLINE: By PENNY SINGER

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 10, Column 3; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1348 words


WHEN mortgage interest rates dropped in the county, activity at the Furumoto
Realty offices in Tokyo quickened. It is there that Japanese businessmen,
scheduled for job assignments in the United States, study property listings in
Hartsdale, Scarsdale, Rye, Pound Ridge and Harrison, and sometimes make
decisions to buy houses sight-unseen before they leave Japan.

The preselling of homes and offices in the United States to Japanese clients is
one of the marketing strategies of Tak Furumoto, the president of Furumoto
Realty, whose major office in the county is in Scarsdale.

Mr. Furumoto, who started his company 12 years ago with a capital investment of
$180, generated $200 million in sales last year. He now has nine offices,
including three in Westchester (Hartsdale, Harrison and Scarsdale), four in the
greater New York City area, one in Hong Kong and the one in Tokyo.

Mr. Furumoto was born in an internment camp in California in 1944. At the war's
end, his parents took their five children to live with relatives in Hiroshima.
When Mr. Furumoto was 12 years old, the family returned to California and Mr.
Furumoto later graduated from the University of California at Los Angeles.

''I have always considered myself an American who lived for a time in Japan,''
said Mr. Furumoto, who is a Vietnam veteran. ''My mother was also born in the
United States. I don't remember anything about the internment camp, although my
older sister does. My parents never talked about it. I know my father lost his
wholesale produce company and was never able to achieve the same business level
after the war. He couldn't get back what he had lost. I only wish my parents had
lived to see my company now.''

Mr. Furumoto got his start in real estate by working part-time renting
apartments to Japanese families in Fort Lee, N.J.

''It was a time when Japanese companies began opening offices in New York,'' he
said. ''Fort Lee had a Japanese community and as someone who could speak
Japanese and who understood Japanese customs, I was able to get a following. In
1974 my wife Carolyn and I decided to take a chance and form our own real estate
company to serve Japanese customers, who were coming into the area in large
numbers.'' His wife also is an American whose parents are Japanese.

''First it was difficult to even get listings,'' he recalled, ''but we knocked
on doors and more doors and eventually we got business.''

As the number of Japanese companies in the New York area increased, more and
more Japanese executives arrived. Mr. Furumoto opened his first Westchester
office in Hartsdale in 1981. Despite the recession and high interest rates that
characterized the early 80's, he said, the office was successful.

''Japanese executives wanted prestigious communities with good school systems,''
he said. ''They liked Westchester very much. Also language and service are very
important when you do business with the Japanese. They are used to much more
service than Americans. I would act as interpreter for Japanese housewives who
didn't understand American customs. I would register their children in school,
take them to the doctor and even help them buy furniture or cars. I soon began
to realize that there were other ethnic groups besides the Japanese that needed
special attention, and I thought 'Why not sell homes to other groups as well?'
''

Mr. Furumoto began seeking out sales people with special language skills,
natives of other countries. ''We trained them and helped them qualify for the
real-estate license test,'' he said. ''Between them, our Westchester sales
people speak 10 languages, including Chinese, Indian, Greek, Portuguese and
Korean. In Westchester the Korean market is now most active.''

Korean customers, many of whom have retail operations, are well-educated and
affluent, he said. ''Many are able to buy houses in Scarsdale.''

Yet it is the Chinese market that Mr. Furumoto believes will be the most active
in the future. ''We have already rented an apartment house to the Chinese
delegation members in Queens,'' he said. ''And we have the office in Hong Kong
already in position.''

Sus Tokunaga, who manages Furumoto's three Westchester offices, came to the
United States 10 years ago. ''I met Sus at a poker game at the home of a
friend,'' Mr. Furumoto said. ''In the four years he has worked for us, he has
tripled production in Westchester.''

With the recent opening of an office on Fifth Avenue in Manhattan, Mr. Furumoto
began seeking a larger share of commercial leasing. ''We did $35 million in
commercial real estate last year,'' he said. ''Some of it is leases for back
office space for Japanese corporations in Westchester.''

Knowing the customs and tastes of Japanese businessmen, Mr. Furumoto said, has
helped him in the competitive commercial market.

''Japanese companies prefer to own, rather than to lease, headquarters buildings
in foreign countries,'' he said. ''Right now we are looking for 5 to 15 acres in
Westchester for a Japanese company that wants to build an office here.''

In addition to real-estate brokerage and property management, Mr. Furumoto has
begun to make his company known in development and construction.

''We are in the process of completing a three-story, 20-unit condominium in
Tuckahoe,'' he said. ''It is a joint venture with a financing partner in Japan.
We're also involved in a mortgage-brokering company, Stratford Equity, in White
Plains and eventually we would like to go into mortgage banking. Also in Japan,
we have an office that caters to American businessmen who need housing in
Japan.''

In the course of commercial leasing activity, the Furumoto firm has rented
properties to a number of Japanese concerns that have sprung up to serve the
Japanese market in the United States.

''They range from Japanese markets that stock the same type of foodstuffs found
in Japan to restaurants, travel agencies and specialized shops all geared to the
Japanese population,'' he said.

One such business, Hair Studio Naka in Harrison, is owned by Ryoji Nakada, a
hair stylist, and his former customer, Hiroko Takahasi, who is now his partner.

Mrs. Takahasi lives in Chappaqua with her husband, a broker with Drexel Burnham
& Lambert, and the couple's 14-year-old twin sons.

''We have been in the United States four years now,'' she said. ''We expect to
stay another four years. In Japan, I am a home economist, but it is difficult
for me to do that here. Yet I have a lot of free time,'' she added, explaining
why she went into business with Mr. Nakada. ''My husband works long days in New
York City. Our sons are at the Horace Greeley School all week and go to Japanese
school in Harrison on weekends. I wanted something to do.''

The shop, designed with Japanese furnishings, complete with Japanese language
magazines, is run by Japanese operators who give the traditional head massage
with every shampoo. It has, according to Mrs. Takahasi, drawn Japanese customers
from Connecticut and New Jersey as well as from Westchester.

''I make appointments and run the shop,'' she said. ''We follow Japanese custom
by keeping open on Sundays, which is our biggest day.''

As for Mr. Nakada, he, too, is gratified by the acceptance the shop has
received. ''We have only been open four months, and we have many steady Japanese
men and women customers. What is even more pleasing is that we are getting a lot
of American and French customers who like the Japanese technique. We started by
marketing only to the Japanese community, now we will market to the larger
community.''

Mr. Nakada, who recently moved to Harrison, said he first came to the United
States as a tourist but now intends to stay here permanently.

Mr. Tokunaga said that he believes he has more opportunity here and that he,
too, plans to stay permanently.

''It is much harder to be an entrepreneur in Japan,'' Mr. Furumoto said. ''There
is so much competition for a limited market. Here I expect to increase business
by 50 percent next year. In the United States, you have the biggest market for
everything in the world.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Tak Furumoto, president of Furumoto Realty, with Sus Tokunaga,
manager of the company's Westchester offices; Photo of Hiroko Takahashi with
Ryoji Nakada, co-owners of Hair Studo Naka

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 7, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. AGAIN SEEKING TO INDUCE ALLIES TO ACT ON LIBYA

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1058 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 6


In the aftermath of the two terrorist bombings in Europe last week, the United
States will press its European allies again to take political and economic
actions against Libya, a senior Reagan Administration official said today.

He said the Administration was concerned that Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the
Libyan leader, not be allowed to portray the current situation as a strictly
Libyan-American conflict. He said this perception only won sympathy for Colonel
Qaddafi.

Among steps to be discussed with the allies will be the ouster of Libyan
diplomats known to have used their diplomatic immunity to funnel explosives into
Europe and to check American installations as a prelude to possible terrorist
attack, the official said.

'Allies Are Rather Slow'

William J. Casey, Director of Central Intelligence, said at a meeting of the
American-Israel Public Affairs Committee today that while the allies were
cooperating more on security and intelligence against terrorism, they had failed
to develop ''a concerted diplomatic action, economic and political sanctions to
evoke a penalty on the states which participate in state-sponsored terrorism.''

''Many of our friends and allies are rather slow on that,'' he said. ''We can
only hope and believe that the recent outrageous character of terrorist attacks
in all countries will stimulate cooperation of that kind.''

Much of Mr. Casey's presentation was an attack on the Soviet Union for trying to
establish ''bridgeheads'' in such places as Nicaragua, Ethiopia, Libya, Syria,
Angola, Afghanistan and Vietnam. He said the new Soviet leader, Mikhail S.
Gorbachev, was actively engaged in that effort.

''We have a new Soviet leader, Mr. Gorbachev, and already a hallmark of his
regime is an intensified attempt to nail down and cement these bridgeheads, make
them permanent,'' he said.His direct criticism of Mr. Gorbachev seemed
inconsistent with the Reagan Administration's avoidance of personal attacks on
the Soviet leader at a time when plans for a new summit meeting are expected to
be discussed in coming days.

The subject of whether United States allies would expel Libyan officials was
touched on by Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, as he flew back to
Washington from California on Air Force One. He noted that on Saturday, France
expelled two Libyans for anti-American plotting. ''Surely it's advantageous to
get rid of people who are plotting terrorist activity,'' he said.

The senior Administration official said that after terrorist attacks at airports
in Rome and Vienna in December the United States had tried to persuade the
allies to expel all Libyan officials from Europe. But he said Deputy Secretary
of State John C. Whitehead had failed to get the Europeans to agree either to
expel the Libyans or to join the economic boycott begun by Washington. There are
no plans for such a request again, he said.

Libyan 'Handwriting'

Since the bombing in a West Berlin discotheque on Saturday morning seemed to
have Libyan ''handwriting'' on it, the official said, there was a particular
desire to see the West German Government expel many, if not all, of the Libyans
in Bonn.

But he said that the bombing probably originated with the Libyan Mission in East
Berlin accredited to East Germany and that conversations were now going on with
that Government. A ban on Libyans crossing into West Berlin from East Berlin is
being considered, he said. No specific evidence of Libyan involvement has been
produced, however.

Mr. Speakes, asked aboard Air Force One what the United States intended to do
next, replied, ''Just continue to work with allies.''

''We continue to keep our antennae up as far as terrorist threats on a worldwide
basis, but we continue to seek ways to improve our international cooperation,''
he said.

Robert B. Oakley, the head of the State Department's office of counterterrorism,
said American efforts to mobilize international cooperation had failed because
others said, ''Oh, this is an American crusade; this is an American obsession.''

Noting that of the 928 people killed in terrorist incidents last year, only 23
were Americans, Mr. Oakley said on the CBS News program ''Face the Nation'' that
the problem ''is much more out there than it is here, and only with the
cooperation of other governments are we going to be able to get it under
control.''

''It's not something the U.S. can do by itself,'' he said.

Mr. Oakley also said that Americans should not be discouraged from traveling to
Europe and the Middle East because of the latest incidents.

'We Shouldn't Be Scared Off'

''I think that we cannot allow the terrorists to force us into a fortress
America,'' he said. ''We have too many things to do abroad. We have national
interests abroad. We also have business abroad. We shouldn't be scared off by
the terrorists. We shouldn't lock ourselves in a rose garden and then say we're
not going to leave the United States until there is an end to terrorism abroad.

''We should get out there and confront it, working with others. We need to raise
the awareness of European governments.''

Last Wednesday, a bomb exploded in a Trans World Airlines plane flying from Rome
to Athens, killing four Americans. On Saturday morning, a bomb exploded in a
West Berlin discotheque, killing an American soldier and a Turkish woman and
wounding 204 people.

Bombing 'Fit the Pattern'

So far, investigators have been unable to pin the blame definitively on any
country, but Mr. Oakley said the United States had ''suspicions'' linking the
Berlin attack to Libya. He said that the bombing ''fit the pattern'' of
Libyan-inspired actions.

He said that there was less than ''conclusive evidence that can link it to
Libya,'' but added, ''There have been a number of surveillances conducted of
American embassies by Libyans, Libyan People's Bureau members in a number of
countries around the world, and so the Libyans are beginning to come out in the
open.''

After noting that Colonel Qaddafi said in January that he was training people to
carry out attacks on American targets, Mr. Oakley said, ''We take seriously what
Qaddafi says, even though he's a madman in some respects.''

''Hitler was also a madman in some respects,'' he said, ''and there was a lot of
trouble when people didn't take seriously what he was saying.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 7, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THROUGH A SOVIET LENS: GOMORRAH ON HUDSON

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 898 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, April 6


New York City, never depicted very favorably in the Soviet Union, was the
subject of a scathingly critical documentary that was broadcast on Soviet
television last Wednesday evening in prime time.

The film, called ''The Man From Fifth Avenue,'' portrayed New York as a modern
Gomorrah, focusing on the misery of the homeless, the squalor of Times Square
and the presence of prostitution, drug addiction, pornography and poverty.

The 90-minute documentary was one of the longest examinations of American life
ever shown on television here, Russians and Western diplomats said. It was
written by Leonid M. Zamyatin, the Communist Party's chief spokesman, and
Genrikh Borovik, the journalist and playwright.

The film was consistent with the common Soviet portrait of America as a corrupt,
immoral society torn by racial tensions and economic inequities and controlled
by ruthless capitalists.

Film Is the Talk of Moscow

But apparently because of its unusual length and intense images, the
documentary, which is also being shown at a small Moscow movie theater, has been
widely discussed by Muscovites.

Some said they were appalled by the number of homeless people shown in New York
and the disparity between the rich and the poor pictured on Fifth Avenue.

''You can have your America,'' a Muscovite told an American student after
watching the film.

Other Muscovites said they were amazed that Government-controlled television
would show so much of New York. Several Russians said they were impressed by
buildings like the Trump Tower and glimpses of abundant consumer goods.

''Is that what New York is really like?'' a Muscovite asked an American.

Break-Dancing in Times Square

Another said break-dancing by black teen-agers in Times Square looked as good as
any performance by the Moiseyev Folk Dance Ensemble.

Soviet officials criticized American movies and television programs in January
for portraying the Soviet Union in a negative way, citing films such as ''Rambo:
First Blood Part II'' as part of an anti-Soviet campaign.

Filmed primarily in Manhattan last November, the documentary revolved around a
man identified as Joe Mauri and described as an unemployed New Yorker, who took
the Soviet cameras on a guided tour of the underside of the city. Mr. Mauri was
the subject of news reports in New York last August when his landlord on the
West Side obtained a judge's permission to evict him because she wanted his room
as a sewing room.

Flashing back and forth between shots of abandoned blocks in Harlem and affluent
scenes along Fifth Avenue, and dwelling on the peep shows and pornographic films
on 42d Street, the film followed Mr. Mauri as he described the difficulties of
living in New York on a low income.

''If you don't have money, forget it,'' Mr. Mauri said, standing in front of the
Plaza Hotel. ''If I try to go in there, they'll throw me out like a dog.''

Window Shopping on Fifth Avenue

Reporting that he was being evicted from his midtown, one-room apartment, Mr.
Mauri led viewers on a window-shopping excursion along Fifth Avenue near
Rockefeller Center, pointing out the opulent displays of clothing, jewelry and
electronic equipment.

Along the way, he stopped to talk with homeless people sitting near heating
grates, surrounded by piles of garbage.

''Most people would prefer if the garbage trucks hauled away these homeless
citizens and dumped them in the river,'' he said.

He then headed up what appeared to be Park Avenue around 72d Street, stopping to
ask doormen about the availability and price of apartments.

''The cheapest thing we have is a one-bedroom for $375,000,'' one doorman said.
Mr. Mauri shook his head.

Pro Wrestling and Vietnam

Mr. Mauri's tour of Manhattan was interrupted several times to show film clips
of a company that makes stretch limousines, an interlude of professional
wrestling, featuring two behemoths cracking heads, as well as scenes of American
soldiers in Vietnam beating a prisoner and burning down a village.

The film also showed people sniffing cocaine, prostitutes looking for customers
in midtown Manhattan, members of the Ku Klux Klan burning a cross and United
States Air Force planes flying over an unidentified Central American country.

''They don't have human rights here,'' Mr. Mauri said, reporting that he had no
choice but to leave his one-room apartment and join the ranks of the homeless.

A black woman, who said she was imprisoned unfairly, told a Soviet television
correspondent that there were thousands of political prisoners in the United
States.

If He Had a Hammock

The documentary concluded with shots of Mr. Mauri walking through Central Park
describing how he wished he could hang a hammock between the branches of a large
tree and live there.

The documentary was introduced by Mike Davidow, the Moscow correspondent of the
The Daily World, a newspaper published by the Communist Party, U.S.A.

Mr. Davidow told viewers that ''what is most horrible'' about Mr. Mauri's life
''is not that he's going to be without a home, as terrible as that is, but that
he lives in a society without a soul, a society that doesn't care.''

He added: ''That's the tragedy in our country. It's a tragedy because there's no
reason for it. Our country is a rich country, a beautiful country. There is no
need for the kind of suffering you will see in this film.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of frames of homeless man and child break-dancing from Soviet
film ''The Man from Fifth Avenue''

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 7, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NICARAGUA AT TOP OF LIST FOR RETURN OF CONGRESS TOMORROW

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1199 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 6


When Congress returns to Capitol Hill from its Easter recess on Tuesday,
legislators are likely to adopt a compromise that allocates some military aid to
the guerrillas trying to oust the Sandinista Government in Nicaragua. The real
fight will be over whether Congress directs President Reagan to negotiate
seriously with the Sandinistas before the money is released.

The Nicaraguan issue surged to the top of the Congressional agenda last month,
as the House rejected Mr. Reagan's request for $100 million in rebel aid by a
narrow margin, 222 to 210. The Senate then approved the request, 53 to 47, and
the House is scheduled to renew consideration of the matter on April 15.

Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., who has been traveling in Latin America in the
recess, was forced to schedule the second vote to retain his slim margin against
the Reagan request. Many lawmakers who opposed Mr. Reagan last month are uneasy
about a position that cuts off all aid to the rebels, called contras in
Nicaragua, and they want the chance to vote again on various compromises that
are now being polished.

Two Lesser Priorities

At a staff meeting in California last week, Mr. Reagan decided that the aid
question would be his major legislative priority this spring. Right behind are
the Federal budget and overhauling the nation's tax code. In addition, the
legislators will be considering in the weeks ahead such issues as gun control
laws, aid to rebels in Angola, and Federal judicial appointments.

While Mr. Reagan seems to have the upper hand on contra aid, Congress is clearly
more resistant to his budget priorities. At the staff meeting, Mr. Reagan
reportedly decided to bar any compromise with Congress on his two basic budget
demands: continued growth of his military build-up, and no new tax revenues.

But the spending blueprint that emerged from the Republican-controlled Budget
Committee differs sharply on both issues. Led by Senator Pete V. Domenici, the
New Mexico Republican who presides over the panel, a bipartisan majority adopted
a plan that would cut the President's military budget $25 billion in the 1987
fiscal year while calling for $18.7 billion in new revenues.

Twenty-four of the 53 Senate Republicans, most of them conservatives, then
signed a letter to Senator Bob Dole, the majority leader, endorsing Mr. Reagan's
priorities and rejecting the Budget Committee's. Mr. Dole's quandary is made
worse because 22 Republican-held Senate seats are up for re-election in seven
months, and many incumbents do not want to vote against programs that are
popular at home.

Postponement Is Likely

As a result, the majority leader will probably postpone floor debate on next
year's budget until at least April 15, the day when Congress is supposed to
complete a final document. But since the legislators did not pass the final
piece of this year's budget until March 20, they are obviously used to missing
deadlines.

House Democrats are enjoying the discord among Senate Republicans and are in no
rush to join the budget battle. Representative William H. Gray 3d, Democrat of
Pennsylvania, who is chairman of the House Budget Committee, says he will wait
for Senate action before starting his own drafting sessions.

The Senate is also the focus of attention on the tax revision measure, which
passed the House late last year. Senator Bob Packwood of Oregon, the Finance
Committee chairman, plans steady work on a bill to reduce individual tax rates
by nullifying many existing breaks and loopholes.

Most analysts are still predicting that a measure to overhaul the tax structure
will become law before Congress goes home next fall, but the drive has lost some
of its steam since Congress adopted a measure last year mandating a balanced
budget by 1991. Under that law, which is now being tested in the Supreme Court,
the budget deficit must come down to $144 billion next year. Otherwise,
automatic spending cuts will go into effect.

Value of the Effort Debated

Many legislators believe that eventually Congress will have to raise revenues to
meet its deficit-reduction goals. So they question whether it is worth the
effort to produce a tax-revision measure that does not contribute new income to
the Treasury.

In one sense, the contra aid issue has started to generate a consensus on
Capitol Hill. Last month's debate demonstrated that most members of Congress are
looking for some sort of middle ground between two hard-edged positions: no aid
at all, or the aid Mr. Reagan wants with no strings attached.

The search for a middle ground has been complicated by the memory of Cuba and
Vietnam. Those who back Mr. Reagan say Cuba is the appropriate lesson for
Nicaragua, and that the United States should halt Communist expansion before it
spreads. Critics point to the experience in Southeast Asia, and say that weapons
will inevitably lead to military advisers, and then combat troops.

As they grapple with these conflicting historical models, most express confusion
and uncertainty over the course of policy. A majority seems to favor an approach
that uses aid to the guerrillas as leverage on the Sandinistas to negotiate, not
as a military end in itself.

He Agrees to Delay of Money

In order to win some wavering votes, Mr. Reagan has already agreed to modify his
original request and delay the release of $75 million for three months while
attempts at negotiation go forward. Under this plan, the $25 million would be
released immediately for the purchase of nonmilitary goods, plus defensive
weapons such as portable antiaircraft missiles.

But two key questions will have to be decided by the House. In the waiting
period, should the Administration be mandated to talk directly to the
Sandinistas? Many critics of Mr. Reagan say such talks are essential to any
progress toward peace. The White House adamantly opposes such a requirement
unless the Sandinistas are also required to talk directly to the contras.
Critics reply that any mandate for talks between the Sandinistas and the contras
would poison the atmosphere, since the Nicaraguan Government has long refused to
bargain with the rebels.

The second question is what happens when the waiting period is over. The
Administration wants the right to use the funds as long as Mr. Reagan certifies
that the Sandinistas were not interested in talking seriously. Opponents argue
that Congress should evaluate the character of the talks and vote again whether
to release the funds. The White House replies that if Congress has the right to
vote again, the Sandinistas will be under no pressure to talk.

Underlying this disagreement is a deeper issue. Many Members of Congress have
argued that the only realistic aim of negotiations should be ''containment'' of
the Sandinistas and removal of foreign bases and advisers. The Administration
argues that any bargaining should also aim at domestic reforms in such areas as
freedom of the press and religion.

Moreover, some in Congress suspect that the real aim of the Reagan
Administration is not a negotiated settlement that leaves the Sandinistas in
power, but a military campaign, perhaps with American troops, that uproots the
Government.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Senator Pete V. Domenici (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 7, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

PUTTING THE V.I.P.'S ON CANVAS

BYLINE: By BARBARA GAMAREKIAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 953 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 6


Along with the power and perks that accompany the office of the Presidency, or a
top Cabinet position, usually comes the opportunity to be immortalized in an
official portrait for future generations to gaze upon.

And for the artist chosen to paint one of these powerful officials, especially a
President, the opportunity is a fantasy come true and the actual painting
sometimes something of an adventure.

''It's the top - something every portrait artist dreams about because the
prestige and publicity make it a big prize,'' says Herbert E. Abrams, who did
the portrait of Jimmy Carter now hanging in the White House and who is now at
work capturing a likeness of the White House chief of staff, Donald T. Regan.

Good Likeness as Well as Art

According to Clement E. Conger, the White House curator, Mr. Abrams's portrait
of Mr. Carter is generally considered the best of the contemporary White House
portraits.

How does Mr. Abrams view the work of capturing such a major figure on canvas?
''It's important that a portrait be a good likeness,'' he says. ''But it must
also be a work of art that can stand on its own.''

Mr. Abrams's work hangs not only in the White House but also in the Pentagon and
on Capitol Hill. When the portrait of Mr. Regan is completed - the preliminary
work depicts a quizzical-looking Mr. Regan, papers in hand and sitting on the
edge of a desk - it will hang in the Treasury Department, where Mr. Regan was
Secretary before coming to the White House.

The Missing First Ladies

It was in 1857 that Congress first appropriated money for Presidents' portraits.
Today, all the former Presidents are represented on the White House walls, most
of them commissioned but some borrowed or bought. A President's portrait is not
hung until after he leaves the White House.

Shortly after 1857, portraits of first ladies began to be commissioned, too. But
seven first ladies' likenesses are missing from the White House collection in
spite of a major search begun by Patricia Nixon and Mr. Conger.

Before a Presidential portrait is commissioned, dozens of artists are considered
and their work reviewed by the President. The screening does not guarantee a
satisfied client, however.

Lyndon B. Johnson took one look at his portrait by Peter Hurd and pronounced it
''the ugliest thing I have ever seen.'' It now hangs in the National Portrait
Gallery and a second portrait of President Johnson, painted by Elizabeth
Shoumatoff, hangs in the White House.

'For the Thrill of It'

The White House Historical Association now pays for Presidential portraits,
setting a $15,000 limit. ''We try to get it done for less,'' Mr. Conger
confided, adding, ''If you do a President, you're going to do it for the thrill
of it.''

Cabinet officials' portraits are handled by the individual departments, and
President Carter once suggested photographs instead, a suggestion to save money
that ''went over like a lead balloon,'' said Mr. Conger.

Mr. Abrams's portrait of Mr. Car-ter depicts a contemplative man, hands folded,
elbows resting on the arms of his chair. ''It just happened to be one that fell
off the brush,'' says Mr. Abrams. ''It just flowed - I knew from the beginning
it was going to be one of my best.''

But the muse is not always that cooperative.

''Sometimes you hit a snag,'' he said. Senator Howard H. Baker, whose portrait
now hangs in the Senate majority leader's office, lost 25 pounds between
sittings, sending Mr. Abrams back to his easel.

His striking portrait of Gen. William C. Westmoreland as Army Chief of Staff,
painted in 1972, shows him in fatigues. ''Westy was so identified with Vietnam
that I wanted it more informal,'' said Mr. Abrams, who has known the General
since painting his portrait as Superintendent of West Point. In executing this
second portrait, which hangs in the Chief of Staff Gallery at the Pentagon, Mr.
Abrams traveled with General Westmoreland on his last trip to Vietnam.

'Feeling of the Inner Person'

The artist, who lives in Warren, Conn., has to his credit dozens of other
portraits of well-known personalities, including John J. Rhodes, former House
minority leader; Gen. Creighton Abrams, and the writer Arthur Miller.

Although the courtly looking Mr. Abrams, who just turned 65 years old, can now
command as much as $25,000 for a portrait, he says, ''I grew up poor and sold
paintings off a fence for years.''

Upon receiving a commission, he asks for an informal hourlong chat. ''It helps
get a feeling of the inner person,'' he said, ''and also helps to get over any
awe that might be there on either side. Sitting for a portrait can produce
traumas, he noted, explaining, ''After all, it's going to be a statement about
them that is going to last forever.''

Mr. Abrams requires three sittings: a two-hour session followed by two one-hour
appointments. He has the subject's undivided attention -no paperwork, no
reading, just talk.

'Whatever Comes to Mind'

''We talk about whatever comes to mind,'' he said. ''Mr. Regan, who has the
reputation of being a pretty tough guy, was very congenial and warm. At the
beginning, he was a little stiff, but towards the end of the sitting he began to
relax. He has a puckish look in his eyes, but only when he smiles.''

On his journeys to Plains, Ga., to paint President Carter, the two talked of
their children, of their ''growing-up'' years and of fly fishing.

One of his prized posessions from those trips is a yellow plastic tube for
carrying fly rods. It was given him by Mr. Carter to carry the artist's
rolled-up canvas. He asked the President to autograph it and to draw a picture
of a fish on it.

''It's the worst-looking fish I ever saw,'' says Mr. Abrams.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Herbert E. Abrams (NYT/Ken Heinen); Photo of portraits of
Jimmy Carter and Gen. William C. Westmoreland

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 7, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

DUMB ECONOMIES FOR EXPOSED DIPLOMATS

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 400 words


Secretary of State Shultz has been stalking Capitol Hill like an ancient
mariner, begging a fair hearing for a doleful story: ''Mr. Chairman, the
Department of State does not have weapons systems to stretch out. We do not have
programs we can transfer to state or local governments. We cannot 'privatize'
our diplomatic activities . . . The massive cuts under consideration by the
House Budget Committee would ravage this country's international presence and
seriously harm our national security.'' He has a powerful case.

The threatened cuts would halve the State Department's budget request of $3.9
billion. That would eliminate $1.4 billion for embassy security, leaving
America's diplomats exposed just as Colonel Qaddafi is declaring a terror war.

The cutback would also reduce by $220 million, or 15 percent, State's operating
budget. Mr. Shultz reckons that $125 million could be saved by closing or
curtailing 40 embassies and consulates, firing a fifth of the Washington staff
and eliminating 600 positions in larger embassies. But even all that would fall
$95 million short.

These cannot be serious proposals. That they even surface is a measure of
Congress's fecklessness, and State's vulnerability. The myth persists that tax
dollars are squandered on an overgrown and underworked diplomatic service. The
facts are otherwise. In the 1950's, the Foreign Service was a corps of 4,700
Americans staffing 58 embassies. Now there are 7,000 in 140. Cable traffic,
which accounts for two-thirds of foreign intelligence, has increased sixfold. In
the same period, more senior diplomats have been murdered than all the generals
and admirals killed in action in Korea and Vietnam.

On the recommendation of a committee headed by the C.I.A.'s former deputy
director, Adm. Bobby Inman, State seeks to protect embassies against car-bomb
attacks without barricading them behind barbed wire and sandbags. It wants to
train 300 more security agents, add more Marine guards, send training teams to
high-risk posts and substitute Americans for local employees in unfriendly
countries. For this, Mr. Shultz asks for $4.4 billion over four years, a sum
that he asserts is within the Gramm-Rudman limits.

These are not only reasonable requests; they are essential for a nation with
global interests. It is incredible that any American legislator would leave the
Foreign Service denuded and endangered.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 7, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

'THE LITTLE SISTER,' DRAMA ON PBS

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 380 words


THE Boston waterfront and that city's back streets, which are a long way from
life in Harvard Square, serve as the interesting backdrop for ''The Little
Sister,'' tonight's ''American Playhouse'' drama (9 o'clock on WNET/Channel 13).

The feature film centers on a juvenile-probation officer and an 18-year-old
woman from a wealthy family who gets into a minor brush with the law. As the
film progresses, their relationship, somewhat predictably, develops into a
hidden romance. ''The Little Sister'' is written and directed by Jan Egleson.

For nearly two long hours, the film teases the viewer, watching to see how the
relationship will intensify. (It does.) The probation officer is played by John
Savage, who will be remembered for his role as the steelworker turned Vietnam
soldier in ''The Deer Hunter.'' Tracy Pollan, who plays the young
semi-deliquent, is best known for her appearances in the television program
''Family Ties.''

In the development of the drama, there are a few complications involving her
father, an affluent attorney with the state's alcoholic-beverage control board.
There are intimations that the woman's father is involved in illegal activities.
This enables the cameras to go into a standard go-go bar. Finally, during the
course of interrogation by the probation officer, the young woman discloses some
family secrets that tie up the drama neatly.

An effort is made for some social comment here. The probation officer is told:
''You know what your trouble is? You want to fix the whole world.'' But ''The
Little Sister'' really doesn't. It adds up to a pleasant little story that lacks
compulsion. The Boston docks, however, provide good local color.

A prize-winning short film, ''Rosey & Jonesy,'' under 15 minutes, follows ''The
Little Sister'' and fills out the second hour of American Playhouse. It is a
sentimental tale of two retired plumbers, Rosey (played by Jack Beers), who is
Jewish, and Jonesy (Walter P. Brown), who is black. The film was written,
produced, directed and edited by David Wesley Wachs.

The two old plumbers play chess, encounter a Lindy's-type waiter in a kosher
restaurant, and Jonesy sells some egg creams. Then they ride off into the sunset
on a bicycle built for two. Literally. The film is mercifully short.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Tracy Pollan and John Savage

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 8, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET SEEKS A LARGER ROLE IN SOUTHEAST ASIA

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 657 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 5


The Soviet Union, as it continues to build its military strength in Southeast
Asia and the Pacific, is at the same time trying to increase its economic and
diplomatic influence in the area, according to regional officials and diplomats.

Taking advantage of widespread discontent in Southeast Asia caused by falling
commodity prices and protectionist moves in the United States and Western
Europe, Moscow has been sending high-level delegations to the region offering
aid and trade.

At the same time, the Soviet Union has been trying to broker a Southeast Asian
regional security pact and has also volunteered its assistance in searching for
a formula to end the war in Cambodia.

To carry out the new initiatives, a new breed of Soviet diplomat - relaxed,
congenial and with more power to make on-the-spot comments if not decisions - is
appearing in Southeast Asia and the small island nations of the Western and
South Pacific.

Among them is is Valentin P. Kasatkin, an elegant, witty and congenial
56-year-old who has been Ambassador to Thailand since the end of 1984. He and
his stylish wife, Natalya, a lawyer fluent in several languages, are regulars on
Bangkok's tennis club circuit.

Journalists and members of a variety of Thai organizations find Mr. Kasatkin
accessible. Officials say he is empowered to make decisions without the ''I'll
have to get back to Moscow'' response that once characterized the embassy.

But there have been problems. Thai officials have publicly protested what they
say is a new Soviet practice of recruiting students outside normal Thai
Government channels to send to Soviet institutions. The recruitment, Thais say,
has been most active in the poor northeast area, where a Communist insurgency
was finally put down just a few years ago.

A succession of Soviet delegations, the most recent led by Deputy Prime Minister
Yakov P. Ryabov, has toured Southeast Asia in the last year, seeking increased
trade. Indonesia, where Soviet-bloc nations would like to set up trade missions,
was offered a medical aid program by Moscow. In Malaysia, Prime Minister
Mahathir Mohamad was given an invitation to visit Moscow.

Officials say there has been little new trade activity so far because the Soviet
Union prefers barter deals that are not always attractive to free-market
economies. Thailand does sell rice to Moscow, which then delivers it to Vietnam.

The diplomatic and trade offensive extends to the smallest nations. Kiribati, a
nation of island chains in the central Pacific with a population of about
60,000, now allows Soviet trawlers to fish in its waters under a one-year
agreement. It is costing the Russians about $1.5 million - one fifth of
Kiribati's national budget.

Moscow also lobbied in tiny Palau against a vote for closer association and
military cooperation with the United States.

In Vanuatu, a Government with growing Soviet-bloc ties has just agreed to accept
a team of Vietnamese doctors, and there are reports that a fishing pact with
Moscow, modeled on Kiribati's, is about to be signed. Regional officials are
skeptical of the intentions of Moscow and Hanoi in both small nations. Military
experts say the Kiribati agreement could put Soviet spy ships within useful
range of American missile-research bases in the Marshall Islands.

The United States, Australia and New Zealand recently outbid the Soviet Union on
an ocean prospecting project in the South Pacific. In recent testimony before a
House subcommittee, John C. Monjo, the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for
East Asian and Pacific Affairs, commended the cooperative prospecting plan as a
welcome response to what he sees as the Soviet challenge.

''For the first time since World War II,'' he said, ''we are faced with a
hostile power attempting to extend its influence in the Pacific.'' He said
recent moves by the Soviet Union were threatening ''the political environment in
which we operate in the region.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 8, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Fact, Fiction And Politics

BYLINE: By Charlotte Curtis

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 837 words


IT'S an old pitch, common to both political parties, and this time it comes over
Bob Dole's signature. Fork over $1,000, the appeal says, and you too can join
the Republican Senatorial Inner Circle.

Pay up, and the Senator from Kansas promises ''high-level Washington
briefings,'' ''lunch with Vice President Bush'' and ''small, intimate dinners
hosted by Republican dignitaries.'' Furthermore, you'll be joining (a trumpet
fanfare would not be inappropriate here) ''the elite ranks of Republicans who
will play a direct and decisive personal role in the most important election in
our nation's history.'' Clearly, this is rhetoric in need of translation.

Savvy individuals recognize such appeals, whether from Democrats or Republicans.
They know that in this context, ''high-level Washington briefings'' means little
more than being in the same conference room with dozens of other donors while a
Senator, even a Cabinet officer, makes a statement. The same may be said of the
lunch. Except the room and the size of the crowd will be larger and the Vice
President will appear.

As for those ''small, intimate dinners,'' ''small'' in Washington can mean 40
guests, 10 to a table. ''Intimate'' suggests that you may shake hands or sit at
a table with a familiar 'The well-informed are talking over the heads of the
American people.' face. ''Republican dignitaries'' could be just about anybody
who isn't a Democrat.

About the only ''direct and decisive personal role'' $1,000 contributors play in
either party is writing checks and voting. ''The most important election in our
nation's history'' is always the election at hand. So much for reality.

Yet Americans believe and respond. What the Dole invitation says in contrast to
what it means is hardly a momentous example of political fact-fudging. Nothing
like those Presidential assertions about how we were winning the war in Vietnam.
But it arrived the day James David Barber, the Duke University political
scientist, whizzed into town for a few hours. And there's a connection.

Professor Barber, former director of Duke's Center for the Study of
Communications Policy, has long been concerned by the many Americans who have
little idea how their political system works. He is disturbed by polls showing
that a lot of Americans believe a defendant is guilty until proved innocent and
don't know that each state has two Senators. He is troubled by fuzzing of the
facts and says that if educators and journalists were on their toes, there would
be less ''fictionalization'' in American politics.

''There are two very different conversations going on in America today,'' he
said. One is among scholars, politicians, economists, educators, journalists and
the well-informed. The other is everybody else. As he sees it, ''The
well-informed are talking way over the heads of the American people. President
Reagan understands that. So he speaks in short bursts to television, in words
ordinary people can understand. He simply bypasses the first group.''

That's not news, of course. Any more than Mr. Reagan's frequent errors of fact.
But 1986 is an election year. The war of words is heating up. And Dr. Barber
wants more citizens to know and remember the facts while having to contend with
the incoming fictions.

''To make it in the 30's and 40's,'' he said on his way to a dinner,
''journalists scooped on the facts. After World War II, they went to college and
became analysts. Now they are moving beyond that, to a literary, poetic mode -
in which cleverness and turn of phrase is celebrated - rather than dealing with
the warp and woof of reality.''

He exempted two newspapers, one of which was The St. Petersburg Times, and no
magazines or television programs. But the temptation, and it proved
irresistible, was to ask him where he gets off with his criticism of the press.
He smiled.

''It would be much to the benefit of journalists if they came to the university
and studied their effect on America,'' he said evenly. ''Educators and
journalists are strangely incurious about their effect on the generations. They
forget that educators do the kids and journalists do the grown-ups.''

He certainly has the credentials. Among the eight books he either wrote or
edited (the most influential being his studies of the Presidency), is ''The
Pulse of Politics: Electing Presidents in the Media Age,'' published in 1980. He
has been examining news media coverage in Presidential elections since 1972.
Yet, as he says, ''The test is not about credentials but facts.''

Whether or not the forthcoming political war of words should be waged with
facts, it won't be. The purpose is to win, and the parties approach it
pragmatically. All Dr. Barber can do now is keep reminding the informed of the
two conversations and everyone of the sham.

''I can't forget that when a House Democratic group wanted to know more about
farm conditions,'' he said, ''they brought Sissy Spacek and Jane Fonda in to
testify because they'd both played farm wives, so they'd know.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 8, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

STAGE: 'WASTED,' AT WPA THEATER

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 648 words


AS if to mark last weekend's sad anniversary of Martin Luther King's
assassination, the WPA Theater is presenting a new play, ''Wasted,'' that takes
us right back to that cataclysmic day in April 1968. The author, a first-time
dramatist named Fred Gamel, portrays the response of a representative urban
community as the unspeakable news from Memphis arrives by radio. His characters
are black, white and Hispanic Americans of varied credos and prejudices -most of
them poised to boil over into the violence that would soon set the cities of the
nation aflame.

Yet Mr. Gamel has not, as might be expected, actually set his play in one of
those cities. The prototypical Americans of ''Wasted'' are instead to be found
thousands of miles away, in a Marine base camp in Vietnam. The playwright, who
served in Vietnam, recognizes that the same rage that festered within the urban
ghetto was re-created, perhaps at even greater intensity, among the American
''grunts'' transplanted to Southeast Asia. Not unlike Dr. King, Mr. Gamel wants
us to see the war abroad as an apocalyptic paradigm of racial and economic
injustices at home.

Fascinating and potentially explosive as the writer's intentions are, one cannot
say that they've been realized on stage. Mr. Gamel has recalled the war's
bitter, scatological lingo in his dialogue, but his awkward dramaturgy saps
''Wasted'' of theatrical and thematic vitality. As much as this evening is
haunted by the unseen presence of Dr. King, it is even more in thrall to an
unseen fictional character - a racist staff sergeant named Drew who might or
might not prove to be himself an assassination victim (by ''fragging''). We hear
so many bulletins about Drew's current comings and goings, not to mention
descriptions of his personality and past behavior, that too much of ''Wasted''
seems to be taking place wherever he may be in the wings.

The play is further compromised by Mr. Gamel's rigid notion of characterization;
each of his marines too unambiguously represents a single ideological or
sociological position in response to Dr. King's death. What gives one some hope
about the writer's future, however, is his fundamental willingness to understand
and present differing points of view, ethnic identities and personalities.
Perhaps with more experience, he'll figure out how to draw characters as complex
as they are diverse.

Given their often simplistic roles, the actors are limited in what they can
achieve. Matt Mulhern, last seen as a World War II recruit in ''Biloxi Blues,''
and Eriq LaSalle fare best. The direction, by Clinton Turner Davis, tends to be
as compartmentalized as the writing. By frequently arranging the play's
antagonists in neatly polarized clumps, Mr. Davis makes it harder for the
excellent production design and sound effects to simulate the nightmarish chaos
of the war. The one exception occurs at the evening's climax, when the
uncontainable anguish and horror of self-destructive violence at last turns the
Vietnam camp into a mirror image of the American urban war zone of 1968.
Suddenly, we appreciate the multiple meanings of Mr. Gamel's title and are again
possessed by that sickening memory of an era's tragic waste. War Zones WASTED,
by Fred Gamel; directed by Clinton Turner Davis; setting by Charles H.
McClennahan; lighting by Craig Evans; costumes by Don Newcomb; sound by Paul
Garrity; production stage manager, David Lawrence Folender. Presented by WPA
Theater, Kyle Renick, artistic director; Wendy Bustard, managing director. At
the WPA Theater, 138 Fifth Avenue, at 19th Street. Sgt. (Farm Boy) KellyMatt
Mulhern Lance Cpl. (Spider) Evans Walter Allen Bennett Jr. Cpl. (Hound)
BassettEriq LaSalle Lance Cpl. (Big Mac) MacNeill Jace Alexander Cpl. (Slick)
AcevedoRamon Franco Pfc. (Padre) GomezEmil Herrera Pfc. Earl ThomasAlvin Alexis
Pfc. Roy PruittErik King Lieut. Gary BladeBurke Moses

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: April 9, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
The cast listing with a theater review of ''Wasted'' yesterday gave an incorrect
address for the WPA Theater. It is at 519 West 23d Street.

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 9, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BOMB AT WEINBERGER HOTEL IN BANGKOK

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 670 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Wednesday April 9


A bomb exploded Tuesday evening at the entrance to a parking lot at the hotel
where Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger was scheduled to attend a state
dinner with Thailand's Prime Minister.

The police said the bomb exploded in a trash can near a chauffeurs' shelter of
the Erawan Hotel at 6 P.M. (6 A.M., New York time), 90 minutes before Mr.
Weinberger was scheduled to arrive. The Defense Secretary would have passed
within five yards of the site, according to authorities.

Three people were wounded, two seriously, according to the official Thai radio.

No group had taken responsibility for the explosion at the Erawan, a
Government-owned hotel.

The dinner for Mr. Weinberger, given by Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanonda, was
moved to the Hilton Hotel, where Mr. Weinberger was staying.

Security Is Tight

At an airport news conference this morning before he left for Australia, Mr.
Weinberger tried to play down the significance of the bomb attack. ''I can't
bring myself to believe that anyone would want to do me in,'' he said.

But Thailand's Foreign Minister, Siddhi Savetsila, told reporters earlier that
he was ''really frightened'' when he first heard about the blast. Security for
Mr. Weinberger has been tight at all stops on his Asian trip.

The special precautions follow threats made by the Libyan leader, Col. Muammar
el-Qaddafi, in the wake of United States Navy attacks on Libyan military targets
last month. Since then, fatal bombing attacks have been carried out against a
T.W.A. aircraft bound from Rome to Athens and a nightclub in West Berlin
frequented by American United States servicemen.

The explosion follows a tense period in Thailand marked by rumors of discontent
within the country's armed forces and by a rising anti-Americanism, as Thais see
their economy damaged by what they view as increasing protectionism in the
United States. Questions are also being revived about this country's military
cooperation with Washington.

Next Stop Australia

Mr. Weinberger has already been in South Korea, Japan and the Philippines.
Today, he left Thailand for Australia, with a stopover at the Indonesian island
of Bali.

Before leaving Thailand, he made a quick visit to the border with Cambodia,
where Thai forces face Vietnamese troops that support the Cambodian Government
of Heng Samrin against a three-part guerrilla coalition.

At his news conference this morning, Mr. Weinberger said he had been impressed
by the ''serious'' threat Vietnam's forces posed to Thailand. He said he had
visited a Thai village that had been ''shelled in a most barbarous way'' by
Vietnamese troops.

Mr. Weinberger's visit to Thailand, lasting less than 48 hours, has provoked
demonstrations against an agriculture bill now being considered in Congress. The
legislation has been front-page news for weeks in Bangkok because it is
perceived as a move against Thai rice exports.

Plan for Weapons Stockpile

There are also protests about a proposal - which Mr. Weinberger was to have
discussed on this trip - for a weapons stockpile to be set up by the United
States in Thailand.

Pressed this morning for more details about the weapons stockpile, Mr.
Weinberger said discussions on establishing the store would take some time to
negotiate, and that the proposed accord would require Congressional approval. He
said the weapons stockpile would benefit both countries. It would be limited to
conventional weapons, he added.

There apparently are two reasons for proposing the stockpile: to put war
equipment at the disposal of Thailand should it be attacked by Vietnam, and to
create a reserve for American forces if they are called upon to act in this
region.

While no decisions have been made about the quantity or kind of weapons in the
proposed stockpile, some Thai columnists have expressed alarm that nuclear or
chemical arms could be brought here - or that Washington would use a stockpile
agreement as a first step toward the re-establishment of American bases in
Thailand.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Thai police inspecting bomb site (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 9, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
POLITICS AND THE PRESS

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 769 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The American Society of Newspaper Editors met here this week, which tempts me to
butt in with an observation and a suggestion about politics and the press.

The observation is that from Roosevelt to Reagan the arts of public relations
and political advertising have not only tended increasingly to dominate our
politics, but also to diminish the influence of the printed word and distort the
facts of our national life. In short, the hucksters are getting out of hand.

Managing the news, of course, is the oldest game in town. Franklin Roosevelt was
a master at it. The leaders of all institutions try to manage the news in the
sense of emphasizing their virtues and minimizing or suppressing their failures.
Even newspaper owners have been known to fiddle with the facts.

What is new, however, is that in the conduct of the public's business, the power
of the unelected and largely unknown ''specialists'' or manipulators, who write
the speeches for the executives downtown and frame the questions for the
legislators on The Hill, has increased to such a point that while we know who is
speaking, we don't know where the words come from.

We are seeing more than ever before, or so I believe, a distortion of the theory
of representative government. Increasingly, the executive branch, with its
dominance of television, tends to evade the doubts of Congress by theatrical
appeals to the people on the theory that what's popular is right.

This is not a partisan or ideological argument. President Truman counted in
advance on public support rather than on considered discussion with Congress
when he dropped the atom bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki. So did President
Johnson, for a time, in his manipulations of public opinion on Vietnam, and
President Kennedy in his covert disaster at the Bay of Pigs, not forgetting
F.D.R's efforts to pack the Supreme Court.

The main difference now is that Ronald Reagan is better than any of them at
reading speeches other people write, and at using television to argue that
Nicaragua and Libya are major threats to our security and that a permanent ban
on the testing of nuclear weapons, which all other Presidents since Eisenhower
have publicly supported, is just another Soviet trap.

Also, what was merely a cunning P.R. talent on the part of Roosevelt has now
become a Deaverish industry under Mr. Reagan. The editors can check it for
themselves: The publicity budget in Washington has soared and the number of news
conferences has declined. Publicity is not merely an instrument of government
here these days: it is government.

The Founding Fathers didn't imagine that the great conflicts between nations,
let alone the mysteries of outer space, could be decided by public opinion,
except at election time. But that's the current trend and the question for the
editors is what, if anything, they can do about it.

The short answer is not much, but at the opening of the baseball season, my
suggestion is that they might get a tip by looking at their sports pages and
their business pages.

Every day, editors devote two or three pages of newsprint, which is not cheap,
to keeping the precise figures on Wall Street, who's up, who's down and who's
chiseling on the side.

Likewise on the sports pages. They keep the record: runs, hits, errors, stolen
bases, beanballs and other achievements and misdemeanors. But not on the
political pages. Sure, we catch the pols off base from time to time, but in over
40 years in Washington I can't remember a period when so much obvious nonsense,
even so many distortions of fact, have gone by unchallenged or been dismissed
with scarcely more than a whisper by the public.

Roosevelt, in his cynical way, used to say: Just let me make the headlines on
the front pages and I don't care what they say on the editorial pages.

Now the theme is: Give me half an hour on television and I'll prove the
''freedom fighters'' of Nicaragua and the ''Peacekeeper'' missile are essential
to the security of the nation, and that Colonel Qaddafi is masterminding the
terror of the world.

Well, as the President says, it may not make sense but it makes news and it gets
votes. You could say that Mr. Reagan is the most popular President since the
last war and that the press is more unpopular than ever for questioning his
statements and policies.

But there is a difference between the President and the press. He's in the
popularity business and we're not, and never have been since the old
pamphleteers raised hell against the British and the abolitionist editors fought
against slavery, which was popular for almost a hundred years.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 9, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Michiko Kakutani

SECTION: Section C; Page 23, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 995 words


THE WAR. A Memoir. By Marguerite Duras. 183 pages. Pantheon. $13.95.

WITH ''The Lover,'' published to critical acclaim and popular success in America
last year, Marguerite Duras created a hypnotic story of love and death, set down
in stylized, translucent prose. Though billed as a novel, ''The Lover'' actually
looked back upon Miss Duras's own adolescence in French Indochina during the
30's; and in a sense, this memoir gives us a portrait of the author as that same
heroine more than a decade later - grown to womanhood, living in war-ravaged
France and working for the Resistance.

Certainly the facts of Miss Duras's life and many of the scenarios in these two
books may seem extraordinary to us, like the heightened stuff of romantic
movies: the steamy love affair at the age of 15 with an older man in Saigon; the
baroque geometry of family emotions connecting the heroine, her two doomed
brothers and their despairing mother; the terrible heroics summoned up by the
war -playing a desperately controlled game of flirtation and surveillance with a
member of the Gestapo, helping to gather information about prisoners and
deportees for the Resistance, and waiting for rumors, for news, of a loved one's
death or survival. If scenes from ''The War'' strike the reader as outtakes from
a film like ''Casablanca,'' however, Miss Duras points out that to the
participants, they were neither extraordinary nor heroic. ''They're like
everything else,'' she writes. ''Like everything else, they happen to you.
Afterward, they have happened to you. They might happen to anyone.'' In fact, in
''The War,'' Miss Duras does her best not to sentimentalize events or emotions.
With the exception of a few melodramatic sequences (''You have to strike. Smash.
Shatter the lie. The vile silence''), a few self-dramatizing descriptions
(''Beside Rabier and me they are innocents, they haven't dabbled in death''),
there is a pleasing, straightforward quality to the writing here that conveys
the wrenching emotions of the war less through understatement than through
simple directness.

''The Lover,'' too, of course, was much acclaimed for its austere, distilled
style, but the writing in that book used austerity - as it used repetition,
lyricism and selected detail -to achieve a self-conscious narrative effect; and
while there were passages that quite beautifully conveyed certain emotional
states, there were also sections that attempted to manipulate the reader with
cliches and the sort of heavy-breathing abstractions found in cheap romance
novels (''And, weeping, he makes love. At first, pain. And then the pain is
possessed in its turn, changed, slowly drawn away, borne toward pleasure,
clasped to it. The sea, formless, simply beyond compare'').

Written in 1944, ''The War'' possesses an austerity of a different sort - its
prose is simple not in the mannered way of ''The Lover'' but in the way of a
good documentary film. Two negligible fictional studies (''The Crushed Nettle''
and ''Aurelia Paris'') have been added - presumably to fill out the volume - but
for the most part, the book deals with Miss Duras's own experiences during the
last days of the war, as she and her Resistance comrades await the Liberation.

In ''Monsieur X, Here Called Pierre Rabier,'' she tells us of the strange
liaison - if liaison is the right word for such a peculiar, threat-filled
relationship - that she develops with the Gestapo officer who has arrested her
husband; and the story grows, page by page, into a chilling study of power and
need. The officer, one Pierre Rabier, it seems, is a lonely man, eager for Miss
Duras's companionship, eager to have a pretty young novelist listen to his
daydreams about books and art. Miss Duras, on her part, is hopeful of extracting
news about her husband - and possibly abetting his release; and as a secret
member of a Resistance group headed by Francois Mitterrand, she is also hopeful
of gathering Gestapo intelligence. Rabier has the power to arrest her, to order
her killed; and yet, as the Liberation of Paris becomes imminent, she realizes
that she, too, has the power to sentence him to death. In the end, she testifies
both for and against him at his trial.

Conflicting emotions, again, are the subject of ''Albert of the Capitals, Ter of
the Militia.'' Here, Miss Duras dispassionately chronicles the feelings - of
rage, of vengence, of cruelty, pity and guilt - elicited by an interrogation
session in which she and her Resistance friends casually torture an informer;
and she describes, too, the similarly ambivalent passions inspired by an
exchange with a handsome, carelessly amoral collaborator awaiting trial for his
crimes.

It is the title chapter of ''The War,'' however, that most fiercely demonstrates
Miss Duras's evocative powers as a writer. Despite the author's rather coy
assertion that the piece ''can't really be called 'writing,' '' - she says she
can't even remember keeping the diaries in question - this lengthy memoir
possesses a stark immediacy of expression that enables the reader to
participate, seemingly firsthand, in Miss Duras's experience of waiting for her
husband to return from a German prison camp at the end of the war.

She tells us of combing lists of survivors for the name of Robert L., of
grilling returning deportees for fragments of information, of reading hope or
desolation in every phone call, in every list of released prisoners. She tells
us of feeling despair, fright and nausea at the prospect of never seeing him
again; and she tells us, too, of the joy and terror she feels on greeting him at
last - greeting this man, her husband, turned by starvation and fear into a
stranger returned from the dead. At once generic in its talk of war and peace,
love and fear, and acutely personal in its delineation of remembered emotion,
''The War'' ends by becoming more than one woman's diary; it becomes a haunting
portrait of a time and a place and also a state of mind.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Marguerite Duras (UPI)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 10, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

For Vietnam Veterans, the War Refuses to End

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 324 words


To the Editor:

We, a group of Vietnam combat veterans currently in treatment, would like to
comment on Joseph R. Kurtz Jr.'s Op-Ed article (March 10). He attacks everyone
including the public, psychiatrists and those of us who didn't die in Vietnam,
although many of us wished, maybe, we had. A noncombatant, Mr. Kurtz accuses us
of using Vietnam as an excuse for ''undirected lives.'' We question his
authenticity, since he writes that he opposed the war from the seventh month of
his tour of duty. Why then did he serve 21 months, when a tour lasted only 12
months? Since he states he felt such disgust for the war, what possible reason
could have made him re-up?

We find it interesting that he considers the complaint of the ''Agent Orange
victims'' justified, although the Federal Government is inconclusive about all
the effects of Agent Orange on Vietnam veterans. The Agent Orange class-action
suit is indeed an example of the bandwagon theory he so derides. As the suit was
originally filed, veterans who didn't join were barred from making a claim
later, causing thousands to join whether they had problems or not.

Mr. Kurtz is another in a long line of those who have called us losers. In one
sense, they may be right; you see many of us lost a part of our lives in
Vietnam. Our buddies are destroying themselves with anger, rage, drugs and
suicides. Why do we turn on one another? The military turned on us when we were
in uniform. America turned on us when we returned home. Now, one of us who calls
himself a brother turns on us and tells us our pain is a con job.

Mr. Kurtz, join us! Support us! Come to a combat-veterans' group at a nearby vet
center. Our groups will be open to you when you need us.

JOHN LOYER, ANDREW CARNEY

DON ALLEN, TERRY FEARON Lyons, N.J., March 26, 1986 The writers represent the
combat-veteran therapy program at the V.A. Medical Center, most of whose other
members also signed the letter.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 10, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Congress;
More Lessons in the Secrecy Trade

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 983 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 9


Rumors swirled around Capitol Hill Tuesday that the Reagan Administration was
planning a major attack against Libyan-based terrorists, reported Senator Dave
Durenberger. So when Republican leaders met with the President at the White
House this morning, ''half the people in the room expected him to say something
about Libya,'' said Mr. Durenberger, who heads the intelligence committee.

When asked about the subject, the President laughed off the rumors. But Senator
Durenberger recounted the incident, he said, to illustrate how members of
Congress are increasingly unhappy with the Administration's refusal to brief
them about secret intelligence and paramilitary operations that are still in the
planning stages.

''We're not being informed on any of these things,'' the Minnesota Republican
complained.

The Libyan rumors highlight a basic question that has long troubled lawmakers:
How does an open, democratic society effectively monitor secret intelligence
operations?

That is being asked with growing frequency as the Administration pursues an
aggressive policy of countering terrorism and supporting so-called ''freedom
fighters'' around the world.

''We clearly are more confrontational,'' Senator Durenberger said. ''We are
following a policy of an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth. We are building an
Israeli model here in the United States.''

In the Senate, lawmakers have reacted to this new appetite for confrontation by
opening private talks with Administration officials and urging them to establish
a system that would keep Congress better informed about secret operations.

In the House, lawmakers are also disgruntled with the Administration's handling
of covert operations, particularly its decision to ignore Congressional
objections and send secret aid to insurgents fighting the government of Angola.
Representative Lee H. Hamilton, chairman of the House intelligence panel, has
introduced legislation that would force the White House to ask openly for the
aid.

The Indiana Democrat argues that an American commitment to the rebel forces in
southern Africa is an important foreign policy question and should be discussed
publicly, not just within the confines of the intelligence panel.

Some lawmakers, like many Administration officials, say the whole subject of
secret operations should not be openly debated on Capitol Hill. Representative
Henry J. Hyde of Illinois, a senior Republican on the intelligence committee,
said Mr. Reagan's foreign policy was being ''strangled in its crib'' by critics
who publicize covert campaigns, such as the Angolan matter.

On Blowing the Whistle

''The White House,'' Mr. Hyde said, ''is totally incapable of carrying on covert
activities if someone disagrees and blows the whistle.''

But Congressional oversight of covert operations is clearly growing as an issue,
particularly as the Administration becomes involved in more paramilitary
campaigns. As Representative Robert W. Kastenmeier, a Democrat from Wisconsin
who is a member of the intelligence committee, put it, ''We're really being
tested by the Administration now.''

The current oversight system was established 10 years ago, after the Vietnam War
and a flurry of disclosures about secret intelligence operations. Under this
system, the Administration is required to inform both intelligence committees of
any contemplated covert operations. The panels then have the right to comment on
the plans but not to veto them.

According to Mr. Kastenmeier, the system worked well in the Carter
Administration, which he said took a ''reasonably compliant'' approach to
Congress. But problems emerged when the Reagan Administration started financing
rebels fighting the government of Nicaragua.

Mr. Durenberger noted that for almost a year, Congress was unaware of the
rebels' campaign to mine Nicaraguan harbors. After the operation was disclosed
in 1984, he added, Congress insisted on a new set of guidelines that would
require the Administration to keep lawmakers better informed.

Now, he said, members of Congress are pressing the Administration to expand
those guidelines in two ways. First of all, Mr. Durenberger said, the lawmakers
want to be briefed in advance about counterterrorist operations, such as the
recent attack on Libyan forces in the Gulf of Sidra.

''I sure as hell think we ought to be informed about that,'' he said.

Second, Congress is seeking more details about covert operations that are likely
to become public, such as aid to the Angolan rebels. When the Administration
informs Congress of such an operation, Mr. Durenberger said, it should provide a
complete analysis of how it would affect American foreign policy.

A few members of Congress would like to go even further and give themselves veto
power over covert operations. That idea does not command wide support, however,
because most lawmakers still want to give the Administration the ''benefit of
the doubt'' in foreign policy matters, noted Representative Dave McCurdy of
Oklahoma, a senior Democrat on the intelligence panel.

''It's a very delicate balance,'' he said, ''I don't think we can have
hard-and-fast rules.''

But so far, Mr. Durenberger said, the Administration's reaction has been
skeptical and ''untrusting,'' even to informal rules changes.

Not as a Partner

Mr. Kastenmeier says that on intelligence matters, the Administration regards
Congress as ''an obstacle, something to be coped with'' and not as a partner in
a ''mutual enterprise.''

By taking this attitude, Mr. Durenberger warns, the Administration runs a
serious risk of losing Congressional support for its intelligence operations.
Eventually, he said, Congress might try to pass legislation that bars certain
secret operations or cuts off their financing.

''That's why,'' Senator Durenberger said, ''the Administration is so dumb in not
doing this sort of thing voluntarily.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Lee Hamilton; photo of Henry Hyde; photo of Robert
Kastenmeier; photo of Dave Durenberger

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 11, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
21 Vietnam War Dead Given to U.S. by Hanoi

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 138 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, April 10


Vietnam today turned over to the United States the bodies of 21 people believed
to be missing American servicemen. It was the first repatriation of war dead
this year and the third largest since 1975.

At Hanoi's international airport, an honor guard drawn from the four American
military services escorted each coffin into a C-141 transport plane.

Hanoi used the occasion to warn the United States that the future of joint
Vietnamese-United States efforts to resolve the issue of missing Americans could
be in jeopardy.

Nguyen Can, the acting head of the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry's North American
Department, said the two-year deadline set last year by Hanoi for resolving the
missing and prisoner of war issue cannot be met if there are what he called
''statements that vilify or discredit Vietnam in Washington.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 11, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

DEMOCRATS BATTLE OVER FOREIGN POLICY ISSUES

BYLINE: By PHIL GAILEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 470 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 10


Still struggling to build a consensus on foreign and military policy, Democrats
will open two days of hearings here Friday amid signs of strong competition
among party factions for control of the debate.

The Democratic Policy Commission, established last year by the Democratic
National Committee to break new policy ground, will convene to hear views on
this issue, which has troubled and divided Democrats since the Vietnam War.

But the Coalition for a Democratic Majority, an independent group with a
conservative-to-moderate viewpoint, got in the first shot today as some of its
members criticized a position paper being drafted by a panel headed by
Representative Stephen Solarz of Brooklyn.

Penn Kemble, chairman of the executive committee for the coalition, who is
coordinating a foreign policy panel for it, said the Solarz document, now in its
sixth draft, was primarily a restatement of the foreign policy views that cost
Democrats heavily in recent Presidential elections.

'It Goes Too Far,' He Says

''It goes too far in blaming the Reagan Administration for all our foreign
policy problems,'' said Mr. Kemble. ''It won't stand up when voters ask
substantive questions.''

The draft contends the Administration's foreign policy has been ''characterized
by inflammatory rhetoric toward the Soviet Union'' and ''injudicious
confrontation'' in Central America.

If adopted by the party's policy commission, it would place the Democratic Party
on record as opposing aid to anti-Communist rebels in Nicaragua and Angola, Mr.
Reagan's proposal for a space-based defense against missiles and his arms
control policy, which the document described as the cause of an ''unrestrained
arms race.''

At a breakfast meeting with reporters, members of the Coalition for a Democratic
Majority said they planned to press Democrats to move toward a foreign policy
based on support for guerrilla movements against dictators of the left and the
right and on an ''unflinching recognition of the gravity of the Soviet threat,''
among other things.

Solarz Sees Steps to Consensus

In an interview, Mr. Solarz contended that the work of his 33-member panel
reflected the views of ''mainstream and senior Democrats who are involved in
foreign policy.'' He said there had been little dissent over language, adding,
''I think what we have goes a long way toward reaching the consensus on foreign
policy we are seeking.''

As for Mr. Kemble's criticisms of the report, Mr. Solarz said, ''Perhaps some
people should consider whether they would be more comfortable within the
Republican Party.''

Peter R. Rosenblatt, president of the Coalition for a Democratic Majority, is a
member of the Solarz task force. He declined to discuss the report other than to
say ''there are certain elements of it with which I disagree.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 12, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

DEMOCRATS CLASH ON FOREIGN POLICY

BYLINE: By PHIL GAILEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 432 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 11


The Democratic Party today managed to conduct a harmonious public discussion on
foreign policy, but the illusion of a party consensus on this issue was
shattered in an impromptu argument outside the meeting room.

Conservative Democrats have expressed displeasure with the tone and substance of
a foreign policy position paper being drafted by a 33-member task force headed
by Representative Stephen J. Solarz of Brooklyn.

Among other things, the draft accuses the Reagan Administration of engaging in
''puerile name-calling'' with the Soviet Union, an ''injudicious confrontation''
in Central America and ''ideological ineptitude'' in dealing with Southern
Africa.

Mr. Solarz included excerpts from the draft in his remarks today to the
Democratic Policy Commission, a party panel seeking to break new policy ground
on foreign affairs and other issues.

As he was leaving the session, he encountered one of the critics of his report,
Penn Kemble, chairman of the executive committee of the Coalition for a
Democratic Majority, an independent group of moderate and conservative
Democrats.

Discussion in a Stairwell

As a small crowd of reporters and party members gathered around, Mr. Solarz and
Mr. Kemble debated the issue as their associates tried in vain to advise them
that a stairwell was not a proper place to air their differences.

Mr. Kemble told reporters on Thursday that Democrats of his viewpoint were ''not
at all happy'' with the draft version of the Solarz report, contending that it
went too far in charging that the nation's problems over foreign policy ''were
mainly the creation of Ronald Reagan's rhetoric.''

Mr. Solarz said the report not only reflected the viewpoint of mainstream
Democrats, but also the voting record of Congressional Democrats on key foreign
policy issues.

Mr. Kemble said he regarded the report, written primarily by Theodore H.
Sorenson, an aide to President Kennedy, as ''a regression'' to the party's post-
Vietnam foreign policy views.

Privately, some party officials were dismayed that the controversy over the
Solarz report had overshadowed the efforts of the policy commission to avoid
highlighting the foreign policy divisions that have plagued the party since the
Vietnam War.

Officials of the Democratic National Committee said many of the speakers at the
commission's two-day program were from the party's centrist and conservative
wings, including Representative Les Aspin of Wisconsin, chairman of the House
Armed Services Committee, and Sam Nunn of Georgia, the senior Democrat on the
Senate Armed Services Committee.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 12, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

REP. JOSEPH ADDABBO DIES; HEAD OF KEY DEFENSE PANEL

BYLINE: By RONALD SMOTHERS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 32, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1164 words


Representative Joseph P. Addabbo, a Queens Democrat who had a powerful hand in
shaping national defense policy as chairman of a key House subcommittee, died
late Thursday at Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington. He was 61 years
old.

Mr. Addabbo, who served in Congress for a quarter of a century, had been
suffering from cancer of the bladder and had been receiving treatment for six
years. He slipped into a coma March 11, five days after he suffered a seizure at
a luncheon on Capitol Hill.

Critics of Pentagon spending looked to Mr. Addabbo, an influential Congressional
insider, as their most important voice on Capitol Hill against what they viewed
as wasteful arms projects.

Mr. Addabbo had been a main sponsor of what many consider the first anti-Vietnam
War measure to pass the House - a 1973 amendment to cut off funds for the
continued bombing of Cambodia - and later, as chairman of the defense
subcommittee of the House Appropriations Committee, Mr. Addabbo opposed the
development of the B-1 bomber and supported a nuclear freeze.

Key Figure in S.I. Base Plan

While his subcommittee position gave Mr. Addabbo influence over the national
agenda, it also allowed him to look after the interests of his district and his
state. He was able, through defense contracts, to bolster Long Island's aircraft
industry, and he was a key figure in the Pentagon's 1983 decision to plan to
base a seven-ship Navy battle group on Staten Island, a move that backers say
will add thousands of jobs in the metropolitan area.

Yesterday, the Speaker of the House, Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., said Mr. Addabbo had
''won the respect of members of Congress from both sides of the aisle.''
Governor Cuomo called him a ''relentlessly committed Congressman and leader.''

First elected to the House of Representatives in 1960 from a district that now
covers the southern portion of Queens, from South Jamaica to the Rockaways, Mr.
Addabbo mastered the intricacies of the legislative process and became one of
the more influential members on defense and foreign policy.

The House 'Is My Career'

While other New York Congressional colleagues, such as Hugh L. Carey and Edward
I. Koch, went on to win other elective offices, Mr. Addabbo stayed in the House,
building the seniority that eventually earned him the chairmanship of the
defense subcommittee in 1979. ''This is my career,'' he said.  ''If he had a
private agenda at all,'' said a fellow Queens Democratic Congressman,
Representative James H. Scheuer, ''it was improving New York's position in
defense-related contracts.''

But Mr. Addabbo was also, in the words of another colleague, Representative
Charles B. Rangel, Democrat of Manhattan, a ''credible critic'' of the steady
increase in defense spending in general and of certain weapons systems in
particular. Whether arguing in the relative privacy of committee debates or in
his rare but significant speeches from the floor of the House, many of Mr.
Addabbo's colleagues credited him with turning the tide against such projects as
the MX and Pershing missiles.

No Ordinary Hawk

Unlike many other members of Congress, he was not easily catalogued as a hawk or
a dove - Mr. Scheuer called him ''a chicken hawk.''

''By that I mean he was for a strong defense, but he wanted a lean and hungry
defense,'' said Mr. Scheuer, who was second to Mr. Addabbo in seniority among
House members from New York City. ''Joe viewed the Pentagon generals as a bunch
of bureaucrats and he took what they said with a large grain of salt. That made
him a major force for rationality in defense spending.''

What many called Mr. Addabbo's ''credibility and knowledge'' on defense matters
also drew praise from Republicans such as Representative Guy V. Molinari, of
Staten Island, with whom Mr. Addabbo most recently worked on winning final
approval on the home-port measure. Mr. Molinari said it had been Mr. Addabbo who
had convinced him, a strong Reagan Administration supporter, and other
Republicans to vote against the President's MX missile program.

Over the years, Mr. Addabbo also was a chief sponsor of legislation that helped
poor families pay for household heat, assisted small businesses and steered
funds to economically depressed areas.

Losses in the Reagan Era

Not long after he became chairman of the subcommittee, the Reagan Administration
began and Mr. Addabbo faced a growing national mood more receptive to increased
military spending. As a result, Mr. Addabbo frequently lost legislative
skirmishes within his subcommittee - including those on the B-1 and a nuclear
freeze. But his criticism of some of the programs - such as the MX missile - as
wasteful and inefficient occasionally won out in votes by the full House.

Mr. Addabbo was born March 17, 1925, in Ozone Park. He attended public schools
there, went to the City College of New York and graduated from St. John's
University School of Law in 1946. He opened a law practice in Ozone Park, which
he maintained until his election to Congress.

Unlike many members of Congress, Mr. Addabbo commuted to the capital weekly. He
once said that he had moved only four times in his life, all within the space of
10 blocks.

A String of Successes

He began his Congressional career with a 1960 victory in his first try for
elective office as the Democratic candidate in a conservative district that had
been represented for many years by Albert H. Bosch, a Republican, who was
retiring.

At the time, most observers attributed his victory to the large numbers of Irish
and Italian Roman Catholics who turned out to vote for the Democratic
presidential candidate, Senator John F. Kennedy. Whatever the reason, Mr.
Addabbo converted that first victory into a string of successes, often running
not only on the Democratic line but the Republican and Liberal Party lines as
well.

He defied the vagaries of redistricting, which shifted and reshifted his
district over the years. He also weathered a strong Conservative Party surge in
the 1960's and early 70's along with changes in the ethnic makeup of the area,
which went from an overwhelmingly Italian, Irish and German mix in 1960 to one
that was nearly two-thirds black and Hispanic residents in 1982.

Mr. Addabbo conceded that his first real political scare came in 1982 when a
black candidate, Simeon Golar, armed with a modern campaign-polling apparatus,
nearly edged him out in the Democratic primary election.

In 1984, Mr. Golar, buoyed by the sweep of the district by the Rev. Jesse
Jackson in that year's Democratic Presidential primary, challenged Mr. Addabbo
again. But this time, the incumbent hired his own battery of consultants and
pollsters and won handily, with 68 percent of the vote.

Mr. Addabbo is survived by his wife, Grace; two sons, Dominick and Joseph Jr.,
and a daughter, Dina, all of South Ozone Park.

A funeral mass is to be said Tuesday at 11 A.M. at St. Patrick's Cathedral, at
Fifth Avenue and 51st Street.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Joseph P. Addabbo with Secretary of Defense Harold Brown in
1979 (NYT/George Tames)

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 13, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI SIGNALS A NEW CHILL IN RELATIONS WITH U.S.

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 958 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, April 12


Hanoi, saying it is disappointed that progress in the search for Americans
missing since the Vietnam War has not elicited ''cooperation and good will''
from the United States, has suddenly shifted to a much harsher public stance
toward Washington.

The shift, which comes after less than a year of improving relations, raises the
possibility that efforts to determine the fate of more than 1,700 Americans
still unaccounted for in Vietnam will be halted, according to Hanoi officials.

Recent public statements from Hanoi also indicate that the Vietnamese are
becoming alarmed at signs of reinvigorated Thai-American military cooperation
and the likelihood that more American support will be given to rebels fighting
the Vietnamese-backed Government of Cambodia.

'A U.S. Comeback'

After Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger toured the Cambodian border area
last Tuesday while on a visit to Thailand, the Vietnamese News Agency,
envisioning what it called ''a U.S. comeback to Southeast Asia,'' said:

''The military cooperation between Washington and Bangkok is increasing to the
dangerous point of reopening U.S. military bases in Thailand. This dangerous
policy of Bangkok is directly threatening the fundamental national interests of
Thailand.''

On Thursday, Vietnam turned over to the United States the remains of 21 people
believed to be missing American servicemen. It was the first repatriation of war
dead this year and the third largest since 1975.

But in a meeting with reporters today, Deputy Foreign Minister Hoang Bich Son
said that ''in the absence of cooperation and goodwill from the United States, a
lot of obstacles could be created'' in the search for missing Americans.

The Communist Party newspaper Nhan Dan has recently begun to attack American
officials for what it said were statements indicating the United States was
''ready to use force, if necessary, to free any American prisoners'' in Vietnam.
The attacks were apparently a reaction to testimony in Congress by Assistant
Secretary of Defense Richard L. Armitage, who said the United States would take
''appropriate action'' if it was determined that the Vietnamese Government was
holding Americans in Vietnam.

Another article in Nhan Dan criticized the State Department for saying there
were violations of human rights in Vietnam. The newspaper called the annual
human rights report a ''brazen slander and a manifestation of the U.S. hostile
attitude toward the Vietnamese people.''

''The Washington authorities,'' the article said, ''have spent large amounts of
money for propaganda campaigns against Vietnam, the Soviet Union and other
socialist countries in hopes of covering up the fact that they themselves are
the most brazen violators of human rights in the world.''

Mr. Son, charging that the United States has rejected two sets of Vietnamese
proposals for a joint agreement on solving the missing-in-action issue, today
called for a written accord between the two nations. He declined to elaborate on
what was in the proposals, but the Vietnamese have long sought a two-year
timetable for completion of outstanding missing-persons cases.

The United States has rejected a written accord in the belief that this would
hinder Washington from pursuing the issue after the time limit expired.

Mr. Son repeated a charge made earlier this week by Nguyen Can, head of the
Vietnamese Foreign Ministry's department of North American affairs, that
suggestions by some Americans that the Hanoi Government was holding live
Americans had slowed the search process. Hanoi denies that there are any living
Americans in the country; Mr. Son said Saturday that he had been misquoted by
members of an American delegation that visited Hanoi in February. The group, led
by Mr. Armitage, had reported that Mr. Son said some Americans may be living in
remote areas without Hanoi's knowledge.

A loss of momentum on this issue -coming less than a year after what Washington
considered to be a breakthrough with Hanoi - would follow a pattern of ill-fated
efforts to resolve problems between the two nations.

Among the now-stalemated questions are the Amerasian children and
''re-education'' camp inmates who the Reagan Administration has said it would be
willing to resettle in the United States. Also stalled is the Orderly Departure
Program, under which Vietnamese leave their country legally for the United
States and other Western nations under the auspices of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.

Causes and Consequences

Hanoi has always taken the position that its offer last summer to resolve the
missing Americans issue ''within two years'' was strictly a humanitarian
gesture.

But at the same time, diplomats say, the Vietnamese may have thought that a
gesture of good will on their part would quickly be reciprocated by the
Americans. Diplomats are almost unanimous in saying that Hanoi still puts a very
high priority on getting United States diplomatic recognition.

Diplomats also suggest that the steady succession of delegations from the United
States coming to Vietnam to discuss the issue of missing Americans might have
left Hanoi officials with the impression that this issue was more important to
the United States than the continuing Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia.

The diplomats say it is the Vietnamese presence in Cambodia that has soured
relations between Hanoi and most nations outside the Soviet bloc. The United
States has taken the same position: that Cambodia is the ultimate issue.

A foreigner in Phnom Penh, however, said the Vietnamese are shrewd and
experienced readers of American political signals, and may think it possible to
extract concessions from Washington ''by playing the M.I.A. card.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 13, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: SUNDAY, APRIL 13, 1986

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 2, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 555 words


International

President Reagan sent Vernon A. Walters, the chief American delegate to the
United Nations, to European capitals to seek support for possible United States
action against Libya and to discuss Libyan involvement in terrorist activities,
Administration officials said. At the same time, Mr. Reagan announced he was
sending Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d to Europe later this month to discuss
ways to combat terrorism. White House officials said United States
counterterrorism experts would confer with European officials Monday and Tuesday
in advance of Mr. Meese's visit. [Page 1, Column 6.]

The allied powers in West Berlin responded to the bombing of a discotheque there
a week ago with the announcment that they were taking measures to check
international terrorism and remove people ''posing a threat to the population of
Berlin.'' A statement issued in the name of the United States, Britain and
France said the measures were ''exceptional and provisional.'' [1:5.]

Haiti is drifting without direction or leadership from the ruling council that
succeeded the Duvalier regime two months ago, according to diplomats, local
businessmen and foreign experts. Conversations with Haitians and members of
embassies give the strong impression that the Government barely exists. [1:2.]

Hanoi's attitude to the U.S. has suddenly become much harsher over the issue of
Americans missing since the Vietnam War. Hanoi says it is disappointed that
progress on the missing Americans has not elicited ''cooperation and good will''
from the United States. The shift, which follows a period of improving
relations, raises the possibility that efforts to determine the fate of more
than 1,700 Americans may be halted. [1:4.]

National

The movement out of cities has reversed, according to Census Bureau figures.
Metropolitan areas, which lost population to rural areas in the 1970's, are
attracting most people on the move. The figures are contained in a draft of the
bureau's Geographical Mobility report for 1984, which measures permanent moves
in the previous 12 months. [1:1.]

David A. Stockman's memoirs say that President Reagan had little grasp of the
large cuts in Government spending that his Administration sought upon taking
office five years ago. ''When he was later called on to justify the cuts,'' said
Mr. Stockman, who was Mr. Reagan's budget director, ''he would remember only
that he was making a cut, not why.'' After months of seclusion, Mr. Stockman has
begun publishing kiss-and-tell recollections of his four and a half years as a
powerful member of the Administration. [1:3.]

LaRouche fund-raising is the subject of a Federal grand jury investigation of
organizations affiliated with the extremist Lyndon H. LaRouche Jr. A
prosecutor's affidavit filed in the inquiry said early findings ''indicate an
extensive nationwide pattern'' of credit card fraud by LaRouche representatives.
[1:1.]

Metropolitan

A broken steam line shut subways on the West Side for six hours and detoured
traffic for more than 12 hours Friday night. The ruptured line spewed
asbestos-contaminated debris over a three-block stretch of Eighth Avenue between
55th and 58th Streets. Crews, responding to a ''level one'' emergency, worked
through the night to clean up the debris. [38:1.]

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 13, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FAIR WARNING;
REAGAN CONFRONTS AN INTRACTABLE QADDAFI

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1019 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


OF all the problems that have confronted Ronald Reagan as President, none has
proved so intractable as terrorism.

Last week, for the second consecutive week, the President devoted much of his
attention to Colonel Muammar el-Qaddafi and the terrorist acts the Libyan leader
is believed to have inspired, if not actually ordered. The focus of Presidential
attention remained locked on terrorism even while other weighty matters of state
and politics - Moscow, Nicaragua, budget, taxes, oil prices - crowded Government
agendas in Washington. Last week the preoccupation intensified in the aftermath
of the latest deadly terrorist attacks, on an American airliner over Greece and
a West Berlin discotheque favored by American soldiers. Officials in Washington
said Colonel Qaddafi was ''probably linked'' to the TWA attack and spoke of
''incontrovertible evidence'' tying him to the one in Berlin.

The President did not go that far. He called the Libyan leader a ''mad dog'' -
to which Colonel Qaddafi replied that he would not be deterred by the
''insults'' of an ''old man'' - and said the United States was ready to strike
militarily once more if he was convinced of Libyan complicity in the two latest
outrages.

Prospective targets, it was said, were Libyan coastal air bases. At the week's
end, an American armada - aircraft carriers, cruisers, destroyers - was steaming
in the Mediterranean awaiting the Commander-in-Chief's orders.

Two weeks ago, convinced that Libya was the principal (or at least the most
vulnerable) fountainhead of random violence in Europe and the Mediterranean, the
Administration sought to punish Colonel Qaddafi (or perhaps encourage his own
armed forces to rise against him) through conventional military means.
Responding to challenges from Libyan forces in the Gulf of Sidra, United States
ships and planes sank Libyan patrol boats and damaged Libyan missile sites.

If that demonstration of American power changed anything, it was evident neither
from intelligence reports nor from subsequent events. On April 2, a bomb went
off in a Trans World Airlines jet as it approached Athens, killing four
passengers, three of them Americans. On April 5, a bomb went off in the West
Berlin discotheque, killing an American serviceman and a Turkish woman and
wounding 230 other people, including more than 50 Americans.

Mr. Reagan's pugnacious stance has evoked little criticism from politicians or
others at home.

A New York Times/CBS News Poll completed Thursday showed that 15 percent of
those interviewed considered terrorism the country's most important problem,
compared with the 1 percent who thought so in December and the 6 percent who
agreed in January.

And there were the first, faint signs in Western Europe last week that American
allies were ready to provide slightly more support. France and West Germany both
expelled Libyan diplomats.(NATO allies are cautious, page 2.) But some experts
on the Middle East, here as well as abroad, are questioning the utility of
military strikes as a weapon against terrorism. They doubt that even a much more
massive attack than the last one would either sufficiently frighten Colonel
Qaddafi and his allies to persuade them to rein in the terrorists they sponsor
or seriously undercut the Libyan leader's standing in his own country.

'Making Qaddafi a Hero'

Patrick Seale of The Observer in London, one of the most respected Arabists in
British journalism, said last week that American firepower was ''totally
ineffective against terrorism'' and argued that ''a wise superpower doesn't
think in terms of inflicting punishment on tiny states of 2 or 3 million
people.'' He told CBS News: ''Hitting Qaddafi will only make Qaddafi a bigger
hero than he is already. It will only put more American lives at risk'' and
persuade more Arab states to support the Libyans.

The Reagan Administration, in rebuttal, says that it is expending every possible
intelligence effort to discover and abort terrorist attacks, that it has tried
economic sanctions only to see them fail, partly through the non-cooperation of
European allies, and that it must not give the impression of impotence.

''I grant you that Tomcats and F-16's are not the ideal anti-terrorist
weapons,'' one senior strategist commented. ''But we can't invade Libya, can we?
Our European and Arab allies wouldn't stand for that, and it's not clear that
the American public would, either. So we have to use what we have and hope that
it works. It may not; obviously it hasn't worked so far. But we must try
something, and I don't hear very many creative suggestions from our critics.''

Another constraint is often cited by other officials who believe that Syria is
at least as important a supporter of state terrorism as Libya. Syria is off
limits to an American military attack, they say, because such a strike might
well bring the Soviet Union into the conflict on Syria's side. The Russians
supply weapons and advisers to Libya, but their commitment to Tripoli is not
nearly so strong as their key alliance with Damascus.

As in so many cases in the last two decades - in Vietnam, in Iran and elsewhere
- the United States, for all its military might, finds its room for maneuver
heavily circumscribed. It could defeat Libya with comic ease in a head-to-head
battle, but the goal, after all, is not to conquer Libya but to force its
Government to behave according to international norms. That is the real issue,
the one that has come to dominate Washington recently.

There were so many questions on terrorism at the President's news conference
Wednesday that he only had a moment or two to deal with such major items as the
budget, tax reform and Vice President Bush's seeming concern that oil prices
were falling too far too fast.

For Mr. Reagan, however, even such pressing matters as those must take second
place to curbing terrorism. One of the reasons he was elected in the first
place, and one of the reasons his popularity has continued at a high level, is
the belief of the American public that he would stand up to, would face down,
the nation's enemies.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 13, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE DIFFICULT ART OF COUNTERINSURGENCY ELUDES THE RUSSIANS

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 870 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


THE Soviet armed forces, which have been fighting longer in Afghanistan than
they did in World War II, have apparently learned relatively few military
lessons there, Western experts say. Indeed, perhaps the Russians' most important
decision in Afghanistan has been to resist the temptation to escalate the
hostilities. With an estimated total of 110,000 men, ''the Limited Contingent of
Soviet Forces in Afghanistan,'' as it is called in Moscow, has lived up to its
name, having grown only insignificantly since it entered Afghanistan in December
1979.

Moscow's limited-war policy may be strained by the Reagan Administration's
recent decision to provide shoulder-held portable antiaircraft missiles known as
Stingers to rebels fighting in Afghanistan and Angola. The decision also worries
some Western experts because some of the Afghan rebels are based in Iran.
Critics fear that the Stingers, which could be used against civilian airliners,
might fall into the hands of international terrorists. President Reagan, asked
at his news conference last week if he had such concerns about Stingers
reportedly destined for rebels in Angola, declined to discuss who is getting the
missiles.

The Russians have not followed the United States example in Vietnam, where the
commitment of 19,000 advisers grew to more than 500,000 combat troops in about
three years without decisive results. The Russians have not achieved decisive
results, either, but they have held down their political, economic and military
costs by limiting the size of their quagmire. ''They do not need a quick
victory,'' said one American military officer.

However, despite Moscow's reputation as the global incubator of guerrilla
warriors and teacher of insurgency techniques, its achievements in the difficult
art of counterinsurgency have not been impressive. ''The Afghanistan experience
suggests that armies will do well only at those things for which they habitually
prepare and practice,'' concludes Maj. Joseph J. Collins, of the United States
Army. Since its last big war ended in 1945, the Soviet army has prepared almost
exclusively for large-scale, mechanized warfare against conventional enemies.
Soviet military journals have published relatively few articles on
Afghanistan-related subjects such as mountain warfare, helicopter operations and
physical conditioning of troops. Analysts think the Soviet high command prefers
to concentrate on conventional operations and regards the guerrilla conflict as
an aberration with little future applicability.

Much of what Moscow has learned in Afghanistan has been mundane and of limited
value. For example, to safeguard roads from ambushes and mines, the Russians
have sometimes dropped flares to protect trucks at night and have spread smoke
screens for convoys, an innovation of sorts. Road clearing is a problem in all
guerrilla wars. Large numbers of soldiers are required, but the results are
often poor and seldom lasting. Partly to leapfrog the nagging road problem, the
Russians have embraced the helicopter much as the Americans did in Vietnam. But
they are using only an estimated 650 helicopters, including about 250 armed
gunships, far fewer than the thousands the United States had in Vietnam.

Tactically and strategically, the Russians seem to be as baffled as the
Americans were in Southeast Asia. According to some reports, the Russians are
increasingly moving troops by helicopter. They have apparently learned - as the
Americans did - that in guerrilla wars small units are more useful but at
greater risk than large ones. And in the central Panjshir Valley, where the
Russians used to bombard an area with artillery and air strikes for a week
before attacking, they have learned to move more quickly.

Overall, however, the evidence is overwhelming that the Russians have tried to
quell the insurgency with heavy firepower, much as other armies have done with
only limited success. They have succeeded in depopulating sizable zones, which
may have helped them, Western experts think, but have not come close to ending
the war.

''Soviet strategy appears to have been to hold the major centers of
communications, limit infiltration and destroy local strongholds at minimum cost
to their own forces,'' Major Collins wrote in Parameters, the Army War College
journal. ''In effect, Soviet policy has been a combination of scorched earth and
migratory genocide.'' But even the limited use of toxins and poison gas
apparently has not stopped the insurgents.

One Washington expert thinks the Russians' best hope, although a wan one, is to
strengthen Afghanistan's army. They have had some success, according to Western
intelligence, despite earlier mass desertions and mutinies. But few experts
think the war will be ''Afghanistanized'' soon. Jane's Defense Weekly once said
the war was giving ''vital experience to the Soviet officer corps,'' but not
everyone agrees. No interesting new Soviet military doctrines have emerged, and
their rigid, formal system does not encourage innovation or flexibility. One
Afghan army colonel who defected told Western interrogators that the Soviet
forces were oversupervised, lacking in initiative and ''addicted to cookbook
warfare.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of an Afghan guerilla with an anti-tank grenade launcher
(Reuters)

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 13, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

KING OF THE RODEO

BYLINE: By Thomas McGuane; Thomas McGuane's books include ''Nobody's Angel,''
''Something to Be Desired'' and the forthcoming ''To Skin a Cat,'' a collection
of stories.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1637 words


RAIN OR SHINE A Family Memoir. By Cyra McFadden. Illustrated. 178 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $16.95.

IT would be hard to imagine a more unexpected book by the author of the nimble
and terrific comedy ''The Serial.'' ''Rain or Shine'' is a message in a bottle,
sent with forlorn force to a dead father. That the father was the legendary
voice of rodeo and therefore, to some extent, of town life in the West for 40
years does indeed seem to amplify the breadth and peculiarity of this tale of
rodeo, open roads, motels and towns that, whether they border Canada or Mexico,
are viewed as part of one region. In Miss McFadden's book, this is a remarkably
unupholstered district where lives rise and fall, even respectable lives, with
as much solitude as those of drifters.

When Cy Taillon, the author's father, died, he was canonized as the dean of
rodeo, a Western public figure who, like John Wayne, seems to be the product of
sentimental local taxidermy. Cy Taillon took to probity in later life with the
fervor of a reformed rakehell. Miss McFadden's account of his transformation
doesn't diminish him. Rather, the paired struggles - Taillon's ''to be
Somebody,'' set against his humble farm origins, the Depression and the war, and
Miss McFadden's to find a family among the fragments and a place to call her own
- dignify each other in this spare-parts monument to life in the West, where
traditions of any kind are almost nonexistent. It does not promote some ersatz
sectionalism to state that these lives seem peculiar to the spacious West.

Cy Taillon was a wound-up, hard-drinking, hard-gambling lady-killer rodeo figure
from North Dakota. After a 24-hour courtship, he married Pat Montgomery, a
''soubrette,'' vaudeville dancer and trick rider from Paragould, Ark., an area
where the heat kills chickens by the thousands and people shoot each other over
leaks in the wading pool. They were two people with stars in their eyes who, as
they say in rodeo, ''went down the road,'' literally, in a 1937 Packard in which
they ate, dressed and slept and tried to raise their daughter as a kind of
fairgrounds Shirley Temple. Forty years later, their daughter, the author of
this book, picks through the pieces in scrapbooks, newspaper clippings and her
own mind. With hints from her stepbrothers, neighbors and family friends, she
hunts for her parents in an atmosphere that seems as inappropriate to family
inquiry as a diner on the edge of Panguitch, Utah.

Cy and Pat seem driven as by wind by their ambitions, queerly particularized by
the place they live in, toward display through suicidal trick riding in Pat's
case and Cy's all-consuming mellifluousness as he made the rodeo before him into
a model of goodness where men were men, and women, etc. But before Cy could
really make the legend stick, he had to quit all this hell-raising.

Pat wasn't much help. On a trip back to Cy's family farm, where she stayed for a
month with her vaguely neolithic in-laws while Cy was on the road, she managed
to seduce all the able-bodied ranch hands in the neighborhood. When Cy returned
at his mother's request, Pat drawled, ''The only thing you told me not to do was
smoke in the barn.''

Cy had a kind of caretaker in the early days named Roy Qualley, a plain, honest
type obviously selected to keep Cy out of the deep end and to provide a degree
of normality in a situation that strayed toward the out of control. Roy worked
out on barbells, saved his receipts, took business school correspondence courses
and read Mussolini's precepts for personal efficiency. He was stingy, and Cy was
generous. In Roy's future was a 30-year obsession with nutrition and hair
growth. One speculates in vain as to Cy's and Pat's dialogue as this Iowa yahoo
followed them from town to town, as would be seen, smoldering.

The crash came at the bottom of a spiral of alcohol-fueled fighting in Billings,
Mont. Cy unhooked the trailer and drove away for good. Roy came up to Billings,
hooked the trailer to his car and hauled Pat and Cyra away. The reader wonders
how, with this level of goings-on, it could be so heartbreaking; but it was.
Children don't know the world has to be this way. The child in the middle of Cy
and Pat's catastrophe grew up to be a writer.

Cy married a woman who, years before at the age of 14, spotted him demonstrating
a piano in the window of a Great Falls, Mont., department store. Pat married Roy
and, after opening a dance studio in Missoula, Mont., began having bouts of
mental illness and gave up. Cy's career took off, and he became a conspicuous
Western public figure of a type easily belittled by those outside the region,
unable to comprehend its desperation for connections.

Pat's sister, Ila Mae Gosney, chronicled everything in almost daily letters
whose character cannot quite be described: ''Our town is full of Rape stabbings
and dope. Last night 12 year old girl was stabbed six times in her home. He
tried to Rape her. Didn't make it, he was just out of prison. Few weeks ago 9
year old girl was Raped all most died they haven't caught the man yet. The
police said no woman should be out after dark.  ''So have good day for I love
you all.''

Ila Mae's commentary on life here on earth, particularly in Montana, while she
awaited transport to glory runs with self-assured mania through a book of
passion and illness, arguing with apparent success for faith as any port in a
storm. She apprenticed at this sort of thing back in Paragould when Pat dreamed
of being a dancer and she a fry cook. AS Cy's star ascended and Pat's declined,
Cyra attempted to make a life of her own in California. One imagines that the
remote and dispassionate clarity of ''The Serial'' began in her dislocation. The
courses of her parents' lives grew beyond her reach as her own inscrutability in
their eyes increased. Cyra sits in the crowded San Francisco Cow Palace for the
National Western Rodeo, anonymously listening to the Golden Voice thunder from a
microscopic point in the distance.

And yet the longing for one another in this family never disappeared. They began
to die: Ila Mae; Ila Mae's husband, Wiley; Roy - imprisoned by his vast
collection of vitamins, hair preparations and laetrile -Cyra's husband; and
finally the voice of the Miles City Bucking Horse Sale, the dean of rodeo, Cy
Taillon. When Cyra McFadden returns to a Montana nursing home to tell her mother
the news, the considerable power of this book and of these lives are burned
permanently into the reader's memory.

Precious and Peculiar

In a way, ''Rain or Shine'' has been following Cyra McFadden around for a while.
The family archives that she stored in hatboxes and cartons were hauled back and
forth across the continent as Miss McFadden settled in California, then New
York, then back in California. It's not that she intended ever to rummage
through them and fashion a literary reminiscence of her parents. She was simply
fascinated by her own family history - a history she thought both precious and
peculiar.

''At some point, after dragging those boxes around with me, the material sort of
tapped me on the collarbone and said, 'Write me,' '' she said in a telephone
interview from her fogged-in home in Marin County, Calif., the setting of her
1977 best seller, ''The Serial.''

What emerged, she said, is an affectionate letter - not to her father, as some
have suggested, but to her grown children, Caroline Rey and Lee Hinzet. ''I
wanted to tell them about their family legacy, one I think is extraordinary,''
she said. ''Maybe everybody feels that way about families, but I thought mine
was extra-special, and I felt the kids should have some document of it.''

She said her daughter, in particular, was ''much touched'' by the portrait of
her Grandma Pat and eagerly devoured rough drafts of chapters Miss McFadden sent
along to her. ''Caroline only knew my mother as a very fragile, damaged woman,''
Miss McFadden said. ''I think she felt my mother's career ended so early and it
was Dad who enjoyed a lifetime of recognition.

Here Mom got her own, and Caroline just loved seeing Grandma Pat tap-dancing
across the pages.''

Her son has yet to read the book. He visited her recently from his home in
Missoula, Mont., but spent the two weeks reading back copies of the twice-weekly
column Miss McFadden now writes for The San Francisco Examiner. As for her
father, Cy Taillon, the Golden Voice of the Rodeo, Miss McFadden thinks that
though he ''may not have been pleased with every line,'' he surely would have
enjoyed the book.

''My father loved an audience,'' she said. ''He'd have given anything to play to
another crowd.'' - Esther B. Fein My Father the Cowboy His blue-eyed darling as
a child, named after him, dressed like him as a wrong-sex, unusually short
cowboy, I'd grown up, moved away from Montana, moved away in heart and mind from
my father and shoot first, argue later. I had a couple of degrees, a divorce
behind me and a second marriage; a suburban California house; belonged to the
ACLU; took part in San Francisco peace marches while my half brother by my
father's second marriage was fighting in Vietnam and my father editorializing
from the crow's nest, the rodeo announcer's booth, in support of the war.

The last time we'd seen each other, he and I argued about racial intermarriage,
hippies, Catholicism as the one true religion and what to have for dinner. We
were at an elegant San Francisco Chinese restaurant. My father insisted that we
both eat chow mein. I was full of self and my new sophistication and didn't want
to sit at the same table with a man who'd order chow mein at Kan's. Especially a
man in kangaroo-skin cowboy boots, nipped-in Western suit and diamond pinkie
ring.

We were obnoxious in equal proportions, but my father won. - From ''Rain or
Shine.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Cy Taillon; photo of Cyra McFadden (Deanne Fitzmaurice)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 14, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

A PEEK AT ARTHUR KRIM, ADVISER TO PRESIDENTS

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1069 words


For 20 years, Democratic Presidents slipped into an elegant East Side town house
to seek advice from its owner, raise money from the well-to-do and, once in a
while, revel at grand parties.

Those years ended when President Jimmy Carter left office, but world leaders
still stop at the town house to see Arthur B. Krim - officially the well-known
movie studio chairman and unofficially a trusted counselor to Mr. Carter and
Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson.

Mr. Krim, 76 years old, is known in the publicity-conscious worlds of film and
politics as unusually discreet, and he has steadfastly declined to talk about
his unofficial role. But for the occasion of a fund-raising dinner in his honor
for the Democratic National Committee, to be held tonight at the
Waldorf-Astoria, he bent his longstanding rule and recalled some of the greater,
as well as the lesser, moments.

Mr. Krim and his wife, Dr. Mathilde Krim, a researcher of cancer and acquired
immune deficiency syndrome, were particularly close to Mr. Johnson. They had a
room at the White House during his Presidency, and they were there the March
weekend in 1968 when he announced that he would not seek re-election.

Argument With Johnson

''He told us in November 1967 that he had made his decision not to run,'' Mr.
Krim recalled, sitting on a silk damask sofa in his sun-filled living room.
''But we never believed it.''

The Krims vigorously opposed the idea and over the next five months tried to
dissuade him, usually in early morning or midnight sessions in Mr. Johnson's
White House bedroom. It was a seesaw decision, Mr. Krim said, right up to the
President's television speech on March 31.

''The night before, we left a party -Mrs. Johnson and the President, Mathilde
and myself,'' Mr. Krim said. ''It was about an hour's drive from the party to
the White House. He gave me the speech, and I read it aloud - nothing in it
about withdrawing. Mathilde and I looked at each other, relieved.''

But as they got out of the limousine in the White House driveway, Mr. Johnson
asked his friends up to his bedroom. Mr. Krim said: ''He pulled out a piece of
paper and said, 'See if you have any changes.' He wanted me to help write it. I
said, 'I won't have anything to do with it.' We went into the hall, arguing with
him, saying how we would end up with Nixon in the White House.''

Worry Over the Establishment

In the end, Mr. Krim said, Mr. Johnson believed he had lost the confidence of
the Eastern establishment - paradoxically represented by Mr. Krim, a Columbia
University graduate, senior partner of the law firm of Phillips, Nizer,
Benjamin, Krim & Ballon and at the time chairman of the United Artists movie
company, which he had bought in 1951 and rescued from bankruptcy.

Mr. Johnson believed that he could win his party's nomination and the general
election but that he would have difficulty uniting the country without ''the
support of this so-called Eastern establishment, in which he included The Times,
Newsweek, Time magazine and The Washington Post,'' Mr. Krim said.

In his book on the Johnson era, a former Johnson aide, Jack Valenti, described
Mr. Krim's relationship with President Johnson as one of the Administration's
best-kept secrets. Mr. Valenti, who is president of the Motion Picture
Association of America, wrote that in the last two years of the Johnson
Presidency, no man ''had the total confidence of the President to the degree of
intimacy and respect of Arthur Krim.''

Paris on 3 Hours' Notice

Practically everywhere the Johnsons went, the Krims went, including Texas, where
the New Yorkers bought a neighboring ranch. On three hours' notice, Dr. Krim
even went to Paris at Mr. Johnson's behest.

''He called one evening,'' she said. ''He said, 'Mathilde, can you move fast? I
need you at the White House at 1 A.M.; you're going to Paris with my three
astronauts.' ''

Dr. Krim, whom Mr. Johnson called on because she speaks five languages and
because he felt she could help ''dress up'' the astronauts' wives, said she
broke up a dinner party, got her husband to drive her to Newark International
Airport and accompanied the astronauts to the Paris Air Show.

It was part of a last-minute plan by the President to prevent the Russian Yuri
Gagarin, the first man in space in 1961, from stealing the international
limelight.

The Krims admired Mr. Johnson's concept of his Great Society program, especially
its legislation on health, education and civil rights. But there were occasions
on which they disagreed with him over Vietnam.

Headed President's Club

Mr. Krim said he felt strongly that had the United States not already intervened
in Vietnam before Mr. Johnson became President, ''he would never have gone in.''

Mr. Krim got to know Mr. Johnson while raising money for President Kennedy
through a new format known as the President's Club.

The club was a way for wealthy contributors to give to a fund that the President
could use for campaign purposes. For their largesse, donors received exclusive
privileges - they were invited to seminars with Cabinet members, summoned to
state dinners or placed on important-sounding advisory commissions.

Mr. Krim cited another fund-raising tactic: a ''very broad practice of making
contributions through surrogates -many of the important, wealthy people would
spread it around their office.''

But he said the campaign finance reforms of recent years had not been perfect
either.

In recent years the Krims have been host to the former Prime Minister of Israel,
Menachem Begin, and to Desmond Tutu, the South African Bishop who received the
Nobel Peace Prize in 1984. Walter F. Mondale used the Krim house as a New York
refuge during the 1984 Presidential campaign.

Many times Mr. Krim has turned down offers to go to Washington in an official
capacity, and he also turned down President Johnson's offer to appoint him
Ambassador to the United Nations.

As someone who has made big business decisions - buying United Artists, where he
worked with directors, including Peter Sellers and Woody Allen, then eventually
leaving to found another movie company, Orion Pictures, which he now heads - Mr.
Krim said he was not suited to the bureaucratic world.

Besides, he said, there is no official position he could have had - ''even in
the Cabinet'' - that could have surpassed his unofficial role in the Johnson
Presidency.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Arthur Krim (NYT/Don Hogan Charles)

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 15, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE SKIES OVER LIBYA'S CAPITAL, PLANES ROAR AND BOMBS RESOUND

BYLINE: By EDWARD SCHUMACHER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1307 words

DATELINE: TRIPOLI, Libya, Tuesday, April 15


For nearly 10 minutes, the night sky was ablaze with explosions from missiles
and tracers as the American planes soared out of the distance.

Hours later, doctors said 60 to 100 wounded civilians had come to a hospital. It
was not known how many people might have been killed, and the doctors did not
offer an estimate.

Bombs fell on an upper-middle-class neighborhood that included the French
Embassy. When reporters toured the area after daybreak, it was littered with
broken glass, collapsed walls and destroyed cars. The reporters saw one body.
The target appeared to be a communications building with a large antenna on top
and several antennas behind it. The building's function was not clear, and
officials would not say.

The bombs fell short of the building, and although its windows were blown out,
the antennas stood intact on the roof.

The attacks began shortly before 2 A.M. (7 P.M. Monday, New York time), when the
rumble of bombs could first be heard. For nearly 10 minutes afterward, the sky
turned into a fireworks display of missiles and bombs.

Missiles could be seen rising into the air, but no American planes appeared to
be hit.

Volleys of Antiaircraft Fire

The air strikes were met by volleys of antiaircraft fire. Smoke could be seen
rising in the capital.

The reaction here was slow. The city's lights were not blacked out until 20
minutes after the attack began.

Even during the bombing, there was a strange calm on the city streets. Cars
moved beneath the street lights around the harbor.

The state-run Libyan radio asserted that bombs had fallen on the barracks where
Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader, maintains his headquarters, and that
some members of his family were wounded in the raids. The reports could not be
confirmed.

Officials said a downed American airplane would be shown to reporters later
today.

During the attack, no Libyan aircraft could be seen taking off or pursuing the
American planes.

More than three hours later, sporadic explosions and gunfire - apparently all of
Libyan origin -could still be heard.

Soon after the strikes began, the Libyan radio began playing martial music,
interspersed with slogans.

A radio announcement said, ''The savage American invaders carried out a
treacherous and barbaric air strike this morning against the residence of the
brother leader of the revolution.''

It added, ''A number of members of the family of the brother leader were injured
as a result of this raid.''

The radio asserted that three American planes had been shot down and that the
American pilots had been killed by Libyan civilians. The report could not be
confirmed through neutral sources.

In a 1981 encounter over the Gulf of Sidra, the Libyans also said they had
downed American jets. In clashes last month in and around the disputed gulf, a
similar claim was made.

In both instances, the United States denied that it had lost any aircraft.

A Day of Preparations

In the hours before the American air strikes today, Libya had continued war
preparations in the expectation of an imminent attack.

Staff members at many hospitals had been put on 24-hour alert, and blood plasma
had been stockpiled, according to foreign doctors and nurses working here. They
also said additional emergency wards had been prepared.

Mobile antiaircraft missile batteries and radar were reported to have been moved
to new positions around the capital and its commercial airport.

At Wheelus Air Base on the edge of the city, where American troops were
stationed until 1970, warplanes had been widely spread out to avoid damage to
more than one plane at a time if attacked on the ground, according to diplomats
close to the Libyan military.

Libya's more than 500 combat aircraft, built in the Soviet Union and France,
could be moved from coastal bases to a second line of bases in the interior, the
diplomats said.

No General Mobilization

But there was no general mobilization and no reserve call-up as civilian life
continued as usual in this seaside capital on Monday, a sparkling spring day.

The preparations continued as the Qaddafi Government rejected as ''political
terrorism'' a move by the European Community to cut back the number of Libyan
diplomats in Europe.

Libya's equivalent of a Prime Minister, the Secretary General of the General
People's Congress, Jadallah Azuz al-Talhi, said in a statement Monday night that
''the United States is playing the role of military terrorism and Europe is
playing the role of political and economic terrorism'' against Libya and the
Arab world.

''There is no justification for any military, political or economic action
against Libya,'' he said.

''Libya is not afraid of an American attack,'' he added. ''It will face it and
defeat it with all the Arab countries.''

'Like the Price in Vietnam'

An earlier statement by the People's Liaison Bureau, the equivalent of a Foreign
Ministry, said the United States would pay a price ''like the price paid in
Vietnam.''

The bureau denied assertions on Sunday by Deputy Secretary of State John C.
Whitehead that Libya was involved in training, financing and supplying
terrorists. It said Libya was against ''all terrorist operations, airplane
hijacking and the murder of innocents.''

But the official Libyan press agency reported on Monday that Libyan ''suicide
missions'' worldwide were ready to respond to an American attack.

On Sunday night, the Ministry of Information produced what it said was a
''military source'' who vowed that Libya would attack shipwrecked American
sailors and downed pilots if there was fighting.

Companies Told to Move Workers

Western diplomats here confirmed that five foreign companies - two West German,
two South Korean and one Swedish - were ordered by a revolutionary committee on
Sunday night to move men onto army camps to take over repairs and to prepare the
camps for the housing of civilian workers.

Colonel Qaddafi said on Sunday that he had evacuated army camps considered
American targets and that he would put foreign civilians in the camps.

It was unclear what army bases were involved or where they were. It was also
unclear if the Government wanted the companies to send workers to live on the
bases immediately or just to do day work on them.

Western diplomats and American residents here said no American companies or
individuals had been required or asked to move onto the army bases or to be
involved in the work.

The revolutionary committees are a parallel government formed by Colonel Qaddafi
outside the regular bureaucracy. While the companies could not legally be
ordered to move onto the bases, most have such extensive interests here that
holding out against Government pressure could put them in jeopardy, Western
diplomats said.

Americans Stay in Touch

An American oil worker here said Americans living in the country had arranged an
informal system to stay in touch with each other in case of emergency. He said
he would know if any American had been required to move onto a military base.
Western diplomats say about 800 to 1,300 Americans remain in Libya, most of them
in defiance of an order by the Reagan Administration in January to leave.

Foreign diplomats said workers for Occidental Petroleum, the largest American
oil company here, had reported that Occidental had not been contacted and had
not begun any moves onto military bases.

Meanwhile, Italian diplomats here said they had little additional information on
Bishop Giovanni Martinelli and three foreign priests and a nun who were detained
Thursday night by armed members of a revolutionary committee in Benghazi. The
diplomats said the group was being held in a villa in Benghazi and was being
questioned by the revolutionary committee. But the diplomats said they did not
know the purpose of the questioning.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Jadallah Azuz, Libyan official, with Maltese leaders Dom
Mintoff, and Karmenu Mifisud Bonnici

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 15, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

POLL SHOWS CONFUSION ON AID TO CONTRAS

BYLINE: By DAVID K. SHIPLER

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1547 words


Americans are uncertain about which side the United States is backing in
Nicaragua and only one out of four supports President Reagan's request for $100
million in aid to the rebels who are trying to overthrow the Nicaraguan
Government, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.

With the approach of another key vote by the House of Representatives on the
President's proposal, majorities of those polled accepted his argument that
Nicaragua is a risk to American interests, but opposed his remedy of $100
million in aid.

Only 38 percent knew that Washington was supporting the guerrillas and not the
Government. That confusion extended to the nature of Nicaragua's Government,
which is aligned with the Soviet Union; just 20 percent said it was Communist,
19 percent said it was a right-wing dictatorship and 49 percent said they didn't
know.

Nicaraguan Threat Perceived

Nevertheless, after questions about the Reagan aid plan had been asked, a more
defined image of Nicaragua seemed to emerge. Fifty-nine percent of the 1,601
adults interviewed by telephone from April 6 through 10 answered yes when asked
if they thought the Nicaraguan Government would provide the Soviet Union with
military bases, and 56 percent agreed that Nicaragua constituted a threat to the
security of other Central American countries. The survey's margin of sampling
error was plus or minus three percentage points.

It therefore appeared that President Reagan had succeeded only partially in his
efforts to sway the American public toward his views on Central America. There
was concern, but it failed to translate into support for action by the United
States.

Citing the risk of another Vietnam, the need to address domestic problems and a
conviction that the money would be wasted, only 25 percent expressed a
willingness to assist the contras. Sixty-two percent opposed the aid, and 12
percent had no opinion.

'A Financial Drain' Is Seen

''If we had some assurance that the money would do the job, that would be one
thing,'' said Thomas Haeger of Vancouver, Wash., who described himself as a
conservative Republican. ''But it would just be the beginning of years of a
financial drain. After Vietnam we don't need the money worry or the emotional
worry.''

As the example of Mr. Haeger illustrated, opposition to the aid request came
even from the ranks of President Reagan's supporters. Even those who approved of
the way in which Mr. Reagan was handling his job as President - a very strong 64
percent of the total - rejected aid to the contras by a margin of 52 to 35
percent. Those who described themselves as conservatives opposed it by 57 to 30
percent and Republicans by 51 to 36 percent.

The survey was done after weeks of vigorous debate in Washington over the
Nicaragua issue. The Reagan Administration is seeking to end a two-year
Congressional ban on military aid to the contras - $27 million in nonlethal aid
was provided during the fiscal year ending last March 31 - but has encountered
considerable opposition, especially in the Democratic-controlled House.

Vote Scheduled for Tuesday

Last month, the House narrowly defeated the Administration's request. The
Republican-controlled Senate then passed a compromise, under which the aid would
be withheld pending diplomatic efforts to get Nicaragua's agreement to move
toward internal democratization and refrain from supporting insurgencies against
its Central American neighbors. The House vote Tuesday is expected to be close.

Judging from the results of the Times/CBS News Poll, the contra aid issue
appears to have tapped a deep well of ambivalence over the place of the United
States in countering undemocratic, pro-American regimes.

Asked whether Washington should back a right-wing dictatorship friendly to the
United States or urge free elections even if they might lead to a Communist
government, those surveyed opted for the elections by a margin of 40 to 33
percent.

The public also expressed more willingness to criticize such governments than to
try to change them. To the question, ''Should the United States criticize
governments that deny human rights to their citizens, even if those governments
support us on important foreign policy issues?'' 54 percent said yes and 31
percent said no. But opposite sentiments were evoked by the question ''Should
the United States try to change a dictatorship to a democracy where it can, or
should the United States stay out of other countries' affairs?'' Sixty-two
percent said stay out, and 28 percent said try to change.

Terrorism Seen as Top Problem

Terrorism, not Central America, was listed most frequently as the most important
problem facing this country, followed by the economy, unemployment, the risk of
nuclear war and the budget deficit. Only 12 of the 1,601 persons questioned
mentioned Central America as the United States' chief worry.

Few of the aid proponents accepted the idea of American military intervention,
and some saw money as a way of avoiding a deeper entanglement. ''If we don't
help, it will turn out like Cuba - we'll be threatened from all sides,'' said
Eva Gramm, a restaurant cook in Avon, S.D.. ''I have three sons - one is
eligible for the draft,'' she continued. ''I think we should send money and keep
our troops out.''

''I'd rather send money than troops,'' said Robert Thomas, an electrician from
Easton, Pa. ''That's where we have to draw the line: no troops, no advisers.''

Indeed, when a suggestion was made to include American personnel in the aid, the
survey showed support for American involvement dropping sharply. The 25 percent
who favored funds to the contras fell to 16 percent when asked whether they
would favor American military advisers if the money ''did not work.'' Then, if
advisers ''did not work,'' they were asked whether they would favor sending
United States combat troops. Only 10 percent said yes.

No Group Favored Aid

Opposition to aid for the contras crossed all political, ethnic and regional and
socio-economic lines. No demographic group favored it. But within that broad
picture, some differences emerged. Aid was opposed by a lower percentage of men
than women, whites than blacks, Republicans than Democrats and conservatives
than liberals.

The higher the education and income, the less the opposition. Those earning more
than $50,000 a year were against aid by a margin of 52 to 40 percent, while
those earning less than $12,500 a year opposed it by 68 to 17 percent.
Similarly, college graduates were against it by 53 to 33 percent, and those with
less than a high school education by 68 to 17 percent.

The shadow of the long, losing war in Vietnam appeared to hang over the prospect
of involvement in Central America. Sixty-two percent of the respondents said
that they feared that the United States would get involved in Nicaragua the way
it did in Vietnam, although when asked to volunteer reasons for opposing contra
aid, only 2 percent mentioned ''another Vietnam'' and the danger of escalation.

Some proponents of aid dismissed the Vietnam analogy. ''We won't have another
Vietnam,'' said Eva Gramm. ''It was a harsh lesson; it won't happen again.''

Domestic Problems Cited

The most frequent reason given against the aid, and given most often by urban
residents and those with lower incomes and less education, was that problems in
the United States were more important. Of those opposing assistance, 44 percent
said the $100 million should be spent on domestic problems.

In addition, follow-up interviews revealed some skepticism about the contras'
abilities and a fear that money would be pocketed by corrupt rebels. Some
respondents pointed to the example of Ferdinand E. Marcos, the former President
of the Philippines, who has been accused of enriching himself with American
Government funds.

''If we give money to the contras, we should monitor where and how it is being
spent,'' said Mary Battle of Riveredge, N.J.

HOW THE SURVEY WAS CONDUCTED

The latest New York Times/CBS News Poll is based on telephone interviews
conducted April 6 through 10 with 1,601 adults around the United States,
excluding Alaska and Hawaii.

The sample of telephone exchanges called was selected by a computer from a
complete list of exchanges in the country. The exchanges were chosen so as to
insure that each region of the country was represented in proportion to its
population. For each exchange, the telephone numbers were formed by random
digits, thus permitting access to both listed and unlisted residential numbers.

The results have been weighted to take account of household size and number of
residential telephones and to adjust for variations in the sample relating to
region, race, sex, age and education.

In theory, in 19 cases out of 20 the results based on such samples will differ
by no more than 3 percentage points in either direction from what would have
been obtained by interviewing all adult Americans. The error for smaller
subgroups is larger. For example, for either Republicans or Democrats the
potential error is plus or minus four percentage points.

In addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any
survey of public opinion may introduce other sources of error into the poll.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart showing results of poll

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 15, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE U.S., AUDIENCES LISTEN IN ON THE ATTACK

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 631 words


Vivid reports of the American air strikes in Libya - of thundering explosions,
jets roaring overhead and fires dancing on the horizon of a darkened city - were
broadcast live to nationwide audiences last night by American network
correspondents in Tripoli.

Though confined to their hotel during the bombing and unable to provide pictures
to accompany their audio reports, the correspondents nonetheless gave dramatic
running accounts of what they could see and hear from windows and balconies
overlooking the city and the harbor.

They told of explosions that shook their building, the pounding of antiaircraft
guns and the scream of planes coming in. Some also told of bursts of tracer fire
in the night sky and fires leaping from targets that could not be identified.

While all the reports were transmitted by telephone, it was possible from time
to time to hear explosions in the background, and the drama of the accounts,
unfolding even as the bombs were falling, enlisted listeners' imaginations in
the way of old-time radio.

Confined to Their Hotel

The reports, broadcast by correspondents for ABC, CBS, NBC and the Cable News
Network during prime-time news programs, were reminiscent also of the graphic
battle reporting familiar to American audiences during the London blitz in World
War II and during the Vietnam War.

Throughout the night, as they had for most of the day, each of the networks kept
telephone lines open to New York, and as the sounds of explosions began in
Tripoli shortly after 2 A.M. (7 P.M., New York time) the correspondents provided
running accounts of the action.

Libya made no attempt to interrupt any of the telephoned broadcasts, according
to network officials, but under Libyan Government orders the correspondents were
all confined to their hotel, the Al Khabir, and the lights went out in the hotel
and in most parts of the city.

Reporting from rooms on a high floor overlooking the harbor, Steve Delaney of
NBC News went on the Nightly News at 7:02 P.M.

''Tripoli is under attack,'' he said. ''I can see planes going overhead. There
are explosions and a great deal of small arms fire and antiaircraft fire in the
distance. I can't tell exactly what's being targeted. An aircraft just flew over
the harbor.''

Later, Mr. Delaney told of more explosions, of the crump and boom of
antiaircraft guns as another wave of American warplanes roared over. Looking
south, away from the harbor, he told of fires on the horizon, of smoke rising in
the night sky.

City 'Virtually Blacked Out'

Charles Glass of ABC News said in a live report: ''For what seemed to be the
20-odd minutes of the attack, one could hear quite a good deal of antiaircraft
fire going up toward the sky, and one could see missiles being fired from the
port area and and other areas around Tripoli.''

''We saw no sign that any planes were brought down,'' he went on. ''It was dark.
It was impossible for us to even see the planes, even though some flares were
fired over the city to light it.''

Allen Pizzey, a CBS News correspondent, said on the Evening News that he was
awakened shortly before 2 A.M. by the roar of planes.

''The city is virtually blacked out,'' he said as the attack unfolded. He told
of the impact of bombs thudding in the distance, of smoke in the sky and
sporadic antiaircraft fire. With him, Jeff Fager, a CBS producer, put the
telephone out the window to capture the sounds of gunfire and explosions in the
distance.

John Donovan, a Cable News Network correspondent, went on the air about 7:15
P.M. and told of flashes in the sky as the bombs fell. Later, in one of his
periodic broadcasts, he said soldiers appeared outside the hotel, raising
concerns over their intentions. The troops left after about 15 minutes however,
he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 15, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Why Money Can't Make the Contras Effective

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 489 words


To the Editor:

As members of Congress consider funds for contra military operations against
Nicaragua, they should focus on key questions that have received little
scrutiny: Are the contras a genuine guerrilla force? If not, can they become one
with enough American backing?

Successful guerrillas traditionally operate inside their own country, attacking
government forces when the situation favors the guerrilla. A guerrilla retreats
from superior forces by blending in with the local population, leaving pursuers
no visible target. To do this, the guerrilla needs to cultivate ties with the
local population. The basic prerequisite for guerrilla success is popular
support.

History bears this out. When the Mongols invaded Vietnam in 1284, the Vietnamese
Marshal Tran Hung Dao, commanding the loyalty of the countryside, used guerrilla
tactics and gained a peace on his terms. In our war for independence, the
American guerrilla leaders Francis Marion, Thomas Sumter and Andrew Pickens used
hit-and-run tactics against the British and melted back into the countryside.

Napoleon's forces were bled white by guerrillas encountered in Spain and Russia.
The Turks in World War I found that Col. T. E. Lawrence and his Arab guerrilla
bands were formidable opponents, again because of using guerrilla tactics in
friendly territory. More recently, Mao Zedong and Fidel Castro used guerrilla
forces with the support of the populace to overthrow governments and take power.

When the guerrilla does not or cannot gain the allegiance of the local
population, failure is inevitable. Insurgencies in Malaya and Kenya were
defeated by the British for this reason. The vast majority of the native
populations remained loyal to the government, and the guerrillas could not use
secrecy, deception and ambush. They were doomed to fail, as Che Guevera did in
Bolivia.

In this historical context, it is obvious that the contras are not a true
guerrilla force, nor does it seem likely they will become one. The contras are
not in Nicaragua, building support with the population while using guerrilla
tactics to demoralize the Sandinistas. Instead, they operate from Honduras and
launch cross-border attacks, which have been characterized by acts of terrorism
against civilians. Thus, they have forfeited the political battle for the hearts
and minds of the Nicaraguan people to the Sandinistas. No amount of U.S. money
seems likely to change this.

It is time to recognize that the contras are not the answer in Nicaragua,
because they cannot do the job militarily and politically. This conclusion is
not based on partisan politics or political propaganda; it is based on the
military history of guerrilla movements. A diplomatic solution is more
appropriate. GREGORY J. WALKO LAWRENCE H. HALL WILLIAM M. ROSE New London,
Conn., March 28, 1986 The writers are, respectively, a student and two members
of the faculty at Connecticut College.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 15, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WHY MONEY CAN'T MAKE THE CONTRAS EFFECTIVE;
Patriot Critics

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 270 words


To the Editor:

Patrick J. Buchanan, White House communications director, wrote early in March,
''The vote on aid to the contras will show whether the Democratic Party stands
with Ronald Reagan and the resistance or Daniel Ortega and the Communists.''
Many Americans may believe it unpatriotic to be critical of our country and the
policies of our President. I agree with a statement made in 1966 by former
Senator F. William Fulbright of Arkansas. He said, ''To criticize one's country
is to do it a service. . . . Criticism, in short, is more than a right; it is an
act of patriotism - a higher form of patriotism, I believe, than the familiar
rituals and national adulation.''

In 1966, America was a nation divided over the Vietnam War. Martin Luther King
Jr., one of America's greatest 20th-century patriots, was critical of our
involvement in Vietnam. He also spoke out strongly and led a movement against
racism, poverty and injustice in our country. Many called him a Communist and
said he was unpatriotic. History has proved he was neither, and we now have a
national holiday to honor him.

Mr. Buchanan has the right to believe and say that America should aid the
contras, but he is way out of line in suggesting that members of Congress voting
against contra aid are soft on Communism and unpatriotic. In a democracy,
diversity of opinion and debate are healthy. Well-informed, thinking citizens
can make up their minds on important issues with no help or arm twisting from
Mr. Buchanan. Many patriotic Americans do not share his obsessive fear of
Communism. PAUL WHITELEY Louisville, Ky., March 30, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 15, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

A 'Plan' to End the Arms Race?

BYLINE: By Mark O. Hatfield; Mark O. Hatfield, Republican of Oregon, is chairman
of the Senate Appropriations Committee and the subcommittee that oversees the
funding of nuclear weapons tests.

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 697 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Administration has a ''secret plan'' to end the nuclear arms race. It must
have. What other possible excuse could there be for the nuclear explosions
carried out recently in the Nevada desert?

Disappointingly few people in Washington - including self-proclaimed advocates
of arms control -have found cause for remorse that the tests have probably
shattered any prospect of limiting runaway nuclear technology. Instead, they are
focusing on the fact that the Russians have sidestepped normal diplomatic
channels by publicly challenging the United States to halt all nuclear tests.
Thus, the charge goes, Moscow is fueling international political pressure on the
United States. It doesn't seem to matter that the Soviet offer is backed up by
unilateral restraint.

If the principal objection to the Soviet proposal seems a bit strange, the
points advanced to support it are even stranger. So desperate are the arguments
raised in opposition to a mutual halt in nuclear testing that deductive
reasoning leaves only two possibilities to explain the apologists' position.
Either the sincerity of their commitment to arms control is in question or they
know something the rest of us don't. If there is a secret plan, let's hope it
works better than the secret plan to end the war in Vietnam. Consider the
following two curious assumptions.

Curious assumption No.1. Opposition to nuclear testing - by Moscow or anyone
else - is simplistic and unwarranted. Tests have yielded significant benefits,
such as the development of smaller nuclear weapons, and will continue to
contribute to the development of desirable weapons such as the Midgetman
missile.

The claim that smaller nuclear weapons are better is simply not true. In fact,
in the Strangelovean world of nuclear war-fighting, small is truly beautiful: It
is both sides' smaller highly accurate, multiple-warhead weapons - weapons
developed through extensive testing - that most imperil the human race today.

As far as the future is concerned, continued testing will enable the Russians to
increase the number and potency of warheads aimed at us and to accelerate their
military space program. Even if the Administration is able to negotiate
reductions in certain Soviet weapons, the march of unrestricted technology will
surely outstrip the benefits of such cuts.

Truly preposterous is the suggestion that the single-warhead Midgetman missile,
now under development, is somehow a ''good'' weapon. A nuclear warfighter's
dream because of its surgical military qualities, it will be a welcome addition
to tomorrow's dangerous first-strike force.

Curious assumption No. 2. Nuclear tests are vital to the Star Wars program,
which is in turn a crucial ''bargaining chip.'' A test ban would diminish the
potency of Star Wars as a means of persuading the Russians to reduce their
arsenal.

The Administration's commitment to move forward with Star Wars is unequivocal.
But even in the unlikely event that the Administration has a change of heart,
the President is rapidly running out of time to secure a meaningful agreement.
To sacrifice the very real possibility of a test ban now in order to hold out
for a deal in which Star Wars is traded for cuts in the Soviet arsenal later
defies common sense. How many times do we have to repeat the lesson of the
''bargaining chip'' before we grasp that such weapons inevitably cease to be
bargaining chips beyond a certain stage of development?

Five years have provided ample evidence that only raw political pressure will
lead this Administration to turn the arms race around. That Moscow is now an
active participant in the effort to create that pressure is irrelevant. The
important thing is to tell the Administration in no uncertain terms that it is
neither appropriate nor acceptable to respond to the Russians by exploding more
bombs in the Nevada desert.

The apologists for the Nevada tests are inviting dangerous bravado from the
nuclear warfighters in the Pentagon. The Administration is being allowed to glue
the pedal to the floor and, by refusing a test ban, to run through the one
roadblock to an unlimited nuclear buildup. That is, unless there is a secret
plan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-EdEDITORIAL COLUMN

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 15, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SIMONE DE BEAUVOIR, AUTHOR AND INTELLECTUAL, DIES IN PARIS AT 78

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 2403 words


Simone de Beauvoir, the author whose work included ''The Second Sex,'' a
provocative and influential polemic on the status of women, died yesterday at
Cochin Hospital in Paris. She was 78 years old and lived in Paris.

The cause of death was not immediately disclosed, but Claude Lanzmann, the
director of the film ''Shoah'' and a longtime friend, said she had been in poor
health since undergoing an operation in March.

Miss de Beauvoir, who was for many years a central figure in left-wing French
intellectual circles, also wrote novels, a play and nonfiction ranging from
political commentary to autobiography.

Her death came the day before the sixth anniversary of the death of her longtime
companion, the French existentialist philosopher and critic Jean-Paul Sartre, on
April 15, 1980.

''Simone's de Beauvoir's death stresses the end of an era,'' Prime Minister
Jacques Chirac said yesterday. ''Her committed literature was representative of
certain movements of ideas that, at one time, had an impact on our society. Her
unquestionable talent made her a writer who deserves her place in French
literature. In the name of the Government, I salute her memory in respect.''

'An Authentic Heroine'

Gloria Steinem said yesterday that ''if any single human being can be credited
with inspiring the current international woman's movement, it's Simone de
Beauvoir.'' Betty Friedan yesterday called Miss de Beauvoir an ''authentic
heroine in the history of womanhood.''

Over the years, ''The Second Sex'' remained the book for which Miss de Beauvoir
was known worldwide, and which made her an important theorist of militant,
radical feminism and a heroine of the women's movement. The book, published in
France in 1949 and in the United States in 1953, was her own favorite. It was
translated into more than a dozen languages, was honored and excoriated, and
sold more than a million copies in a paperback edition in the United States
alone. The 1953 Knopf hardcover edition and a paperback edition published in
1974 by Vintage are still in print.

Its basic premise - from which it took off for more than 700 pages of
compelling, exasperating indictment -was best summed up in two sentences:

''One is not born, but rather becomes, a woman. No biological, psychological or
economic fate determines the figure that the human female presents in society;
it is civilization as a whole that produces this creature, intermediate between
male and eunuch, which is described as feminine.''

Condemned U.S. Role in Vietnam

Throughout her life Miss de Beauvoir was active in causes that advanced or
supported her beliefs - from a 1960's international ''tribunal'' condemning the
United States role in Vietnam to the signing of a manifesto with 340 other women
in 1971 admitting to having had an abortion in defiance of existing French law.

Her disillusionment with Marxism in practice was recurrent - regime after
regime, from the Soviet Union through Algeria to Cuba, disappointed her hopes.
But she long advocated what she thought of as the concept of authentic
international revolution, and the civil rights even of those with whom she
disagreed.

Although she proclaimed at 19 that ''I don't want my life to obey any other will
but my own,'' she in fact spent much of her life - from 1929, when she and
Sartre met as students at the Sorbonne, until his death in 1980 - as the closest
companion of Sartre. They lived not in the same apartment but always near each
other, saw each other daily, spent their annual six-week vacation in Rome
together, were completely open about their liaison.

''We have,'' she said once, ''pioneered our own relationship - its freedom,
intimacy and frankness.'' She added, with characteristic candor: ''We had also,
rather less successfully, thought up the idea of the 'trio.' '' She wrote that
she turned down Sartre's offer of marriage because she knew he did not want it,
but that their relationship was central to both their lives, and ''essential
love,'' in Sartre's phrase. They made allowance, at least in theory, for
''contingent'' relationships of less importance.

As she conceded, this was not always a success, but the relationship with Sartre
was always the one that mattered: ''I knew that no harm could ever come to me
from him - unless he were to die before I did,'' she said once, and at another
time commented that ''Since I was 21'' - when she met Sartre - ''I have never
been lonely.''

Basic Existentialism

Although her major theoretical contributions were to feminism, Miss de
Beauvoir's writings, both novels and nonfiction, were also regarded as brilliant
expositions of basic existential belief: that is, that man is responsible for
his own destiny. ''Men may make of their own history a hopeless inferno, a
junkyard of events, an enduring value,'' she wrote in 1947, a sentence that
itself could be a definition of existentialism.

Sartre encouraged her literary ambitions and was credited by her with pushing
her into the investigation of women's oppression that led to the rage and
accusation of ''Le Seconde Sexe.'' The book caused a storm of outrage in France
and an equal furor in the United States. Philip Wylie called it ''one of the few
great books of our era.'' Dr. Karl A. Menninger described it as a ''scholarly
and at the same time pretentious and inflated tract on feminism.''

In 1954, Miss de Beauvoir's novel ''Les Mandarins'' (''The Mandarins'') won the
Prix Goncourt and stirred scandalized delight with what were regarded as thinly
disguised portraits of Sartre, Albert Camus and other leading French
intellectuals. The author never admitted that it was a roman a clef, but did
concede that the novel included an account of her affair with Nelson Algren, the
American writer to whom she dedicated the book. It appeared in the United States
in 1956.

Her first novel, ''L'Invitee,'' published in France in 1943 and in the United
States as ''She Came to Stay'' in 1954, concerned itself with a ''trio,'' with
the triangular relationship among a man and a woman long attached and a second,
younger woman. Miss de Beauvoir, although criticized for longwindedness, said
that she felt she had been influenced by Hemingway, and that she admired the
writing of Kafka, Proust and Joyce. She was a slow, meticulous, daily writer.

Four-Volume Autobiography

Her other novels included ''The Blood of Others'' (1948), ''All Men Are Mortal''
(1955), ''Les Belles Images'' (1967) and ''The Woman Destroyed'' (1968). She
also wrote four volumes of autobiography - ''Memoirs of a Dutiful Daughter''
(1958), ''Force of Circumstance'' (1963), ''The Coming of Age'' (1972) and ''All
Said and Done'' (1974) - and a play, ''The Useless Mouths'' (1954).

A tour of China led to ''The Long March'' in 1958, just as a tour of the United
States had produced - or provoked - ''America Day by Day'' in 1953. Her attitude
toward the United States did not mellow with age and she wrote in the early
70's: ''The moment a nationalist or a popular movement seems to threaten its
interests, the United States crushes it.'' She went on to say that friends
predicted the imminent collapse of the country, adding: ''Perhaps this collapse
may set off a revolution on a worldwide scale? I do not know whether I shall
live long enough to see it, but it is a comforting outlook.''

With Sartre, she also engaged in acts of political protest. In 1970, for
example, they were arrested for selling a banned Maoist newspaper - which they
were doing to protest the ban, not in support of the paper's positions. In 1960,
they were both banned from appearing on France's state-controlled radio or
television because they had signed a manifesto supporting the right to refuse
military service in Algeria, which was fighting for its independence from France
at the time. Only a few years later, in 1967, they were put on a list of
boycotted authors by a semi-official Algerian newspaper because of their support
for Israel.

Throughout her life, Miss de Beauvoir continued her political activism, speaking
out on issues, heading committees, making speeches, signing manifestos. The
condition of women was perhaps her primary ''cause,'' followed some years later
by a similar outrage at the conditions of old age. These she wrote about in
''The Coming of Age'' in 1972, arguing that, for once, women had the advantage:
''Old age is better for women than for men,'' she told an interviewer in 1974.
''First of all, they have less far to fall, since their lives are more mediocre
than those of most men. And then they still have their homes, their housework,
cooking, their children, all the 'feminine' culture.''

Conveyed 'Emotional Toll'

The problems of women in France early in this century figured in a collection of
five early stories by Miss de Beauvoir that was published in the United States
in 1982 under the title ''When Things of the Spirit Come First.''

Earlier, Miss de Beauvoir had written about death, specifically that of her
mother, in the ironically titled ''A Very Easy Death'' (1966). Although she had
never been close to her mother, the book was unusually free in its expression of
emotion. Her mother had been a devout woman; her father a skeptic and
unbeliever. Later, Simone Lucie Ernestine Marie Bertrand de Beauvoir, born in
Paris on Jan. 9, 1908, was to say that this ''disequilibrium, which condemned me
to a perpetual soul-searching, largely explains why I became an intellectual.''

After conventional studies she went to the Sorbonne for a degree and diploma in
philosophy, which she planned to teach. It was there that she met Sartre, a
fellow student three and a half years older than she. ''It was the first time in
my life,'' she wrote ''that I felt intellectually inferior to anyone else.''

For about two years after leaving the Sorbonne, Miss de Beauvoir remained in
Paris. In 1931 she obtained a teaching appointment in Marseilles, and in 1933 in
Rouen. By 1938, she was back in Paris, teaching, and in October she began work
on what would be her first published novel. By 1943, she had given up teaching
to write, and in 1945, she joined Sartre in the editing of Les Temps Modernes, a
monthly review.

Miss de Beauvoir was somewhat humorless, uncompromising and passionate in her
convictions. She remained convinced that, as she wrote in ''The Second Sex,'' a
''totally new society'' would be needed, but became increasingly convinced that
meaningful change in the status of women would not necessarily evolve from
change in the forms of government.

''I think that for the proletariat or a government representing it, to own the
means of production is not enough to change the relationship between people,''
she said in the mid-70's. ''That's what is really important, to change
relationships between people.''

At about the same time, Miss de Beauvoir acknowledged that ''There hasn't been
the change I'd hoped for'' in women's condition. In 1976, some 25 years after
''The Second Sex'' she told an interviewer that she was uncertain about the
coming of the hoped-for revolution.

''But the changes that women are struggling for,'' she said, ''yes, that I am
certain of, in the long run women will win.''

Miss de Beauvoir's survivors include a sister, Helene de Beauvoir.

WRITINGS ABOUT WOMEN

A man who is compelled to go on materially and morally supporting a woman feels
he is victimized. But if he abandons without resources the woman who has pledged
her whole life to him, she will be quite as unjustly victimized. The evil
originates in a situation against which all individual action is powerless.
Women are ''clinging,'' they are a dead weight, and they suffer for it; the
point is that their situation is like that of a parasite sucking out the living
strength of another organism. Let them be provided with living strength of their
own, let them have the means to attack the world and wrest from it their own
subsistence and their dependence will be abolished - that of man also. There is
no doubt that both men and women will profit greatly from the new situation. -
From ''The Second Sex'' (Alfred A. Knopf), translated and edited by H. M.
Parshley.

In my family it was always held that the things of the spirit came first. Papa
devoted his life to the study of literature and Mama to the practice of the
Christian virtues, while Marcelle and Pascal were dedicated to the worship of
beauty and the inner life. As soon as I was three years old Marcelle taught me
to read, and when I was seven I made my first Communion with an extraordinary
degree of piety. I was always very advanced for my age because they paid so much
attention to me at home: Papa used to read Pascal and the tragedies of Corneille
and Racine after dinner and I was allowed to listen; that forms one's mind - I
was always first in examinations, and at the end of term the old ladies of the
Institut Ernestine Joliet embraced me more heartily than any of the other
pupils. These worthy schoolteachers were not overburdened with diplomas, but as
far as devotion and morality were concerned they were second to none: they wore
long black skirts and plum-colored silk blouses that caressed my cheeks when
they pressed me to their bosoms.'' - From ''Marguerite,'' one of several short
stories about French women rebelling against their upbringing, in ''When Things
of the Spirit Come First'' (Pantheon), translated by Patrick O'Brian.

She passed examinations, attended courses, and she won a certificate that
enabled her to work as an assistant librarian in the Red Cross. She learnt to
ride a bicycle again to go to her office. She thought of doing dressmaking at
home after the war. When that time came I was in a position to help her. But
idleness did not suit her. She was eager to live in her own way at last and she
discovered a whole mass of activities for herself. She looked after the library
in an observation sanatorium just outside Paris as a volunteer, and then the one
that belonged to a Catholic club in her neighborhood. She liked handling books,
putting wrappers on them, arranging them, dealing with the tickets, giving
advice to readers. She studied German and Italian, and kept up her English. -
From ''A Very Easy Death,'' a reminiscence, as her mother lay dying of cancer,
of the new life her mother began when she was left a penniless widow at 54 (G.
P. Putnam's and Pantheon), translated by Patrick O'Brian.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Simone de Beauvoir (Gamma-Liaison/Eric Bouvet)

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 15, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

A Rock Effort To Support Man's Rights

BYLINE: By Charlotte Curtis

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 843 words


BILL GRAHAM, the Live Aid impresario, and Amnesty International U.S.A. have made
their deal. The ''Caravan for Human Rights'' is about to begin. And so it falls
to Sting and U2, the rock stars, to take the cause of unjustly imprisoned and
tortured political dissidents to the heartlands. Now what does that say about
America?

For one thing, it says that human rights, like the homeless, the hungry and the
illiterate in America and famine in Africa, just don't have the pull that the
colleges, the hospitals and the great cultural institutions have. They need an
extra push. Further, that if you want to get your message to the biggest
numbers, and Amnesty International is determined, it takes a David Wolper (the
Summer '84 Olympics), Lee Iacocca (the Statue of Liberty) or the rockers to do
it. ''Amnesty is a well-kept secret,'' John G. Healey explained. ''We want to
make it a household name.''

Mr. Healey is Amnesty International's executive director. He says prisoners
whose names are known have a better chance of survival. He thinks the news media
have been helpful. But somehow, he says, Americans do not (or will not) hear,
see or read about human rights issues. When they do, many don't really believe
the atrocity stories.

''I can see it in their faces,'' he said, describing how audiences respond to
his speeches. ''I'll give an example of torture. They take a deep breath and
sort of shrink back.''

Afterward, during the inevitable receptions, he says, he gets the same sort of
questions: '' 'You mean to tell me that when I was on that beach in Acapulco
there was torture going on right there in Mexico?' ''

Yes, he says, Amnesty has evidence that human beings are still tortured in
Mexico, Morocco and perhaps a dozen other countries including India, Spain and
Turkey. He mentioned Morocco because some well-known Americans, including New
Yorkers, were just there taking part in the lavish birthday galas for King
Hassan II. Mr. Healey doubts those visitors know what goes on behind the scenes.

Since the hostage crisis, Americans have been willing to believe the Iran regime
capable of virtually any crime. ''But tell them parents have to pay for the
bullet government forces use to murder a son,'' he said, ''and they don't
believe.''

Mr. Healey finds some skepticism healthy. At least he has engaged his listeners'
attention. He wants them to ask for evidence. He provides what he can and wishes
he had more. Yet it's difficult to prove what goes on behind closed doors inside
foreign prisons. Torture, unlike Vietnam, just is not going to show up on the
evening news.

''We wonder whether to believe witnesses, too,'' he said. ''But our research
department is very, very conservative. I don't think we've made a major
mistake.''

Amnesty International's estimates of human rights violations tend to be lower
than those of other organizations. Its reports are widely available. Now and
then, the grisly reality of its charges is only too starkly revealed.

The Mexican earthquake provided such a glimpse. When the walls of the attorney
general's office building in Mexico City came crumbling down, rescue workers
found seven bodies in what was left of a garage. Six were Colombians, two of
whom showed clear evidence of torture. And in the trunk of a car for all to see
was the body of a well-known criminal lawyer. He was gagged and blindfolded. His
hands and feet were tied together. He had been beaten. Mexico denies the
torture, of course. All countries do.

Useful as skepticism may be, if it leads to disbelief in the face of facts, and
this is not unusual, it is also a way of avoiding the issue. Time after time,
psychological studies have shown that people refuse to believe what they do not
want to believe. And it is among the disbelievers, the avoiders, those who
haven't been paying attention and the younger generation that the rockers are
expected to open minds.

Yet even true avoiders are as nothing compared with politicians who misuse
Amnesty International data. ''They cheer us on when we're describing cases in
the Soviet Union and the Eastern bloc,'' Mr. Healey said. ''But not when we talk
about an ally of the United States.''

Amnesty International, the human rights movement and news reports have
introduced a reluctant world to Winnie Mandela of South Africa, Kim Dae Jung of
South Korea, Yelena Bonner and Andrei Sakharov. Ahmed Ben Bella, the Algerian
prime minister deposed and imprisoned by his successor, has repeatedly said that
without Amnesty International's nagging on his behalf he would be dead.

Sting and U2 are familiar with these cases. But what of less familiar names? The
artists, educators, clergy, trade unionists, political activists and opposition
leaders still in jail? These are the cases the rockers are studying. If they are
salesmen enough, Amnesty International will indeed become a household name. And
a lot more people will have heard of the Weibel brothers in Chile, Wieslaw Pyzio
in Poland, Mahmud Jalbut in Syria and Morena Margarita Rivas Qui jada in El
Salvador.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 16, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ATTACK ON LIBYA: CHARTING A FUTURE COURSE;
PILOT SAYS LIBYAN MISSILES MAY HAVE HIT TRIPOLI

BYLINE: By ROBERTO SURO, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 745 words

DATELINE: ABOARD THE U.S.S. AMERICA, in the Mediterranean, April 15


United States airmen who took part in the bombing runs over Libya on Monday
night said today that Libyan missiles might have contributed to the damage in
the target cities.

A Navy pilot who flew a support mission for the Air Force F-111 bombers said
that the American bombs ''looked to me like they were right on target.''

He said damage in places other than the target areas could have been ''caused by
the Libyans themselves'' because of the way many of the missiles were fired.
''They were firing missiles straight up into the air,'' he said, ''and they were
coming straight down on the city.''

Defense Department officials in Washington said that this was possible, noting
that either boosters from the rockets or the rockets themselves could have
fallen back to the ground and caused damage.

Location of Defenses

Many of the missile and gun emplacements were located in populated areas of the
two Libyan cities, Tripoli and Benghazi, where targets were bombed.

The Libyan defenses were described as thoroughly menacing by Navy pilots and
their commanders.

''I don't think anyone has flown a mission in a denser surface-to-air missile
environment,'' said Vice Adm. Frank Kelso Jr., commander of the Sixth Fleet. He
was speaking to a group of reporters brought aboard this aircraft carrier a few
hours after the raid on Libya was completed.

Several varieties of French- and Soviet-made surface-to-air missiles were
launched in substantial numbers, Admiral Kelso said, and antiaircraft artillery
batteries fired on the planes as well.

'Like a White Light'

A Navy pilot who spent two minutes on a bombing run over Benghazi recalled his
encounter with the missiles. ''I saw one,'' he said. ''It was like a white
light, a roman candle coming up at us.'' He added, ''One was enough for me.''
Although they gave credit to the complex electronic countermeasures used to foil
the missiles' guidance systems, several of the Navy pilots said it seemed the
heavily armed Libyans were firing their weapons wildly. ''It was like they were
setting off a Fourth of July fireworks display,'' one pilot said.

Although the thick antiaircraft fire had been expected, the Navy men said they
did not expect to find the Libyan cities fully illuminated. ''With all the
lights on you could see the targets just where they were supposed to be,'' said
the bombardier of a Navy A-6 attack plane. Apparently one of the most
anticipated surprise attacks in recent history turned out to be a surprise when
it was finally started.

Two Airfields Attacked

Two Libyan airfields were bombed in the raid, and a number of aircraft were
presumed destroyed, along with communications and radar facilities. One United
States F-111 is missing.

Life aboard the America started settling back into the normal routine today
after days of tension.

The tension started to build aboard the America soon after it left the port of
Leghorn in northern Italy on April 9, and, instead of heading for a port call at
Cannes on the French Riviera, turned south.

While senior officers conducted intense planning missions in secret, most of
4,800 men aboard had only hunches to go on. Then, Monday morning, Capt. Richard
C. Allen, the ship's commander, announced on the public address system that the
ship might be involved in combat operations.

Address by Ship's Captain

Later, he addressed the crew again to confirm that an operation was on. But the
captain never disclosed the targets, and most of the men only learned about the
raid when President Reagan's address was carried live on the ship's television
system.

Today, under a pale sky, planes were continuously catapulting off the flight
deck to keep watch for a Libyan counterattack. Even as missiles and bombs were
rolled out on yellow trolleys to reload the planes that flew the bombing
missions, the routine continued.

After a few hours sleep, the men who bombed Libya were telling war stories, and
they were describing a new kind of war. A pilot who flew in Vietnam said: ''It
was the same, except that in Vietnam we were fighting an enemy who fought back
militarily. This time the enemy fights back on the streets of cities.''

The pilots and their commander said they saw a certain distinction in being the
first Americans to strike back at this kind of enemy. Admiral Kelso said, ''We
certainly take pride in sending a signal that our country is not going to live
with the indiscriminate killing of its citizens.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of U.S. A-6 fighter jet taking off from deck of the carrier
America (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 16, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ATTACK ON LIBYA: REPROACHES FROM FAR AND WIDE;
PARLEY IN INDIA CONDEMNS BOMBINGS

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 454 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, April 15


The foreign ministers of 21 nations espousing nonalignment joined today with
Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, chairman of the nonaligned movement, in sharply
condemning the American bombings in Libya and likening them to acts of
terrorism.

Mr. Gandhi said the nonaligned movement ''extends its firm support and
solidarity to Libya in this critical hour.''

Meeting in a special session this evening, the ministers expressed ''deep shock
and profound indignation'' over what they termed an ''act of aggression''
violating international law.

The ministers said the attacks posed ''a grave threat to international peace and
security.''

The ministers also condemned Britain for offering what they said was ''support
and collaboration'' in the attack.

First Meeting Moved Up

A conference of ministers of the countries professing nonalignment had been
scheduled to begin Wednesday, but the ministers moved up their first meeting to
tonight in order to condemn the American action.

Several of the foreign ministers are from countries that the United States
considers more aligned with the Eastern bloc than nonaligned, including
Afghanistan, Cuba, Ethiopia, Vietnam and Angola. But among the ministers joining
in the statement were those from Egypt and Jamaica, which lean toward the West.

Mr. Gandhi's separate statement came before the meeting of the foreign
ministers. He called on the United States and other countries ''to exercise the
utmost restraint and not to do anything to further aggravate the already tense
situation in the region.'' In a separate statement before the Indian Parliament,
the Indian Foreign Minister, Bali Ram Bhagat, said the American action ''places
regional security and international peace in grave jeopardy.''

Nicaragua Minister Signs

One person who signed the nonaligned statement, Foreign Minister Miguel d'Escoto
Brockmann of Nicaragua, said he was ''not surprised'' at the American action,
which he said was the ''latest act of state terrorism.''

He said the action made clear that the United States wanted to ''replace the
international legal order with the concept that might is right.''

He was referring to President Reagan's drive for aid to the forces trying to
overthrow the Nicaraguan Government.

The Libyan Foreign Minister was due to arrive at the meeting late tonight. The
countries represented at the foreign ministers meeting were Afghanistan, Congo,
Cuba, North Korea, Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Guyana, Jamaica, Laos,
Maldives, Mauritius, Mozambique, Nicaragua, Senegal, Vietnam, Yugoslavia, Angola
and Malawi. Also represented was the South-West Africa People's Organization.

The nonaligned movement represents 101 countries or national movements.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of protesters in New Delhi, India (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 16, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Market Place;
Ramifications Of Libya Raid

BYLINE: By Gary Klott

SECTION: Section D; Page 8, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 700 words


WALL STREET is trying to sort out the ramifications of the air strike on Libya
on stocks ranging from military contractors and security personnel companies to
the tourist industry.

The bet is that recent terrorist attacks in Europe and the Libyan bombing have
done more to enrich the prospects for the American tourism industry than for the
military-industrial complex. The tensions have encouraged throngs of Americans
to spend their summer vacations in the United States rather than abroad.
Moreover, Wall Street analysts consider the Pentagon's existing weapons arsenal
sufficient to handle the Libyan conflict, particularly in light of Monday's
raid.

''I don't think the military sees anything they really need that they don't
have,'' said Peter L. Aseritis, an aerospace analyst at E.F. Hutton & Company.
''I don't think the military has a need to reassess its tactics or equipment.
The jammers worked well. The F-111's flew a long way. They were able to hit at
night. Our stuff has worked very well.''

Barring a major escalation of military action, Mr. Aseritis sees little business
for replacement equipment. The need to replace a few bombs used in Monday's
action and the possible loss of one F-111 does not compare with the thousands of
aircraft and bombs that had to be replaced during the Vietnam War, which kept
the military industry prosperous for years.

But Christopher C. Demisch, an aerospace analyst at the First Boston
Corporation, believes the prospects for the long-range Stealth bomber project
may have increased as a result of the 2,800-mile circuitous route that the F-111
aircraft had to fly from Britain to stage the assault because the French would
not allow the Air Force planes to fly through their airspace.

The Northrop Corporation is the prime contractor for the secret Stealth project,
with Boeing, LTV and General Electric among the major contractors. Northrop was
off 1/4, to 48 1/2, yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange. Mr. Demisch
believes the prospects for the McDonnell-Douglas KC-10 tanker aircraft, used in
refueling the F-111's, may also have improved because of the Libyan assault
demonstrated the strategic need for long-range air capability.

The threat of retaliatory terrorist attacks has increased the use of private
security personnel, but Michael Metz, an analyst at Oppenheimer & Company, said
there were few pure plays to be found in the stock market since most security
personnel companies were either privately owned or subsidiaries of
conglomerates. One exception is the Wackenhut Corporation, whose stock rose a
point yesterday, to 32 7/8.

There are also few direct ways to invest in the security-device business. One
exception, according to Mr. Metz, is American Science and Engineering Inc., a
manufacturer of airport X-ray equipment based in Cambridge, Mass. The stock rose
5/8 yesterday, to 10 3/4, on the American Stock Exchange.

Perhaps the biggest impact of the wave of terrorist incidents and the Libyan
crisis has fallen on the travel industry. ''The beneficiaries are American
resorts, such as Hawaii, where tourism is picking up nicely,'' said Stanley
Fishman, an analyst at Fahnestock & Company, ''one reason being it's scary to go
elsewhere.

Among the beneficiaries, he says, are hotel chains, such as Holiday Inns, Hilton
and Marriott; rental car companies, and tourist attractions, such as Walt Disney
World and Disneyland. Disney stock rose 2 3/8 yesterday, to 43 1/4; Holiday Inns
3/4, to 64 3/4; Hilton 1/4, to 69 3/4, and Marriott 1 3/4, to 150 3/4.

Airlines that focus largely on domestic routes have also fared well. UAL Inc.
was up 1 3/4, to 57; AMR 1 1/2, to 56 1/8, and Delta 3/4, to 43 1/2.

But Trans World Airlines and Pan American World Airways, which earn substantial
revenues from foreign routes, have been hurt. T.W.A. fell 1/4, to 16 3/8, while
Pan Am was off 1/2, to 6 1/4.

Mr. Fishman sees other potential beneficiaries on the American leisure front,
believing that everything from attendance at baseball games to motion picture
theaters might increase. ''Movie attendance is greatest during wartime,'' Mr.
Fishman said. ''Almost anything that's domestic, comfortable and safe will
benefit.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 16, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ADDABBO FUNERAL IS TINGED WITH A TOUCH OF INFORMALITY

BYLINE: By RONALD SMOTHERS

SECTION: Section D; Page 25, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 373 words


More than 1,500 people, including three busloads of Congressmen and Capitol Hill
staff, Mayor Koch and Governor Cuomo, crowded St. Patrick's Cathedral yesterday
to mourn Representative Joseph P. Addabbo of Queens.

Lending a note of informality to the funeral mass, John Cardinal O'Connor walked
down from the altar at one point, noted the size of the audience and said that
Grace Addabbo, the widow of the Queens Democrat, had told him how proud it made
her feel.

''You have too many friends here to let this moment pass for the sake of
propriety,'' said the Cardinal, turning to where Mrs. Addabbo sat with her
daughter Dina and her two sons, Joseph and Dominick, and their families. He then
invited the audience to join in a particularly secular show of appreciation for
the 13-term Queens Congressman. The audience rose, turned toward the casket, and
applauded.

A spokesman for the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York said that the
Cardinal had encouraged such a break in the funeral rite twice before - at the
funeral for Harry Van Arsdale, the labor leader, and the funeral for Roger
Maris, the former New York Yankee.

Addabbo Died Last Friday

Mr. Addabbo, who had been chairman of the House Appropriations subcommittee on
defense, died last Friday at the age of 61 at Walter Reed Army Medical Center.
For the last six years he had suffered from bladder cancer. He lapsed into a
coma on March 11 and never regained consciousness.

Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., Speaker of the House, said that Mr. Addabbo was ''a
powerful man and an important man by any measure'' who saw politics as not only
a worthy profession, but a joy.

''Both of us represented tough, working-class districts where people don't often
question the foreign policy of our nation,'' Mr. O'Neill added. He said that Mr.
Addabbo's introduction on an anti-Vietnam war resolution in 1973 had paved the
way to ending a ''brutal and hopeless'' war.

Bishop Francis J. Mugavero, head of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Brooklyn
where Mr. Addabbo's parish, the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin Mary Roman, is,
recalled that Mr. Addabbo had continued to work representing his district ''up
until the end'' and had not publicly revealed his battle with cancer.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 17, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THE BAY OF PIGS: HATE UNDIMMED AFTER 25 YEARS

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1148 words

DATELINE: PLAYA LARGA, Cuba


Whitecaps ripple across a sandbar in the shimmering waters of the Bay of Pigs, a
short distance off a beach where young Cubans play Frisbee and stretch languidly
under a baking sun.

Twenty-five years ago, on Monday, April 17, a brigade of about 1,400 Cuban
exiles, organized, trained, supplied and directed by the United States, splashed
ashore here in a disastrous attempt to overthrow Fidel Castro.

Within 72 hours the invaders had been defeated, most of them taken prisoner,
vastly enhancing Mr. Castro's prestige and yielding worldwide embarrassment and
scorn for the United States.

It was a spectacular case of mismanagement, historians say, laced with faulty
assumptions and faulty information, ultimately hobbled by the United States'
fruitless effort to maintain the fiction that the invasion was entirely the work
of anti-Castro exiles. In pursuit of ''plausible deny-ability'' President John
F. Kennedy limited air support and ordered nearby United States Navy units not
to help the exiles, who had landed believing they had the full backing of the
United States.

'A Tragic Episode'

Many of the invasion veterans, now United States citizens living in Miami, find
themselves still struggling with an enormous affection for their new country and
an ineradicable sense of betrayal.

''It was a tragic episode,'' a senior State Department official said the other
day.

These days, Playa Larga and the other Bay of Pigs landing beach, Playa Giron,
are quiet resorts that only faintly suggest the scene of an agonizing defeat
that influenced American foreign and domestic affairs for years and left wounds
that are still raw.

The hostility that the leaders of the United States felt toward Mr. Castro in
1961, as he guided Cuba into the Soviet orbit, has not cooled. In turn, the
Cuban leader, who Senate investigators say was the target of eight C.I.A.
assassination plots, has developed an unrelenting enmity for the United States.

Today the two countries remain in a state of undeclared war, backing opposing
armies in Central America and Africa, undermining each other diplomatically
wherever possible and often exchanging accusations and insults.

A United States trade embargo imposed six months before the Bay of Pigs remains
in effect and most Americans - exceptions are journalists, researchers and those
with relatives on the island - are barred by the Treasury Department from
visiting Cuba.

In May 1962, a little more than a year after the Bay of Pigs and a bit more than
three years after Mr. Castro and his guerrillas had toppled the regime of
Fulgencio Batista, Cuba and the Soviet Union announced an alliance in which the
Soviet Union now provides Cuba with $4 billion a year in aid - more than any
other Soviet ally. The aid has enabled Mr. Castro to build the largest and best
equipped military force in Latin America.

On an island that once seemed like an offshore province of the United States,
the Russians have stationed a brigade of combat troops and scores of advisers
and technicians. Soviet warships visit Cuban ports and TU-95 Bear reconnaissance
planes refuel near Havana for flights along the United States coastline.

In the Aftermath

Some historians say they believe the United States' seeming lack of resolve at
the Bay of Pigs encouraged the Soviet Union to install the ballistic missiles in
Cuba that led to the chilling superpower confrontation known as the Cuban
missile crisis 18 months after the invasion. The historians also say they
believe that to some extent the eagerness of American leaders to affirm their
resolve after the Bay of Pigs failure helped propel the United States into the
Vietnam quagmire.

Many of the veterans later served in the United States armed forces. Some have
become prosperous businessmen and a few have served in public office in the
United States.

Four Bay of Pigs veterans were convicted of the burglary at the Watergate Hotel
in Washington that led to President Richard M. Nixon's resignation in 1974.
Other veterans of the invasion have been involved in terrorist bombings in New
York and Miami and attacks on diplomats of the Castro Government.

Sixteen months ago the United States and Cuba signed an important immigration
agreement and relations between the two countries seemed to be improving. But a
short time later, in the spring of 1985, the United States began a new
broadcasting service to Cuba called Radio Marti that anti-Castro Cubans in
Miami, including many Bay of Pigs veterans, hoped would undermine the Havana
Government.

Mr. Castro angrily suspended the immigration agreement and, since then,
relations between the two countries have been, in the words of the Cuban-born
Harvard historian Jorge Dominguez, ''dead in the water.''

A Memo From Nixon

The first recommendation that the United States overthrow Mr. Castro came in
early 1959, a few months after he had taken power, in a memorandum from Mr.
Nixon, who was then Vice President. The C.I.A. set to work on plans that, with
the endorsement of both President Eisenhower and President Kennedy, evolved into
the Bay of Pigs invasion.

The Cuban Government says it lost 161 dead in the invasion, including 5
civilians. In Miami, the exiled veterans say they lost 107 dead. Four American
airmen were also killed.

Twenty months after the invasion, Mr. Castro traded the freedom of nearly 1,200
exile prisoners for $53 million worth of food and medicine from the United
States. Veterans in Miami say he kept 10 prisoners and is still holding two of
them.

For several years survivors of the Bay of Pigs and other exiles, continuing
under the direction of the C.I.A., turned Miami into a seething clandestine base
for scores of paramilitary organizations bent on killing Mr. Castro and ridding
Cuba of Communism.

A few months before the invasion, the United States had broken diplomatic
relations with Cuba. In 1977, during the Carter Administration, there was a thaw
in relations and the two countries opened offices in each other's capitals,
providing limited diplomatic contact. Lately, however, contact has been
extremely limited.

No Resentment, He Says

Jorge Mas, a Bay of Pigs veteran who is now a wealthy building contractor in
Miami, says he harbors no resentment for ''the lack of support that was so many
times promised to all of us.''

At the time of the invasion, Mr. Mas says, ''we were just a bunch of young
Cubans'' who ''lacked the contacts and influence that would have guaranteed what
had been agreed upon.''

But that has changed. A few years ago Mr. Mas, now in his mid-40's, helped
establish the Cuban American Foundation, which lobbies journalists and
Washington officials and has become a potent political force with access to the
White House.

''Had the Bay of Pigs taken place today,'' Mr. Mas said, ''I'm just about
certain that the backing would have arrived as promised.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of bathers at Playa Larga (NYT/Maxine Orris); Photo of airplane
at historical museum; Map showing location of Bay of Pigs

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 17, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

What Are Allies For?

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 652 words


Sgt. Kenneth Ford, the American killed in the Berlin disco bombing that
precipitated the attack on Libya, was stationed in Europe to serve an
extraordinary 40-year American commitment to an extraordinary alliance. Like
300,000 Americans on the Continent, he was defending our allies, and also
American interests that extend into the heart of Europe. If his murder,
America's reprisal and Europe's demurrals were now to weaken that commitment and
that alliance, Colonel Qaddafi would have scored a mighty victory indeed.

The Russians already smell opportunity in the NATO dissension. That is why they
want Europe to think the Reagan-Gorbachev summit meeting has now been
jeopardized. They'll do anything to make Europeans resent NATO and to make
Americans resent standing guard over ingrates.

So the alliance's quarrel over terrorism needs to be carefully contained; the
defense of freedom requires a Sergeant Ford in Berlin. But the failure to
cooperate against Libya plants poisonous seeds of disintegration. Too many West
Europeans seem to believe the Libyan affair is irrelevant to Sergeant Ford's
fate and mission, and to them.

NATO imposes no contractual obligation on the allies to harmonize policy in
Afghanistan, Vietnam, Nicaragua or Libya. The treaty's authors never dreamed of
a joint pursuit of terrorists. But the NATO troops who wait to blunt an unlikely
Soviet attack stand for nothing if they do not stand for a sense of shared
community and values. If a partner in that community pleads for help in
distress, an ally's duty is not merely to weigh the request against other
interests but to recognize the common interest in helping as much as conscience
will allow.

By that standard, only Prime Minister Thatcher of Britain passed the test of
alliance this week. She and her people had doubts about attacking Libya, as
Americans had doubts about her war in the Falklands. Yet she rose to the larger
duty of reciprocating America's loyalty and let us use our own weapons to defend
our interests against terror.

All the allies have been victims of Qaddafi hit men. But because they also
profit from his business and because he likes most to hit Americans, they stood
aside and quibbled about the evidence of his guilt. Some cooperated, as the
French did last week, in thwarting an occasional plot. But they preferred living
with the danger to joining in economic sanctions that might punish him even more
than bombs.

The allies balked at concerted action even when Americans produced indisputable
evidence of Libya's hand in the Berlin bombing. Not until Vernon Walters, the
chief United Nations delegate, revealed the imminence of an American attack last
weekend did European ministers decide to name Libya as a source of terror. But
they meant to stop the retaliation, not to abet it.

Britain gave permission for the use of American planes on its soil. But France
refused even to let them fly through its airspace. France, West Germany and
Italy then mumbled confusing sentiments of opposition, virtually inviting the
Kremlin to play upon their peoples' fears.

America's resort to force may well impose new burdens on the alliance. But it
was Europe's aloofness that forced President Reagan to choose between unilateral
military action and doing nothing.

It would be one thing if America had been urging unreasonable or self-serving
measures. But what on earth is wrong with quarantining confessed outlaws,
closing embassies that shelter terrorists, refusing to train Colonel Qaddafi's
soldiers and pump his oil, grounding his planes and withdrawing tourists and
businessmen? There was nothing selfish about the American summons to protect
travelers, airliners, terminals - and, finally, Sergeant Ford.

Many Europeans now contend piously with the French that diplomatic action works
better. That is what the United States tried and what its allies'
self-indulgence refused to allow.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 18, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

STUDY OF DIOXINS IN VIETNAM IS URGED

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 704 words


A major reassessment of the health effects of dioxins is urgently needed and the
ideal site for such a study would be Vietnam, according to an expert in
preventive medicine. The expert said the Hanoi Government had already cooperated
in a preliminary study.

The proposal for a new epidemiological investigation was presented Wednesday at
the annual meeting of the American Chemical Society here by Dr. Arnold Schecter,
professor of preventive medicine at the Binghamton campus of the State
University of New York. His conclusions were based in part on samples of human
tissue and milk that he and his colleagues obtained from Vietnam in the course
of visits to that country and from intermediaries.

The class of chemicals known as dioxins includes several compounds considered
among the most poisonous of all known substances, at least insofar as laboratory
animals are concerned. Paradoxically, however, efforts to prove that dioxins in
the environment threaten the lives of human beings have been largely unavailing.

Dioxins came to international attention in the 1960's and 1970's because they
were pollutants in the defoliating chemical Agent Orange that the Air Force
sprayed over about 10 percent of South Vietnam during the war. Dioxins have also
been released in several major industrial accidents in the United States and
Europe. Their major normal source is the smoke from municipal and industrial
incinerators in which plastics containing chlorine are burned.

Extended Air Force Study

Several large-scale investigations have suggested that moderate levels of
dioxins have little or no effect on human health. An extended United States Air
Force study concluded last December that the mortality rate was no higher among
servicemen who had been exposed to Agent Orange in Vietnam than it was among
servicemen who had not.

At a recent international scientific symposium on dioxin, Dr. Hermann Poiger of
the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, apparently in good health, startled
colleagues by reporting that he had deliberately swallowed dioxin to trace its
course through his body. In Britain, Dr. Peter King, general secretary of the
British Society of Chemical Industry, asserted that the dioxin scare was mainly
the product of distorted reporting and was most severe in the United States,
''an essentially gullible country.''

Dr. Schecter acknowledged to reporters Wednesday that it had been difficult to
prove that dioxins in the environment were killing Americans. But the reason may
be, he said, that the entire population of the United States, in common with
that of other industrial countries, is so contaminated with dioxins that it is
difficult to distinguish dioxin-related illnesses from other illnesses.

''Our studies suggest,'' he said, ''that the fatty tissue of the average
American contains about 7.2 parts per trillion of 2.3.7.8-TCDD dioxin. This
means that the general population of this country cannot be considered a control
group in assessing the health effects on people known to have had unusually high
exposure to dioxins.''

Hopes for Study in Vietnam

But the situation in Vietnam is quite different, he said. Dr. Schecter and his
colleagues, with the help of the Vietnamese Government, obtained biopsy tissue
and mothers' milk from inhabitants of both the northern and southern parts of
Vietnam and conducted dioxin assays in the United States and Canada.

The scientists found that the mean level of dioxins in the tissues of South
Vietnamese was 23 parts per trillion, far higher than levels found elsewhere in
the world, but that samples from North Vietnam contained no detectable
quantities of dioxins. During the war, defoliants were sprayed only over South
Vietnam.

''This suggests,'' he said, ''that Vietnam would make an excellent subject for
an epidemiological study of dioxin effects, using the northern population as a
control group. The Vietnamese have expressed interest in the idea, but there are
no plans yet for such a study.''

The long life of dioxin in the environment is demonstrated, he said, by the fact
that very high levels of the substance persist in the tissues of South
Vietnamese even 15 years after the last spraying of defoliants.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 18, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PENTAGON;
Hyperbole And Grins

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 755 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 17


An Air Force officer, asked how the Chief of Staff felt about the performance of
the Air Force in the raid on Libya this week, stuck a forefinger into each
corner of his mouth and pulled it into as wide a grin as he could.

Naval officers expressed the same feelings about the Navy's role, although they
seemed a bit more subdued as this was the second time in a month that Navy
aviators had struck Libya successfully. One quoted William James: ''The best
propaganda is the naked event.''

Perhaps the best reflection of the mood in the Pentagon in the aftermath of the
raid was the noon briefing for reporters, usually a tepid affair filled with
routine announcements.

Today, the chief spokesman, Robert Sims, stood between two television monitors
and a couple of easels and produced visual evidence of what the Air Force and
Navy fliers had done in the attack on Libya.

Aerial photos displayed the damage done by the Navy A-6 Intruders launched from
carriers in the Mediterranean while the videos showed the infrared imagery seen
by the weapons officer aboard each of two Air Force F-111's as they flew 500
feet above Soviet-built transport planes on the ground in Libya.

Mr. Sims searched for superlatives to describe the raid. ''It was an abso-lutely
flawless professional performance,'' he said, pointing to the coordination and
communication between Navy and Air Force aviators in the middle of the night. At
another point he called the raid ''near-flawless.''

Indulging in a bit of hyperbole, Mr. Sims concluded: ''It was rather
extraordinary, and I don't think we've anything like in it the U.S. military
annals, frankly.''

The mood was dampened only by the announcement that two Air Force aviators,
until today listed as missing in action, had been declared killed in action.
''Yes,'' said an officer solemnly, ''but they knew the risks when they signed
on, and we think they'd do it again.''

Reports of problems with some of the aircraft were brushed aside as normal for
an involved operation.

The upbeat atmosphere was in contrast to that of three years ago, when two Navy
aircraft were shot down in strikes against Syrian forces in Lebanon. It was
especially different from that of six years ago, when the attempt to rescue
American hostages in Teheran ended in a flaming disaster at Desert One in Iran.

After Navy attack planes were shot down over Lebanon, the Pentagon did not
release pictures of bomb damage or videotapes taken from planes in action.
Details of what had happened then were shrouded in secrecy.

The videotapes played today were without audio, Air Force officers said, because
disclosing the conversation between the F-111 weapons officer and pilot might
compromise the tactics and technology used in low-level precision bombing. But
they showed stunning detail of how the aviators had attacked their targets, and
the officers were more than happy to explain what had happened.

Six years ago, the military services still bore the emotional and physical scars
of the agonizing war in Vietnam. The scars were reopened when the rescue
operation into Iran ended in failure. ''Just think,'' said an Army officer
wistfully at the time, ''what that would have done for us if it had worked.''

Mr. Sims and spokesmen for the Air Force and the Navy all went out of their way
today to praise the cooperation between the two services.

Naval officers lauded the Air Force feat of flying for 12 hours from bases in
England, two flyers sitting side by side in the cramped cockpit of each of 18
F-111's. Air Force officers in turn applauded the support of Navy Hawkeye air
control crews, the electronic suppression of Prowler electronics planes, the
suppressing missile fire of A-7 and F-18 and the fighter cover provided by F-14
fighters.

The show of togetherness was clearly intended to rebut repeated criticism from
Capitol Hill that inter-service rivalry often seriously hampers military
operations.

But privately, some officers questioned the judgment of civilian officials who
ordered the F-111's to fly from Britain, a trip that required four aerial
refuelings each way. ''Do you really think,'' asked one officer, ''that any
military officer would have asked a pilot to fly all that way? I think those
planners should be unstrapped from their desks and strapped into those
cockpits.''

What was the alternative, since the Navy didn't have enough attack planes in the
Libyan region? Replace some of the planes on the carriers with more A-6's flown
from the United States, said one officer.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 18, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

WINNERS OF PULITZER PRIZES IN JOURNALISM, LETTERS AND THE ARTS

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2824 words


PUBLIC SERVICE

The Denver Post

The Denver Post won for its series on missing children, ''The Truth About
Missing Kids,'' written by three general-assignment reporters, Lou Kilzer, Diana
Giego and Norman Udevitz. The series looked at the myth that most missing
children have been abducted by strangers, and found that the majority are
runaways or are involved in custody disputes. Mr. Kilzer, born in Cody, Wyo., is
a Yale graduate. He is 35 years old and has been with The Post since May 1983.
Miss Griego, born in Pasadena, Calif., graduated from California State at
Fullerton in 1984 and is 26. She has been with the Post since February 1985. Mr.
Udevitz, who was born in Cheyenne, Wyo., is 57 and is a 1950 graduate of the
University of Colorado. He has been with the paper since July 1971.

GENERAL NEWS REPORTING

Edna Buchanan
The Miami Herald

Miss Buchanan won for her versatile and consistently excellent police reporting.
Miss Buchanan, who is 40 years old, has been a reporter for The Herald for 12
years. She was formerly a reporter for the Miami Beach Sun. She was born in
Paterson, N.J., and recalls that she developed an interest in crime as a child,
when she read the New York tabloids to her grandmother.

INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING

Jeffrey A. Marx and Michael M. York
The Lexington (Ky.) Herald-Leader

Mr. Marx and Mr. York won for their series ''Playing Above the Rules,'' which
exposed improper cash payoffs to University of Kentucky basketball players and
led to changes in N.C.A.A. regulations. Mr. Marx, who is 23 years old and was
born in New York City and raised in Port Chester, N.Y. He is a 1984 graduate of
Northwestern University's Medill School of Journalism. He joined the staff of
The Lexington Herald-Leader in 1984, after sports and news internships at the
newspaper. He was the paper's coal writer at the time he was assigned to work on
the basketball series. Mr. York, who is 32 and was born in High Point, N.C., has
been a reporter for the Lexington paper since 1979 and its Washington
correspondent since 1982. He is a 1974 graduate of the University of Kentucky
and a 1978 graduate of the University of North Carolina School of Law. Before
joining The Herald-Leader, he was a reporter for The Durham (N.C.) Morning
Herald and the Legal Times of Washington, and a lawyer for the Kentucky
Legislative Research Commission.

EXPLANATORY JOURNALISM

The New York Times

The staff of The New York Times won for a series of articles on the Reagan
Administration's proposal for research on a space-based missile defense system,
commonly known as ''Star Wars.'' The articles, six of which ran in March 1985
and three of which ran in December, explored not only the scientific and
technological issues involved in the plan, but also its foreign policy and
political implications. The Times's citation accompanying its submission
credited the series to the deputy science editor, Holcomb B. Noble; Leslie H.
Gelb, diplomatic writer; William J. Broad and Philip M. Boffey. science writers;
Charles Mohr and Wayne Biddle, military and technology writers, and Gary
Cosimini and Thomas E. Bodkin, art directors.

SPECIALIZED REPORTING

Andrew Schneider and Mary Pat Flaherty
Pittsburgh Press

Mr. Schneider and Miss Flaherty won for a series of 13 articles on the
scientific and ethical questions raised by organ donations and transplants. Mr.
Schneider joined The Press in 1984. He was born in 1942 in New York City and
attended the University of Maryland and the University of Miami. While he spent
much of his early newspaper career as a freelance photographer and journalist,
he has also worked for two chains of Washington suburban weeklies and Family
Magazine, and from 1975 to 1981 for the Associated Press. Miss Flaherty, who was
born in Pittsburgh in 1955, joined the paper in 1977 after graduating from
Northwestern University's Medill School. She has worked mainly as a feature
writer.

NATIONAL REPORTING

Craig Flournoy and George Rodrigue
The Dallas Morning News

Mr. Flournoy and Mr. Rodrigue won for their investigation into subsidized
housing in East Texas, which uncovered patterns of racial discrimination and
segregation and led to reforms. Mr. Flournoy, 34 years old, a native of
Shreveport, La., joined The Dallas Morning News in 1977, where he has worked
primarily as an investigative reporter, after doing freelance writing for a New
Orleans weekly and covering city hall and writing a political column for The
Shreveport (La.) Journal. He received a bachelor's degree in history from the
University of New Orleans. Mr. Rodrigue, 29, has been an urban affairs reporter
for the newspaper since 1983. He was an associate editor of D Magazine in Dallas
from 1981 to 1983 and a county courthouse reporter for The Atlanta Constitution
from 1978 to 1981. He graduated from the University of Virginia in 1978 with a
bachelor's degree in history.

Arthur Howe
The Philadelphia Inquirer

Mr. Howe won for his ''enterprising and indefatigable'' reporting on widespread
deficiencies in the processing of tax returns by the Internal Revenue Service.
His reporting inspired changes in I.R.S. procedures and prompted the agency to
make a public apology to taxpayers. Mr. Howe joined The Inquirer six years ago
and has covered business, economics and finance. He opened the paper's Wall
Street bureau in 1982 and managed it until 1984. Born in Cleveland, Mr. Howe, 36
years old, is a 1972 graduate of the University of Pennsylvania. Before joining
The Inquirer, he worked for five years for the Wilmington (Del.) News Journal
and other newspapers.

INTERNATIONAL REPORTING

Lewis M. Simons, Pete Carey and Katherine Ellison
The San Jose Mercury News

Mr. Simons, a Tokyo-based foreign correspondent; Mr. Carey, an investigative
reporter, and Miss Ellison, a correspondent in San Francisco, won for a series
of articles, published last June, documenting large-scale transfers of wealth
out of the Philippines by Ferdinand E. Marcos, then the country's president, and
associates. Mr. Simons, who is 47 years old, has been based in Tokyo since he
joined the paper four years ago and has written extensively from Asia during his
career. He grew up in New Jersey, began his career in 1964 as a reporter for the
Associated Press and later was a correspondent for The Washington Post in India
and Thailand. Mr. Carey, a Californian who is 45 years old, joined The Mercury
News in 1967 was an aerospace and special-assignments reporter before
specializing in investigations. Earlier he served as editor of The Livermore
(Calif.) Independent and as a reporter for The San Francisco Examiner. He has a
degree in economics from the University of California at Berkeley. Miss Ellison,
who is 28 and grew up in the San Fransicso Bay area, joined the Mercury News
five years ago and has done a wide variety of reporting, ranging from dispatches
from Ethiopia to investigative articles about the San Francisco police
department. She holds a bachelor's degree in international relations from
Stanford University.

FEATURE WRITING

John Camp
The St. Paul Pioneer Press and Dispatch

Mr. Camp won for a five-part series, published between May and December 1985,
about a three-generation farm family - the Bensons of southwestern Minnesota -
and their struggle to maintain their way of life. A 41-year-old native of Cedar
Rapids, Iowa, Mr. Camp joined the newspaper in 1978 and formerly served as a
columnist. After graduating from the University of Iowa in 1966, he spent four
years in the Army and edited an Army newspaper in Korea. He then was a general
assignment reporter with the Cape Girardeau,Mo., Southeast Missourian for a year
before returning to the University of Iowa, where he earned a Master's degree in
journalism. He went on to spend more than seven years as a reporter and editor
at The Miami Herald.

COMMENTARY

Jimmy Breslin
The Daily News

Mr. Breslin won for columns that consistently champion the ordinary citizens of
New York City. He was the first to report charges that a narcotics suspect had
been tortured with an electronic stun gun while in police custody in Queens. Two
officers are now on trial in the case. He was also cited for sympathetic
portraits of AIDS victims. Mr. Breslin, who was born in Richmond Hill, Queens,
began his column in 1963 for the defunct New York Herald Tribune in a style that
has been described as The New Journalism - borrowing in style from traditional
fiction. He joined The News in 1976. He has written several books, including the
novel ''The Gang That Couldn't Shoot Straight.''

CRITICISM

Donal Henanhan
The New York Times

Mr. Henahan, chief music critic of The Times since 1980, won for distinguished
music criticism.Before joining the Times in 1967, he worked on The Chicago Daily
News, where he became chief music critic in 1957. He was born in Cleveland in
1921, earned his bachelor's degree at Northwestern University and did
postgraduate study at the University of Chicago and the Chicago School of Music.
His musical education included training as a pianist and classical guitarist.

EDITORIAL WRITING

Jack Fuller
The Chicago Tribune

Mr. Fuller won for his editorials on constitutional issues. Editor of The
Tribune's editorial page since 1983, he joined the newspaper's local staff in
1973 but left a year later to serve as a special assistant to United States
Attorney General Edward Levy. He joined the newspaper's Washington bureau in
1975 and became an editorial writer in 1978. Mr. Fuller, a Chicago native,
graduated from Northwestern University's Medill School in 1968 and, after a
two-year stint in the Army, from Yale Law School in 1973. He has written three
novels.

EDITORIAL CARTOONING

Jules Feiffer
The Village Voice

Mr. Feiffer was honored for his weekly cartoon strip, which is characterized by
sharp social commentary. Mr. Feiffer's first published cartoon appeared in the
first anniversary edition of The Voice in 1956. He is also the author of such
plays as ''Little Murders'' and ''The White House Murder Case'' and several
movie scripts, including ''Little Murders,'' ''Carnal Knowledge'' and
''Popeye.'' Mr. Feiffer, who was born in the Bronx in 1929, attended Pratt
Institute and worked as an animator and book illustrator before joining The
Voice. He lives in Manhattan.

SPOT NEWS PHOTOGRAPHY

Michel duCille and Carol Guzy
The Miami Herald

Mr. duCille and Miss Guzy won for their photographs of the devastation caused by
the eruption last November of the Nevado del Ruiz volcano in Colombia. Mr.
duCille was born 30 years ago in Kingston, Jamaica. He joined The Miami Herald
photo staff in 1981, the year he graduated from Indiana University with a
bachelor's degree in journalism. Miss Guzy, who is 30, was born in Bethlehem,
Pa. She has been a staff photographer for The Herald for two years. She received
an associate's degree in nursing from the Northampton County Area Community
College in Bethlehem, in 1978, and two years later received an associate's
degree in applied science from the Art Institute of Fort Lauderdale.

FEATURE PHOTOGRAPHY

Tom Gralish
The Philadelphia Inquirer

Mr. Gralish won for two dozen photographs of homeless people in Philadelphia
that appeared in the Easter 1985 issue of the Inquirer's Sunday magazine. Born
in Mount Clemens, Michigan 29 years ago, he has been a picture editor and staff
photographer for the Inquirer since 1983. Mr. Gralish began as a journalistic
photographer with the Las Vegas (Nev.) Valley Times and then spent seven years
as a photographer with United Press International in Dallas, Detroit,
Minneapolis and Kansas City.

FICTION

Larry McMurtry
''Lonesome Dove''

Mr. McMurtry won for a novel about American frontier life, from Canada to
Mexico, during the 1870's. Mr. McMurtry, a 50-year-old native of Texas, has
written 11 previous books, and is known for describing the breakdown of the old
myths in the contemporary West in such novels as ''Horseman, Pass By'' - which
was made into the film ''Hud'' - ''Terms of Endearment'' and ''The Last Picture
Show.'' Mr. McMurtry, the son of a rancher, was born in Wichita Falls, Tex. He
attended North Texas State College, graduating in 1958 with a bachelor's degree
and earned a master's degree from Rice University in 1960. Mr. McMurtry lives in
Washington, but spends much of his time in the West.

HISTORY

Dr. Walter A. McDougall
''. . . the Heavens and the Earth: A Political History of the Space Age''

Dr. McDougall won for a narrative history of the early space age and the growth
and power of government-sponsored technology. Dr. McDougall is an associate
professor at the University of California at Berkeley. He has taken this year
off to serve as a visiting scholar at the Hoover Institution for War, Revolution
and Peace at Stanford University. He was born in Washington in 1946 and was an
artillery spotter during the Vietnam War. He received his bachelor's degree from
Amherst College in 1968 and his Ph.D. from the University of Chicago in 1974. In
1978, he published ''France's Rhineland Diplomacy 1914-1924: The Last Bid for a
Balance of Power in Europe.''

BIOGRAPHY

Elizabeth Frank
''Louise Bogan: A Portrait''

Miss Frank won for her sensitive exploration of the often chaotic life and
lyrical poetry of Louise Bogan, the American poet and critic who lived from 1897
until 1970. Miss Frank, a professor of English literature at Bard College in
Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y., was born in Los Angeles in 1945. She attended
Bennington College and received her bachelor's, master's and doctoral degrees in
English literature from the University of California at Berkeley. Before
arriving at Bard in 1982, she taught at Williams College, Temple University,
Mills College and the University of California at Irvine. She is the author of
''Jackson Pollock,'' a criticial study of the artist.

POETRY

Henry Taylor
''The Flying Change''

Mr. Taylor's book, his fifth collection of poetry, reflects his feeling for
nature, especially the land of his native South. He was born in Loudon County,
Va., in 1942, and is professor of literature at the American University in
Washington. He is a graduate of the University of Virginia and holds a master's
degree from Hollins College in Lincoln, Va. His other books of poetry are ''The
Horse Show at Midnight,'' ''Breakings,'' ''An Afternoon of Pocket Billiards''
and ''Desparado.''

GENERAL NONFICTION

Joseph Lelyveld
''Move Your Shadow: South Africa, Black and White''

Mr. Lelyveld, London bureau chief of The New York Times, won for his account of
his experiences as a journalist returning to South Africa and examining the
white fantasies that define apartheid. Mr. Lelyveld went to South Africa in the
fall of 1980 as The Times correspondent there, a post he first had held in 1965.
Mr. Lelyveld joined The Times in January 1962 as a copy boy. His first foreign
assignment was the Congo. He has served as The Times bureau chief in New Delhi,
India and Hong Kong and was deputy foreign editor before his return to South
Africa. Mr. Lelyveld was born in Cincinnati in 1937. He graduated from the Bronx
High School of Science in 1954 and from Harvard University in 1958 with a
bachelor of arts degree and a master of arts in American history from Harvard in
1959. In 1960, he graduated from the Columbia Graduate School of Journalism.

J. Anthony Lukas
''Common Ground: A Turbulent Decade in the Lives of Three American Families''

Mr. Lukas's book chronicles the effects of school desegregation in Boston on the
lives of three families from 1968 to 1978. This was the second Pulitzer for Mr.
Lukas. He won his first in 1968 for special local reporting, for ''The Two
Worlds of Linda Fitzpatrick,'' published in The New York Times on Oct. 16, 1967.
The story explored the background of the murder of an 18-year-old girl in the
East Village. Mr. Lukas, born in New York City in 1933, graduated from Harvard
University in 1955. He was a reporter for The Times from 1962 to 1972. He has
been a professor and lecturer at Boston University, Yale University and Harvard
University.

MUSIC

George Perle
''Wind Quintet No. 4''

Mr. Perle won for his ''Wind Quintet No. 4,'' a work for flute, oboe, clarinet,
French horn and bassoon. It was commissioned by the Dorian Wind Quintet and
first performed in 1985 at the Merkin Concert Hall in Manhattan. He is the
composer of numerous works for solo instruments, chamber ensembles and orchestra
and is also a musicologist who has written several books. Mr. Perle was born in
1915 in Bayonne, N.J.. He received his early musical education in Chicago and
after serving in the Army in World War II, earned a doctorate in music from New
York University. As a teacher of musical theory, analysis and composition, Mr.
Perle has been affiliated with the Universities of Louisville, California at
Davis and Queens College, where he is professor emeritus.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: April 19, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
Because of an editing error in some editions of Metropolitan Report yesterday, a
biographical sketch of Jimmy Breslin, the Daily News columnist who won the
Pulitzer Prize for commentary, misidentified a school he attended. It was St.
Benedict Joseph Labre in Richmond Hill, Queens.

GRAPHIC: Photo of girl trapped in volcanic sludge after Nov. 1985 eruption in
Colombia, which won Pulitzer Prize for spot news photography; Photo of homeless
people, which won Pulitzer Prize for feature photography

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 18, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

3 U.S. THEATER ARTISTS PLAN A VISIT TO VIETNAM

BYLINE: By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 19, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 489 words


Three American theater artists, one of them a Vietnam War veteran, will visit
Vietnam later this month in what they hope will be the beginning of a cultural
exchange, the first between the United States and Vietnam since the fall of
Saigon 11 years ago.

If the Vietnamese and American Governments permit the visit to be reciprocated,
it is likely that some Vietnamese artists will perform this fall at Joseph
Papp's Public Theater.

After four years of attempts and missed chances, the director Thomas Bird, the
mime Bill Irwin and the writer-performer Spalding Gray received visas this week
from Vietnam. They will enter Vietnam via Bangkok on April 27 or 28 and will
depart after visits to Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City (formerly Saigon) on May 8.

Mr. Bird, the artistic director of the Vietnam Veterans Ensemble Theater
Company, served as an Army infantryman in Vietnam from August 1965 to August
1966. He has visited Vietnam twice since the end of the war -in 1981 as part of
a delegation of veterans discussing such issues as Agent Orange and American
soldiers who remained unaccounted for, and in 1982 on a more general visit with
a delegation including Mr. Papp.

Trip 'Solely Cultural'

''Exchanging culture and arts like this is a way of warming relations between
our countries,'' Mr. Bird said yesterday. ''We will not be discussing anything
political on this trip. It's solely a cultural trip.''

Tran Khanh, a press officer with the Vietnamese mission to the United Nations,
said yesterday: ''The cultural exchange between Vietnam and the United States
will be very beneficial to both sides. We hope that exchanges of this kind will
increase our nations' understanding of each other.''

Mr. Bird said that the American delegation plans to meet with Nguyen Van Hieu,
the Vietnamese minister of culture, and ''to see as much music and theater as we
can,'' with an eye toward spotting individuals or arts groups that might be
invited to perform in New York in the fall.

Mr. Irwin, a mime who won a MacArthur Foundation grant two years ago, will
perform in Vietnam, Mr. Bird said. Mr. Bird is bringing copies of the play
''Tracers,'' which the Vietnam Veterans Ensemble Theater Company developed and
performed last year. And he said it is possible that Mr. Gray will perform
portions of his monologue ''Swimming to Cambodia,'' which is now being
translated into Vietnamese.

Circus Popular in Hanoi

Mr. Bird said he chose Mr. Gray to accompany him because when they played
together in the film ''The Killing Fields,'' he discovered Mr. Gray's deep
interest in Vietnam. Part of the monologue ''Swimming to Cambodia,'' in fact,
concerns the two men's attempt in 1983 to attain a visa from the Vietnamese
Embassy in Bangkok.

As for Mr. Irwin, Mr. Bird said, ''I thought of Bill because his work was
nonverbal. He should go over well there, because I'm told one of the most
popular things in Hanoi is the circus.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 18, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FIGHT NICARAGUA? -- OR LET IT BE

BYLINE: By Linda Robinson; Linda Robinson is associate editor of Foreign
Affairs.

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 719 words


More than anything else, this week's Congressional action - a series of
parliamentary maneuvers that resulted in inaction - on aid to the ''contras''
reflected a desire to avoid the basic issues. The debate is stalled, but not
over. Next month, the House will probably be asked again to approve a compromise
measure -military aid that would not be released unless the Administration made
a good-faith effort to negotiate with the Sandinistas. Such a compromise might
be good domestic politics, but it would do nothing to resolve the contradictions
in United States policy toward Nicaragua.

Such a measure would shield Congress from charges that it is soft on Communism
and from responsibility for taking the country down the road toward ''another
Vietnam.'' The Administration would be required to talk to the Sandinistas for a
few months, but it would get the military aid - probably in the range of $70
million - it seeks.

Congress might insist on a vote assessing such talks before it released the aid.
But even so, it would still face the question that it has avoided in the last
month: What hope is there for a negotiated settlement? The unpleasant fact is
that negotiations do not have a ghost of a chance in the present situation, and
requiring talks between two intransigent parties would do nothing to change
that.

The Administration has avoided clarifying the goals of its policy, but most
Congressmen who support aid do so in the hope that military pressure will force
the Sandinistas to negotiate. But negotiate with whom? Negotiate what? Many want
the Administration to cut a deal with the Sandinistas that would render them
harmless to their neighbors and protect United States security interests. The
problem is that Washington rejects any negotiated settlement that excludes the
rebels. And Managua refuses a settlement that includes them.

Nor is there any reason to think that Washington or Managua would make a
concession to break the impasse. The threat of renewed military aid would not
make the Sandinistas come around; they know that if talks made no headway,
Congress would be as likely to blame the Administration as them. As for the
President, his rhetoric grows more hostile with every passing month, and given
his personal commitment to the rebels' cause, he is unlikely to abandon them.

Curiously, the contras are now talking less about overthrowing the regime and
more about negotiating with it. This too could be posturing, an effort to make
themselves more palatable to the United States public, but it is certainly not
going to lure the Sandinistas into talks.

In fact, none of this maneuvering affects the prospects for negotiations. The
Sandinistas have nothing to gain by accepting the contras - and have no reason
to negotiate with (or about) them unless the rebels threaten their hold on
power. The contras pose no such threat, and $70 million would not change that -
certainly not against a fighting machine that has received more than $500
million in Soviet military aid in the last five years. Given this stalemate,
calling for negotiations is merely a front for continuing a policy of low-level
military pressure - a policy that leads nowhere.

The real choice facing Washington - a choice that everyone is determined to
avoid - is whether the United States should pursue a military solution or let
the Sandinistas do what they like in Nicaragua. A military solution would
require enough aid to enable the contras to push the regime to the brink. At the
moment, it is far from the brink - in fact, it could well wipe out the contras
in the months that are likely to elapse before they get any new aid.

The Sandinistas may never agree to a reconciliation with the rebels; they may
prefer to go down fighting. But a Congressional compromise, which could allow
Congress to refuse aid in the end, would certainly not produce a settlement. The
Sandinistas would much rather bank on that possibility than simply accede to
United States demands.

If the fight is worth fighting in Nicaragua, then it must be a fight to win.
Only such a commitment might force the Sandinistas to make real concessions or
step down. It is no surprise that Congress is reluctant to face this stark
reality. But at some point, it must be faced if the Nicaraguan conflict is to be
resolved.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 19, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

TENSION OVER LIBYA: TRIPOLI AND THE HOSTAGES;
ONE OF 3 HOSTAGES SLAIN IN LEBANON WAS U.S. LIBRARIAN

BYLINE: By MICHAEL NORMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1059 words


One of the three men found dead of gunshot wounds near Beirut, Lebanon, on
Thursday was identified yesterday as an American, Peter Kilburn. Officials had
said all the victims were Britons.

A note found with the bodies Thursday said the men had been slain in response to
the American air strikes against Libya and to British cooperation with the raid.

There was no definite word on the man the authorities initially announced was
dead, Alec Collett, a British freelance journalist who was seized by gunmen
south of the city on March 25, 1985, while on a writing assignment for a United
Nations agency.

Friend Identifies Body

The identification of the body as Mr. Kilburn's was made by a physician at the
American University Hospital in Beirut, Farid Fleihan, who was a longtime
friend, according to the hospital.

There were these other developments yesterday in the aftermath of the American
raid on Libya:

* Britain said it had ''firm evidence of direct Libyan involvement'' in the
kidnapping and killing of the two British teachers whose bodies were found
Thursday with Mr. Kilburn's. [Page 4.]

* President Reagan denied that the United States was trying to kill Col. Muammar
el-Qaddafi in its attack on the Libyan leader's command post in Tripoli. [Page
5.]

* Vietnam notified the United States that it was suspending talks on the
question of Americans still listed as unaccounted for from the Vietnam War, and
Hanoi's Foreign Minister said the action was taken because of the American
strikes. [Page 4.] New Group Emerges A group identifying itself as the Arab
Commando Cells took responsibility for the slayings of the three men in Lebanon
in the note found with the bodies.

The emergence of this relatively new group left the situation of other hostages
in Lebanon somewhat confused. A shadowy group of Islamic fundamentalists calling
themselves Islamic Holy War has taken responsibility for kidnapping five
Americans who are still missing in Lebanon. Mr. Kilburn's name never appeared in
any of that group's statements.

Yesterday, the British Foreign Secretary, Sir Geoffrey Howe, said his Government
had ''firm evidence'' that the two British hostages who were slain had been in
''Libyan hands'' and had been held ''for some time.''

Officials were said to have decided not to make public their evidence or, until
now, the indication of the Libyan connection because to do so would have
increased the danger to the men. Sir Geoffrey did not provide further details.

In a related development, Terry Waite, the envoy of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, said yesterday that he hoped to return to Beirut soon and renew his
mission to free the remaining hostages. Eighteen foreigners are known to have
been kidnapped - five Americans, eight Frenchmen, two Britons and a South
Korean, an Irishman and an Italian.

Meanwhile, a Christian-controlled radio station in Beirut, the Voice of Lebanon,
reported a statement by terrorists that they had executed one of the two Britons
still missing - John McCarthy, an employee of the Worldwide Television News
Agency. He was kidnapped Thursday by unknown gunmen while traveling to the
Beirut airport to return to London, where his company is based.

The police in Beirut said the statement appeared to be a hoax. The station said
an anonymous caller purporting to speak for the Arab Commando Cells had
telephoned the station's offices and said Mr. McCarthy had been slain.

The station quoted the caller as saying Mr. McCarthy had in his possession
photographs of sites in Lebanon that had been marked for an American air attack.
The caller went on to identify a location where the authorities could recover Mr
McCarthy's body, but the police said they searched the site and did not find a
corpse.

Mr. Kilburn, 61 years old, of San Francisco, was a librarian at the American
University in Beirut. He had last been seen on Dec. 3, 1984.

Like the other two victims, Leigh Douglas, a political science professor, and
Philip Padfield, the director of a private language school, he had been shot in
the head.

''It's been hard,'' his nephew, Tim Kilburn, said at his home in Aptos, Calif.
''And it's even harder now.''

Like Iran and Syria, Libya has long exercised influence in Lebanon. In the case
of Libya, the principal means appears to have been political and financial
support of several Palestinian and leftist groups. Its relations with the main
Shiite Moslem militia, Amal, have been strained, however, since the
disappearance of Imam Musa Sadr, a Shiite leader, on a trip to Libya in the late
1970's.

As with the statement about Mr. McCarthy, there was also no confirmation of a
statement by another group, the Revolutionary Organization of Socialist Moslems,
that it had hanged Mr. Collett. This statement, sent to a news agency, said a
picture of the hanging would be forwarded to a Beirut newspaper. No picture
arrived, however.

Originally, an official of the Irish Embassy in Beirut had identified Mr.
Collett as one of the three slain men.

But the journalist's daughter, Suzie Grant, a reporter for Capital Radio in
London, told officials in Beirut that her father had lost a finger and that they
should examine the hands of the three bodies found in Beirut.

At first, she said, speaking on the radio, ''everyone forgot my father had only
nine fingers.'' She added, ''The people went back to the hospital mortuary after
I had spoken to them and confirmed that the bodies had 10 fingers.''

Reaction to the killings of Mr. Kilburn and the British victims was immediate
yesterday.

''We're on our way to war, as far as I can see,'' Tim Kilburn, the victim's
nephew, told The Associated Press. ''The United States Government's answer to
problems is to drop bombs.''

A colleague of Mr. Kilburn in Beirut described the librarian as a ''totally
harmless'' man who ''wouldn't hurt a fly,'' a quiet scholar preoccupied with his
books as well as with trains and ''all kinds of obscure ridiculous things.''

''He didn't support American policy in the Middle East,'' his nephew said. ''He
was outspoken to his friends, but he was not political.''

The killing unsettled the families of other hostages. Peggy Say, the sister of
Terry A. Anderson, the chief Middle East correspondent for The Associated Press,
said of the raid on Libya: ''I think it placed them in great danger.'' y

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of slain hostages; Peter Kilburn of the U.S., Phillip Padfield
and John Leigh Douglas of Britain (UPI)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 19, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI, CITING ATTACK, SUSPENDS TALKS ON MISSING

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 540 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 18


Vietnam notified the United States today that it was suspending talks on
resolving the question of Americans still listed as unaccounted for from the
Vietnam War, the State Department said.

In the official message to the United States Embassy in Bangkok, Hanoi said
''the current situation is not favorable'' for holding the next meeting on the
missing-in-action Americans that had been set for next Wednesday and Thursday in
Hanoi, Bernard Kalb, the department's spokesman, said.

But Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach, at a meeting in New Delhi of the countries
that describe themselves as nonaligned, said the discussions were being
suspended because of the American air attacks on Libya.

The Hanoi move drew a quick warning from Washington. Mr. Kalb said this action
would ''imperil any chance for improvement in the atmosphere between our two
nations.''

Hanoi Pledge Cited

Noting that Hanoi had pledged last year to settle once and for all all questions
dealing with the nearly 2,000 Americans still listed as unaccounted for in
Vietnam, Mr. Kalb said:

''If Vietnam now decides to abandon that pledge and to link this humanitarian
enterprise to political issues, this can only increase the suffering of the
families of those still missing, bring discredit to the Hanoi authorities and
imperil any chance for an improvement in the atmosphere between our two
nations.''

The Vietnamese have also apparently reneged on another pledge made to the United
States - to turn over to the United States some 7,000 political prisoners who
have been in so-called ''re-education camps.'' Many of these prisoners are
Vietnamese with close ties to the United States, such as military and civilian
officials in the former Saigon Government.

In 1984, Prime Minister Pham Van Dong of Vietnam said Hanoi would release these
prisoners if Washington would take them. Secretary of State George P. Shultz
said then that the United States would take them and their relatives over a
two-year period.

Report From Ex-Governor

A report made public today by a special panel on Indochinese refugees, headed by
the former Governor of Iowa, Robert D. Ray, said that when the group visited
Hanoi recently, ''Foreign Minister Thach was categorical in his refusal to
discuss the issue, stating that it was now 'out of the question,' to release the
prisoners.''

''We found that there is great difficulty in getting cooperation or even getting
them to acknowledge what they have previously said relative to the re-education
camp prisoners,'' Mr. Ray said in a news conference today.

''They refuse to call them prisoners,'' he said.

Although American officials dealing with the issue do not believe there are any
Americans still alive, they would like to get more information from the
Vietnamese on what happened to Americans who were known to have been captured
during the war but who were never accounted for and to recover the remains of
Americans from areas where there were known to be plane crashes.

The United States at the end of 1985 listed 1,797 Americans as unaccounted for
in Vietnam, 700 in the north, and 1,097 in the south. In addition, 556 are
listed as unaccounted for in Laos, 82 in Cambodia, and 6 in China, for a total
of 2,441.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 19, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

APARTHEID AND YALE: A WEEK OF PROTEST

BYLINE: By DIRK JOHNSON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 925 words

DATELINE: NEW HAVEN, April 18


During the Vietnam War years, when other college campuses were erupting in
violent demonstrations, Yale University was the scene of mild-mannered protest.

In those days, when blockades of pickets were told they risked suspension,
''they decided it was better to leave,'' recalled John Wilkinson, the university
secretary.

But this week, the demonstrators stayed put. In three separate anti-apartheid
protests here, police arrested 151 students - the first mass arrests ever on the
Yale campus.

''The difference between today's students and those of the 60's,'' Mr. Wilkinson
said, ''is that these students are much better organized. They are much better
prepared to deal in uniform action.''

''It represents the overthrow of apathy on campus,'' said Eva Johanos, a senior
who was arrested Tuesday in a blockade at the Bursar's Office.

But among the 10,000 students enrolled at Yale, there were many who did not
empathize with the protesters. One young man, standing near the protest sign-up
table, shouted in loud and gleeful tones: ''I.B.M. stock is shooting up.''

And Howard Tager, a junior, dismissed the protesters as ''the cause-of-the-week
club,'' and worried about ''the poor image this gives Yale.''

Giamatti Responds

A. Bartlett Giamatti, the president of Yale, said the demonstrations were
depriving the rights of others to free speech and access to university property.

''My job is to maintain everybody's freedom of expression,'' he said. ''But when
you block a building, you're not accounting for the rights of others.''

In the calm after the storm, an outdoor ''teach-in'' on campus today examined
the issues that sent the students and three faculty members to jail.

Among the 500 students gathered on the lawn for the teach-in, some wore arrest
citations as badges of honor.

During the six-hour session they queried a succession of sympathetic professors
on the issues of apartheid, civil disobedience and free expression.

According to Dan Abrahamson, a Yale senior who organized the session, some
students had questions about the arrests and the blockade. ''We wanted to answer
some of those questions,'' he said.

The protesters are demanding that the university withdraw its investments in
companies that do business in South Africa, which practices apartheid, or the
separation of races.

The university now pursues a course of ''selective divestment,'' limiting invest
ment to companies which denounce apartheid or those that plan to withdraw from
South Africa.

''We don't want our tuition going to support that racist system,'' said Leslie
Frane, a graduate student in history. ''We've tried for years to do the polite
thing, to work through the channels. But it's only through confrontation that we
get any response.''

The protests escalated Monday, when the university ordered the destruction of
shanties built two weeks ago by students dramatizing the poor living conditions
of many black South Africans.

Disciplinary Hearings

The students were arrested after they refused to leave the shanties. The police
made more arrests on Tuesday and Wednesday when students blocked entrances to
administration buildings. In one protest, about 60 of the students were
suspended, but the action was rescinded within hours.

The students now face disciplinary hearings within their colleges. Possible
punishment ranges from a reprimand to expulsion, which is considered unlikely.
Disciplinary committees have the option of including the arrests in student
records.

After the arrests, about 150 Yale faculty members signed a petition criticizing
the administration for what it considered a heavy-handed approach.

''It threatens the tradition of free expression and trust between students and
administration at Yale,'' said Vincent Scully, a professor of art history here
since the 1940's. ''In a sense, the administration started it by tearing down
the shanties.''

Mr. Giamatti noted that the protesters had been told they could move the
shanties to another site. He also said the univesity employed the ''Brewster
Scenario,'' named for former Yale President Kingman Brewster Jr., in which
univesity officials agreed to a dialogue with protesters.

''We are not disagreeing about apartheid,'' he said. ''We all agree it is an
unmitigated evil.''

Policy to Be Reviewed

Members of the Yale Corporation last Saturday met with the protesters, and said
that the investment policy would be considered at a meeting of the corporate
board on June 21. The protesters demanded that the corporation consider the
matter sooner.

At today's teach-in, students were urged to volunteer for ''direct action,'' or
acts of civil disobedience.

''We will escalate our protest,'' said Miss Frane. ''But to the end, it will be
peaceful.''

The intensity of the anti-apartheid movement, some students said, could be
measured by the discussions in classrooms and cafeterias around campus.

The movement has marshaled support from many students who traditionally did not
consider themselves activists. Julie Solomon, for example, subscribes to the
National Review magazine and considers herself ''not at all a leftist.''

''But the issues of apartheid transcend any categories of liberal or
conservative,'' she said. ''Everybody knows apartheid is immoral.''

Miss Solomon, a member of the planning committee for the protesters, promised
''innovations'' in future demonstrations.

''I think we're doing more creative things than they did in the 60's,'' she
said. ''But I guess you ought to learn something in 20 years.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of students taking part in outdoor ''teach-in''; Photo of John S.
Lapides in discussion with students (NYT/Rollin A. Riggs)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 20, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE HARD REALITIES OF CULTURAL EXCHANGE

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2329 words


In the coming months, if all goes as planned, American audiences will be
watching and listening to the Leningrad Symphony, the Kirov Ballet, the Bolshoi
Opera and Ballet, the Moiseyev Folklore Ensemble, the Moscow Children's Music
Theater and other esteemed groups and soloists from the Soviet Union. Before the
year is out, an exhibition of Impressionist and post-Impressionist paintings
from the Hermitage in Leningrad and the Pushkin Museum in Moscow are to be shown
in Washington, Los Angeles and New York.

Meantime, in Moscow today, Vladimir Horowitz is scheduled to perform in the
country of his birth for the first time since he left it in 1925. The Russians
have already given a sold-out reception to ''Rag Dolly,'' a musical about
Raggedy Ann, put on by the Empire State Institute for the Performing Arts in
Albany, the first theater troupe to visit their country in more than six years.
Coming up are exhibitions of paintings from Armand Hammer's collection and the
Philadelphia Art Museum.

Along with increased contacts of scholars, students, athletes and others and
possible coproductions of films and trade in television programs, such are
fruits of last November's summit meeting, when President Reagan and the Soviet
leader Mikhail S. Gorbachev agreed to resume the cultural exchanges that had
been on hold since the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979.

For all the strains in Soviet-American relations, no one seems to be against the
resumption and expansion of cultural exchanges. Indeed, mention the word
''culture'' to a public official, and he reaches for his hyperbole. A White
House press release offers the hope that exchanges ''can help break down
barriers, lessen distrust, reduce the levels of secrecy and bring forth a more
open world.''

There is, of course, a simpler reason to welcome such fabled companies as the
Kirov, which will begin its tour of this country in Los Angeles on May 21 and go
from there to Philadelphia and Washington - the pleasure of watching them,
seeing for ourselves what they have been up to in recent years and welcoming a
new generation of dancers and singers. If cultural exchange was all singing and
dancing, everyone could sit back and enjoy. But in relations between the
superpowers, ideology and national interests have a way of imposing themselves
on even seemingly nonpolitical diversions.

President Reagan spoke for many when he said, in regard to the latest agreement,
''Civilized people everywhere have a stake in keeping contacts, communication
and creativity as broad, deep and free as possible.'' The question remains, how
broad, deep and free cultural exchanges with the Soviet Union can be.

Even as Americans look forward to seeing the virtuosos of the Kirov and the
Moiseyev leapers, they may feel some discomfort about consorting on art with a
state that remains determined to keep many works out and some artists in, a
state whose devotion to open exchange must be set against a habit of silencing
those who exceed the authorized bounds of openness and whose most dramatic
cultural export over the decades has taken the form of defectors.

Cultural exchange between the United States and the Soviet Union scarcely
existed during the frosty years following World War II. It put out buds after
the 1955 meeting between President Eisenhower and Soviet leader Nikita
Khrushchev that signaled a thaw in relations and flowered briefly in the 1970's,
under the sun of detente. The Soviets sent us the Bolshoi Opera and Ballet
companies, the Moiseyev dancers, the Moscow Circus and other groups, and we
reciprocated.

The memory of the first appearance here of the Bolshoi Ballet in 1959, with
Galina Ulanova and Maya Plisetskaya, still stirs excitement among dance fans.
Reaction to the company's subsequent visits in the 1960's and 1970's, however,
was restrained. Although there was praise for its ''Giselle,'' critics found the
overall repertory disappointing. In 1976, the dance critic Walter Terry called
much of Russian ballet ''downright bad'' and some of it ''actually
disgraceful.'' This summer, if plans are realized, audiences in New York, San
Francisco, Los Angeles and Washington will be able to see for themselves what
the Bolshoi has been up to in the past decade.

But it has been political rather than esthetic disputes that have held the
spotlight in cultural exchanges. The relationship of art to politics has often
resembled that of Charlie Chaplin's tramp to the rich drunk who takes him in at
night and throws him out in the sober morning. In 1965, for example, the
Russians canceled a planned visit to Moscow by an American company doing
''Hello, Dolly!'' because of the American bombing of North Vietnam. In 1967,
after the six-day war between Israel and the Arab states, they scratched a
United States tour by the Bolshoi. The United States, for its part, suspended
cultural contacts with Communist bloc countries in September 1968 because of the
Soviet-led invasion of Czecholovakia.

With the exchanges beginning again, it seems a reasonable time to think about
the realities of cultural exchange between a closed society and an open one, to
set the anticipated pleasures against the accompanying concerns.

Between Jan. 1, 1986, and Dec. 31, 1988, the first three years of the new
six-year accord, at least 10 major performing groups and at least 10 individual
performers from each nation are scheduled to make public appearances in the
other country.

The accord, phrased in very general language, binds the two governments to
''assist exchanges of theatrical, musical and choreographic ensembles,
orchestras and other performing and artistic groups, as well as individual
directors and performers.'' Invitations have customarily been issued by a
sponsoring organization in one country to a performing group in the other, with
the hosts expected to pay for the upkeep of their visitors. The San Francisco
Opera and Ballet will have to raise $100,000, in addition to box-office
receipts, for the Bolshoi Ballet's visit to their city.

The orchestration of trips overseas by big groups is daunting. Travel by the New
York Philharmonic, whose visit to the Soviet Union in 1976 was the last by an
American orchestra, involves 130 people and 20,000 pounds of baggage. The cost
of a five-week trip abroad comes to about $2.5 million, and support is required
from corporate contributors. In figuring up the costs of accepting an invitation
from the official Soviet concert bureau for four concerts in early May, the
Philadelphia Orchestra had to take into account not just travel expenses but the
loss of fees for canceled commitments for the time it would be away. Even with
the Russians picking up the tab for the brief stay in the Moscow and Leningrad,
the cost would have come to between $600,000 and $900,000, and the orchestra
decided against it.

Sometimes, Washington helps out with cash or with ''facilitative'' assistance,
possibly in the form of red-tape cutting by our Moscow embassy. In both
countries, box office is a major consideration - which is why the Bolshoi is
likely to be more sought after by American impresarios than the Irkutsk Symphony
and why rock groups will be specially welcomed in the Soviet Union.

To what extent are new exchanges likely to encourage greater openness between
the two countries? The audiences will be limited. In cities like New York,
ticket prices are likely to range between $50 and $100 for the better views.
Prices in the Soviet Union are lower, since they are subsidized; nonetheless,
tickets to popular offerings can be difficult to come by and are most readily
available to the politically privileged. Soviet artists who have run afoul of
their state are less likely to be in the audience than their censors. In any
case, however influential the audience, who can say how exposure to another
nation's culture translates into attitudes about its style of government or its
performance on the world stage?

Along with the concerts and exhibitions will come opportunities for musicians,
dancers, artists to meet and see something of each other's work and working
conditions. Such contacts, however, are restricted by circumstances and policy.
The performers are obliged to earn back as much as possible to help pay for
their trip, which means heavy schedules and little time for sightseeing.
Moreover, Russian visitors are known to be under the care of K.G.B.
''babysitters,'' while Americans in the Soviet Union are generally directed to
sights their hosts feel are appropriate for foreign viewing, and they often find
that Russians are reticent in their presence.

Insofar as the exchanges are simply a matter of showing off each nation's
accomplishments in music and dance, they are not likely to stir much
controversy. Orchestras can play pretty much what they want. That luxury is not
available in the case of works that are perceived to carry a political message.
The experience of the Moscow Book Fair has been gloomily enlightening. The
Russians have banned quite a number of books and have held up visas for certain
individuals. American publishers admit that they now censor themselves, keeping
home books that are likely to cause trouble.

Similar constraints are likely to apply to any trade in movies and television
programs. Soviet authorities not long ago attacked the films ''Rocky IV'' and
''Rambo: First Blood Part II,'' which feature Russian villains, and Soviet
officials warned ABC in January that its news operations in Moscow could be
jeopardized if it proceeded with a mini-series, ''Amerika,'' that is to depict
life in the United States after a Soviet takeover. ABC said it would go ahead
anyway.

A delegation of American public broadcasting executives that went to Moscow late
last year found interest in their documentaries about Pablo Picasso and the
American Wing of the Metropolitan Museum of Art. When the discussion turned to
American public affairs programs, however, Robert Kotlowitz, a vice president of
WNET, got the impression that ''all they're interested in are programs about
homeless families in New York.''

It is a safe bet that no works remotely critical of Communism or the Soviet
Union or unduly favorable to the United States will find their way into Russian
homes, and an even safer one that the Russians will send nothing to America that
diverges from the Politburo line.

Moscow can be counted on to screen who it sends as carefully as what it sends.
Washington relaxed its restrictions on participants in cultural exchanges some
years ago, and despite instances of official hindrances to foreign writers of
leftist tendencies, Americans involved in exchanges expect few problems from
this side. The tough Soviet position on defectors, however, may prove more of an
obstacle. A group of Russian writers who had been scheduled to attend the
January congress of PEN International in New York were scratched at the last
hour because defectors like Joseph Brodsky and Vassily Aksyonov would be
present. In February, 1979, the Russians canceled an art show at the University
of Michigan because Mr. Brodsky, who defected in 1972, had been invited to give
a reading.

Given the lustre of some of the defectors - Rudolf Nureyev, Natalia Makarova,
Mikhail Baryshnikov, Mstislav Rostropovich - it is no wonder that Soviet
negotiators tried, unsuccessfully, to add a clause to the current agreement that
would have placed responsibility on the United States for seeing that their
citizens all found their way home again.

The issue of what Soviet negotiators called the ''safety'' of their touring
artists was first raised in 1979, after the stunning defections from the Bolshoi
Ballet of Alexsandr Godunov and Leonid and Valentina Kozlov. Moscow's
cancellation of a scheduled United States tour by the Moscow Symphony that year
was linked to the American refusal to guarantee there would be no defections.

The treatment of dissidents inside the Soviet Union, too, has disturbed
exchanges. The Russians canceled a tour by the Bolshoi Ballet in 1970 following
demonstrations in America on behalf of Soviet Jews. Washington responded by
canceling American participation in the 1971 International Film Festival in
Moscow on the grounds that political films ''highly offensive'' to the United
States were being shown. In 1974, the Russians canceled a tour by the Kirov
Ballet at least in part because of criticism in this country of their refusal to
permit two former principal dancers of the Kirov, Valery and Galina Panov, to
emigrate to Israel.

Today, some Soviet artists are still prevented from going abroad or working
freely in their own country -for example, Vladimir O. Feltsman, a prominent
Russian pianist, who has been barred from giving concerts in Moscow or Leningrad
since he applied to emigrate in 1979. PEN International's Writers in Prison
Committee has compiled a list of 90 Soviet writers and journalists who were
known to be imprisoned, under house arrest or otherwise in deep trouble in 1985.

With all deference to detente, then, it does not seem a mark of the philistine
to consider how cultural exchanges might be used to ease the lot of Russian
writers, artists and performers who are out of tune with their regime.

At the least, Soviet officials might be given to understand that permission to a
Feltsman to leave the country might make American musicians feel better about
going there and American music lovers more hospitable to Russian performers. New
instances of repression, on the other hand, could prompt some performers and
ticket buyers to stay home.

The Soviet Union has treasures to show off and of course we want to see them and
show off our own, and compromises will be needed to get the exchanges moving.
But one would have to be dazzled by the prospect of pleasure or drugged by the
dream of detente to separate the joys of art from the condition of Russia's
artists. Concern for their fate is a measure of our devotion to culture.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of a show from Washington's National Gallery at the Hermitage
Museum in Leningrad (Tass)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 20, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Did Justice Fall From the Skies Over Tripoli?;
Congress Acquiesced

SECTION: Section 4; Page 24, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 302 words


To the Editor:

There are many ''scrupulous citizens'' who, contrary to ''The Terrorist and His
Sentence,'' not only do not approve or applaud the American bombing of Libya,
but indeed look on with horror and concern. The Libyans on the ground who were
killed and wounded in the bombing are as innocent as the people killed and
wounded on the T.W.A. jet and in the West Berlin disco. Further, only those who
have short memories or are too young will uncritically accept the credibility of
the evidence of Libyan involvement. Some scrupulous citizens recall our
Government's fabrication of the Tonkin Gulf incident in which it was claimed
that North Vietnamese boats attacked our Navy, and its use to escalate the
Vietnam War.

The concern comes from the trampling of the Constitution and even more from the
acquiescence of Congress. The Constitution grants Congress the exclusive power
to declare war. Bombing a country's military facilities is the clearest act of
war; the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor was precisely that. Presidents have
justified military action without a declaration of war either in emergencies or
by Congressional approval, such as appropriations for the war in Vietnam, but
neither was present in the case of Libya.

Whether to attack Libya was widely debated for nine days after the West Berlin
bombing and for some time before that. Such a process is precisely what the
Constitution delegated to Congress. That body meekly surrendered its most
important power without so much as a protest, let alone a fight.

The lives of the Americans and Libyans who will die in the mad exchange of
terror must be on the conscience of Congress. The future safety of our country
from the impetuous adventures of a President has been gravely undermined.
HERBERT SEMMEL Brooklyn, April 16, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 20, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Did Justice Fall From the Skies Over Tripoli?;
Tonkin Gulf Parallel

SECTION: Section 4; Page 24, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 303 words


To the Editor:

The Constitution provides, in Article I, Section 8, that Congress has the power
''To declare War, grant Letters of marque and reprisal.'' The responsibility of
Congress to issue letters of marque and reprisal is a power long overlooked in
the debate concerning war powers. According to Black's Law Dictionary, such
letters are appropriate ''whenever the subjects of one state are oppressed and
injured by those of another, and justice is denied by that state to which the
oppressor belongs.''

Letters of marque and reprisal may be more appropriate to authorize the seizure
of persons and property, rather than their outright destruction, which would
appear to be an act of war. In either case, while the President undoubtedly has
the right to defend against an overt attack on United States military personnel,
such as occurred in the Gulf of Sidra, under the Constitution, it is the
responsibility of Congress to authorize military reprisals for acts of
terrorism.

It was the failure to observe these simple rules that led us off the deep end in
Vietnam. The Tonkin Gulf Resolution was not a declaration of war nor a letter of
marque and reprisal, and did not authorize specific military activities. The
Government conceded this in the subsequent court cases challenging the
constitutionality of the war. Nevertheless, Presi-dent Johnson acted as if it
were such authority, and escalated the conflict without congressional authority.

The War Powers Resolution of 1973 does not and cannot alter the Constitution.
Nothing in that act authorizes the President to order specific military
reprisals for acts of terrorism.

If we are to insist that governments around the world adhere to the rule of law,
we must start by adherence to our own fundamental law.MARC J. LUXEMBURG New
York, April 14, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 20, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
Leave It To the People?

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 25, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 764 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


There's a popular notion, almost a rule in Washington, that you can criticize
anybody or anything except the American people. They would know what to do on
earth or even in outer space.

Thomas Jefferson thought this was a silly idea, but after a while he was
followed by George Gallup and Lou Harris, who measured public opinion and
convinced most politicians that what was popular was right, or, anyway, got
votes.

Thus, it's allowed that Speaker O'Neill in the Capitol and even President Reagan
downtown in the White House may be questioned. But the voice of the people, it's
said, cannot be challenged without casting doubt on the democratic principle
that the people know best.

Consider the events in Libya. At no time in recent memory has the U.S. been
condemned by informed opinion across the world as it has been for this bombing
raid on the Libyan capital. Yet public opinion at home has encouraged the
President to pronounce the raid as a great success in the American fight against
international terrorism.

For example, after the raid, The New York Times-CBS News Poll indicated that 77
percent of the American people approved the strike, and the same poll registered
increased support for President Reagan's handling of the nation's foreign policy
in general -from 51 percent the previous week to 76 percent following the
attack.

At the same time, another poll, indicating support for the President's decision,
showed the perception was that the raid would probably not reduce terror but
increase it.

This contradiction, however, was no surprise. Whenever the President takes bold
military action abroad, the people rally to his side.

Even President Kennedy's adventure against Fidel Castro in the Bay of Pigs was
popular at the beginning when the President thought he could do it on the cheap,
but disastrous at the end.

And the people supported President Johnson in Vietnam when he said he wasn't
going to be the first U.S. President to lose a war. But he lost it, and the
people finally ran him out of town.

This is now President Reagan's problem. He is supported by public opinion but
not by informed opinion either at home or abroad, and has to deal with the
consequences.

Nobody doubts his objective - to terrorize the terrorists - but will it work? He
consulted the allies in advance about his military invasion, but the
Mediterranean allies disagreed and refused to let his planes fly over their
airspace.

He didn't really ''consult'' with the leaders of the Congress about the wisdom
of his invasion, but merely informed them that the bombers were on their way. He
said this was an act of self-defense, justified by Article 51 of the United
Nations Charter; but with the exception of Britain, nobody agreed that his
bombers were a ''proportionate'' response by a major nation to this posturing
sawdust dictator in Tripoli.

Did the President, for instance, consider the possible loss of life of his
pilots and bombardiers in their long journey from Britain, refueling their
planes around France, Spain and Portugal into the Mediterranean, or the loss of
life after they hit their target?

Or maybe more important, even if they hit the target and killed Colonel Qaddafi,
what would Mr. Reagan do if Libya invited the Russians to establish a naval base
at Tripoli, which is precisely what the Joint Chiefs of Staff in the Pentagon
have been trying to avoid for a generation?

So the Russians are delighted by this Reagan adventure. It has diverted world
opinion from Moscow's military aggression to Washington's.

The Soviet Union canceled the foreign ministers' meeting with the U.S. that was
to plan for another Reagan-Gorbachev summit. But that should not be taken
seriously; the Russians will not confuse Colonel Qaddafi with arms control but
will eventually set up another summit with Mr. Reagan to discuss the central
question of nuclear weapons.

Meanwhile, the President, glorying in his bombing ''success'' and in the support
of the American people, will have to try to work things out with the Congress
and the allies, and wonder if public opinion, as measured by the polls, is a
reliable guide.

''We must adopt the habit of thinking as plainly about the sovereign people,''
Walter Lippmann wrote 50 years ago, ''as we do about the politicians they elect.

''It will not do to think poorly about the politicians, and to talk with bated
breath about the voters. No more than kings before them should the people be
hedged with divinity. Like all princes and rulers, like all sovereigns, they are
ill-served by flattery and adulation . . .''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 20, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
Time To Agree

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section 4; Page 25, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 751 words

DATELINE: MILAN, Italy


Sitting in the T.W.A. lounge at Kennedy Airport waiting for the overnight flight
to Italy induced a dull fatalism. Passengers watched the news in silence while
Dan Rather told about the warnings, the fears, the precautions being taken by
the U.S. Government. When the newscast was over, one young woman blurted out,
''If my livelihood didn't depend on it, I wouldn't take this trip.'' Later,
another said with a nervous giggle: ''There's always been terrorism in Italy,
hasn't there? We'll keep a low profile, not let on that we're Americans.''

The night before, skimming the intensity of American reaction, television had
shown a schoolchild grinning, no doubt because of the camera trained on him, and
asking, ''Are we going to have a nuclear war now because Russia is a part of
Libya?'' And then it showed a parent, an earnest, heavy-set woman with short
brown hair, saying gravely, ''The kids are worried, really worried that there's
going to be a war.''

Then there was a psychiatrist in a white smock, identified as a stress expert,
explaining that people with high blood pressure, or ulcers, or bad backs, were
likely to feel a lot worse in this period because they'd be tightening up under
the tension and that would aggravate their maladies.

I wondered what we were doing to ourselves. One day Americans were puffed-up
supermen, proudly telling each other that nobody can push them around. The next
day people were quivering, not at terrorism but in self-induced terror, to a
degree no Libyan leader could possibly achieve.

The flight was uneventful and the arrival tiring but routine. The conference
here is about East-West relations, attended mostly by Europeans from both sides
but also a number of prominent Americans and a couple of Soviet officials. The
atmosphere is cordial, as usual, but there is an undercurrent of serious
disturbance among the Westerners.

Italian Labor Minister Gianni de Michelis noted unhappily that thousands of
students were demonstrating against the U.S. in the middle of Milan, the first
big anti-American demonstration since the period of the Vietnam War. ''We're all
against terrorism, certainly in Italy,'' he said, ''but bombing that kills women
and children . . .''

Another Italian said that may be the expression of youth, but older people were
getting fed up and were wondering why this country, which finally took very
stern measures to defeat its own decade of terrorism, hadn't been readier to
cooperate in isolating Libya. A senior German expert on international affairs
said he was personally embarrassed at the allied refusal to show more solidarity
with the United States.

There was clearly concern that the depth of angry feeling on both sides would do
serious damage to the alliance, far beyond what Moscow, let alone Tripoli, could
possible have provoked. That is the real issue now, much more important to the
future of all in the West than the random, occasional incidents of terrorism. It
is harder to dramatize, but it is a far greater danger.

The recriminations and the analysis of who should have done what at which step
have to be set aside. The spilt milk must be cleaned up. The urgent need now is
for a clear, public show of allied solidarity so that the peoples of the West
and the opposing regimes can see that the dispute has been a limited one about
methods, not about purpose and determination.

The deadline for action is probably the Tokyo summit in a fortnight. Otherwise,
the wounds will fester and take a long time to heal. It shouldn't really be so
difficult for the major Western states to agree on some political and economic
sanctions against Libya to show they can and do take a common stand.

If the measures go further than Europeans might really wish and not quite so far
as Washington would like, that won't matter. That is the meaning of friendship
and accommodation. The point is to show that there really is basic agreement.

The immediate problem is weak governments in Europe. France is virtually
paralyzed by its internal politics, and Germany's Chancellor Helmut Kohl,
normally indecisive, is in added personal trouble. The French-German axis which
underpins the European Community probably isn't up to an initiative. Britain's
Margaret Thatcher is out on a shaky limb. Italy and Spain are talking about
taking a lead together, but they're afraid of seeming inconsequential.

Leaders must stop dithering. The passions they have stirred can fracture the
bulwark of the West on which they all rely.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 20, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NO RELIEF IN SIGHT FOR WHITSON AS ORDEAL GOES ON

BYLINE: By MURRAY CHASS

SECTION: Section 5; Page 1, Column 4; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1843 words

DATELINE: MILWAUKEE


THE DATE is Oct. 4, 1984, the place San Diego. The Padres have lost the first
two games of the National League playoff to the Chicago Cubs, but Ed Whitson
pitches the third game and his eight-inning, one-run performance marks the
turnaround for the Padres that will carry them into the World Series.

''That was a lot of fun,'' Whitson recalls. ''We had the people on our side. The
Chicago fans said the San Diego fans didn't deserve it because they were too
laid-back. But when we returned to San Diego, the fans got behind us and really
helped us win.''

One month later, Whitson becomes a free agent, and before the year ends signs a
five-year, $4.4 million contract with the Yankees. Like Reggie Jackson and
others before him, he is personally recruited by George Steinbrenner, whose
charm and persuasion often mesmerize players into ignoring the potential
pitfalls that punctuate the New York landscape.

It is September of last year, many pitfalls later. ''Phil Niekro was trying for
his 300th win at the Stadium and he lost,'' Whitson recalls. ''I walked out of
the ball park, and the fans got all over me. They hooted pretty good. I felt
like I had pitched. I couldn't understand what that was all about. I had nothing
to do with the game.''

By this time, though, the perplexed pitcher has endured hostile treatment from
fans in the stands at Yankee Stadium, heard abusive comments from fans outside
the stadium, received hate mail and discovered nails driven into the driveway
behind all four tires of his car.

During the winter, he wants desperately to be traded back to the safety and the
security of the National League, but a new season begins and he remains a
Yankee, though one who dreads appearing on the field and who seeks a secret exit
from the Stadium so he will not encounter fans on the street.

''The guy is in a living nightmare,'' says Tom Reich, his longtime lawyer. ''We
have a player here who literally dreads going to his own stadium. He's been
living on the edge. Before his first start, he felt great throwing in the
bullpen, and when he got out on the mound, it was like being in Vietnam.''

Whitson chooses a more current but no less sinister battleground to depict his
plight. ''This is baseball,' he says incredulously. ''It's not like looking for
Qaddafi.''

Eddie Lee Whitson, a native of Johnson City, Tenn., will be 31 years old in a
month. He is in his ninth season in the major leagues and is pitching for his
fifth team. He has a wife, Kathy, and a 4-year-old daughter, Jennifer. They live
in Columbus, Ohio, where he once played in the minor leagues and where he and
Kathy met. He has a $700,000 salary this year and will earn the same salary next
year; in the two years after that, he will earn $900,000 a year. He likes his
profession, he loves his family, he likes his teammates and the money he makes.

He hates the place where he makes it.

''It started when I got off to a bad start last year,'' Whitson said one day
last week, speaking in the Yankee clubhouse at cold, damp Cleveland Stadium, his
sanctuary for a few days. ''It has worn me out mentally. I just don't want it to
happen again. If you don't have a clear head when you go out there to pitch,
you're in trouble, especially in New York. I sold my house three days after the
season ended. I wasn't coming back to New York. I had an expensive alarm system
put in. It didn't help. All that security and stuff - it's a bunch of garbage. I
just want to get it over with. I want to get back to just pitching baseball
without worrying about everything else going on.''

Baseball has had players who were singled out by fans and constantly booed,
sometimes even forced out of town. Baseball has had players who could not deal
with the psychological, mental or emotional problems of excelling in the sport
and who disappeared from the field. But the Ed Whitson case does not have many
precedents.

Following Whitson's start at Yankee Stadium in the second game of this season -
a start that began with his saying it was bigger for him than a World Series or
playoff game and ended with his saying he couldn't pitch in New York - Manager
Lou Piniella decided that he had only one immediate solution: Whitson would
start games only on the road. If he pitched in New York, it would be only in
relief and then, very likely, the situation would have to be dire.

Whitson is scheduled to start in Kansas City tomorrow night. When his turn next
comes up in the five-man rotation, next Saturday against Cleveland, the Yankees
will be back at Yankee Stadium and Bob Shirley will pitch.

The solution may be workable, but it is far from ideal. But then, Whitson's
existence as a Yankee is far from ideal.

He tells of the car full of people he described as drunk following him out of
the stadium parking lot one night last season and pursuing him to the George
Washington Bridge. He tells of the three-inch carpenter nails embedded in the
driveway of his home in Closter, N.J., and the tacks strewn on the driveway at
other times. He tells of his wife going to the stadium only once for a game.

''I like my family coming to the ball park; other families go,'' he said. ''But
my family had to stay at home. It got to where I had to put my family on a plane
and fly them out of New York before we would go on road trips. That's no way to
live. I'm having some stuff shipped to New York, but my family won't be there
all the time. They'll be in and out. They'll come in for visits during long home
stands and then go back to Columbus when we go on the road.''

That existence does not promise to enhance the quality of Whitson's life as a
Yankee. Dr. Daniel Begel, a New York psychiatrist familiar with problems of
athletes, explained that, with Kathy and Jennifer in Columbus instead of New
York at times during the season, the pitcher would feel even more isolated.

Whitson, whose 14-8 season with the Padres preceding free agency was by far the
best of his career, has not felt comfortable since he won only one of his first
seven decisions last year.

''He was a high-priced free agent,'' Mark Connor, last season's pitching coach,
said. ''People expect a lot from high-priced free agents. If you're not
successful right off the bat, you're going to feel heat from the fans.''

Other high-priced free agents were not successful from the start, and they heard
from the fans. ''I saw Reggie Jackson go through much more than what Whitson's
going through,'' said Steinbrenner. ''I've seen Dave Winfield get booed. I've
seen George Steinbrenner go through it. It affects me, it affects my family. But
you have to tough it out.'' Last June 11, Whitson pitched nine and one-third
innings at the Stadium against Toronto and left with a 1-1 tie. The fans,
acknowledging his finest performance of the season, saluted him with chants of
''Eddie, Eddie, Eddie.''

''One good game can get you over the hump, and that did it,'' Whitson said. He
didn't win that game, but he won his next three starts and nine of his next 10
decisions over a 16-start stretch. He finished with a 10-8 record, a 4.88 earned
run average -and a barroom brawl with Billy Martin, his manager.

He said he and Martin later resolved their differences, but as this season
approached, Whitson was concerned about how the fans might react to him because
of the fight with the popular Martin. He also wanted desperately to start the
season well, to avoid the abusive treatment some fans inflicted last year.
Throughout spring training, he thought about his first start; it was built into
something he would find impossible to cope with.

On the day of the game he spoke of facing more pressure than he had in the 1984
World Series, and he pitched that night almost as badly as he had in his one
Series start, which lasted less than one inning.

''I wanted to do it so bad, but it turned out horrible,'' said Whitson, who
didn't finish the third inning against Kansas City. ''The harder you try, the
worse things come out.''

And the fans? ''From the time my name was mentioned in the starting lineup, they
booed; they booed me out of the bullpen. I didn't stick around to find out how
they would react. As soon as I was taken out, I took a shower and left,'' he
said.

Whitson, however, cannot leave for good. Steinbrenner said the Yankees had tried
to trade him, conferring twice with the six teams he has said he would go to.
''Nobody wants Ed Whitson at his salary or as a pitcher,'' the owner said.
''There is no market. I told his agent nine months ago to see what he could
find. There's been nothing.''

The agent, Reich, who has a good working relationship with Steinbrenner,
acknowledged that offers have not been forthcoming, but he said the list of
teams was flexible. ''In order to make a deal, it's going to require a constant
effort,'' the agent said.

Whitson has talked of an agreement with Steinbrenner that would require the
Yankees to release him as a free agent if they cannot trade him. The owner says
there is no such clause, and a source familiar with the contract says that is
so. However, there apparently is a separate agreement dealing with Whitson's
right to ask for a trade and possibly become free. The pitcher, though, is not
invoking that agreement. He apparently is willing to give his agent and his
employer time to work it out.

In the meantime, he stews in his frustration and his anxiety. He receives
emotional support from his teammates, but he does nothing to enhance his value
as a pitcher, despite a strong arm that club officials feel is as good as any on
the staff. His teammates recognize his problem, but some feel he simply has to
be tougher emotionally. One fellow pitcher noted that when Whitson threw in the
bullpen during a game at Yankee Stadium, fans cheered him. Whitson, it was
suggested, should use that kind of reception and other positive comments and
letters from fans to steel himself against the abusive element.

''He looks beaten before he starts,'' one Yankee said.

Steinbrenner, who said he likes and respects the pitcher, suggested that Whitson
might have to wear earplugs to shut out the derisive fans. Sammy Ellis, this
season's pitching coach, said the answer might be for Whitson to pitch two or
three good games, whether as a starter or a reliever, so he can get himself
''thinking right.''

''I think the minute he pitches a good game,'' Ellis added, ''the fans will
rally around him.''

Yet Ellis also told of a meeting Whitson had with him and Piniella late in
spring training, where he told them ''how hard it's been for him and his
family.''

In that state of mind, Whitson seems to have virtually no chance of being an
effective pitcher for the Yankees.

''This is a real travesty,'' said Reich. ''This situation appears to be
irreconcilable short of getting him out of there. We're going to do everything
in our power to resolve it. The situation is so extreme, so unprecedented, the
solution also might be. Nothing is out of the realm of possibility. We can't let
him be subjected to this. It can't go on much longer.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Ed Whitson in bullpen with Coach Jeff Torborg and Rod Scurry
(NYT/Carl Skalak); Photo of Whitson with Butch Wynegar (NYT/Larry C. Morris);
Chart of Whitson's record

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 20, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEWARE THE UNDERDOG

BYLINE: By Diane Johnson; Diane Johnson is a writer and teacher whose most
recent books are ''Dashiell Hammett: A Life'' and ''Lying Low,'' a novel.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1920 words


TEFUGA Peter Dickinson. 256 pp. New York: Pantheon Books. $14.95. IT isn't
surprising that ''Tefuga,'' Peter Dickinson's amusing and elegantly structured
tour de force about Nigeria, is very English. At the time of the recent PEN
conference, Edward Hoagland pointed out on The New York Times's Op-Ed page the
great deficiency of American writers in being so unconcerned about the rest of
the world: ''I would guess that five times as many have been to Tuscany as to
the whole continent of Africa; that more have visited Barcelona than all of
South America. . . . Much of the extraordinary ignorance of most Amercans about
what has been happening elsewhere . . . is due to the fact that their eyes and
ears - their writers - have stayed home.''

Though there are some distinguished exceptions, American novels by and large
have been wrapped up in sagas, by now boring, of urban angst, relationships and
self. In comparison, the British, with their memories of empire and their
exploration, not only often write novels about other lands but seem to prefer
them to novels set in England and usually give the Booker Prize, their most
prominent and valuable literary award, to stories of India or Switzerland, or
(last year) a novel from New Zealand. Their writers and worlds include Graham
Greene from Vietnam (''The Quiet American'') to Cuba (''Our Man in Havana''),
George Orwell from Burma (''Burmese Days'') to Africa (''Marrakesh''), Doris
Lessing in Africa (''The Grass Is Singing'' ''African Stories'') - and the
lively Peter Dickinson, who seems at home everywhere.

Serious readers of detective stories are likely to have discovered Mr. Dickinson
already - this is his 16th novel - and he also has a following among occasional
readers of literary detective stories, the ''well-written'' ones. His novels are
always well written, but here, without sacrificing the wit and erudition of all
his work, he has managed his more serious themes of anticolonialism and feminism
in a manner that seems to point away from the genre writing that has occupied
him. (He also writes children's books and has won prizes for those as well as
for his thrillers.) From an American point of view, Mr. Dickinson himself seems
to embody Englishness. He was born in Zambia and returned to England, where he
was educated at Eton and Cambridge - he sounds the very sort, in fact, that he
is severest on in his novels. Perhaps it was when he was an editor at Punch that
he learned the particular style of irreverence with which he presents his
countrymen as slightly ineffective ironists. His countrywomen he sees as
energetic, effective and animated by social sympathies.

''Tefuga'' interweaves a modern story with diary entries that recount events
surrounding an incident at Tefuga Hill in northern Nigeria in the 1920's. The
famous television personality Nigel Jackland (symbolic name!) has arrived in
Nigeria with a film crew to recapture scenes in the diary of his mother, who
came here before his birth with his father, the British district officer.Along
with Jackland in the modern story is his star, Mary Tressider, who will be
portraying his mother, Betty Jackland, and they have an ally in the local
dignitary, old Elongo, who had actually been the houseboy of Betty and Edward
Jackland 60 years before.

Betty's diary entries indirectly characterize her as an innocent bride, a woman
awakening to sexuality and artistic discovery, to the role of women in other
cultures and in her own, to the nature of men and power and, in particular, to
the powerlessness of women and the need for subversion - large topics mused on
in a kind of disarming gush. When she visits the local chieftain's harem, she
feels ''absolutely sick to look at them. It was disgusting. Like being in a
farmyard - not 'cos it was dirty which it wasn't specially, but 'cos the women
weren't people. They were cattle. They stared at me with dark stupid cow-eyes.
They didn't know anything, they didn't do anything, they were just herded into
this place and kept here for that filthy, fat, leering old brute to - I will
write it -to copulate with. It was so shocking I almost fainted, not 'cos of the
heat or the smells, but the absolute horror of it.'' BETTY is married to the
well-meaning but stuffy Edward, with whom, apart from an enthusiastic sex life,
she has little in common and philosophical differences that become increasingly
obvious. Ted believes in the colonial system and indirect rule and clings to the
standard colonialist view of the Nigerians as childlike and primitive, people
with whom one must be fair and firm. Betty feels, especially with the women she
meets, a community of sympathy arising from the powerlessness they share within
male-dominated worlds that Betty, initially compliant, comes to oppose and
subvert. Like Betty, the Nigerian women will work outside the system to get what
they want (in this case, the removal of an odious local potentate). This
subversive alternative power structure is understood too, years later, by Mary
Tressider, who thinks of Betty the way Betty thought of Femora Feng, the
strangely powerful Nigerian woman, as an inspiration and a sister.

Now, events befall the modern film crew that mesh with the emerging story of 60
years before, of political violence, colonial stupidity and female revenge.
These are accomplished with an Englishman's special ability to present
primitives as people - that is, to make fun of them in the same tone he uses to
make fun of the English, as though they were members of the same family, where
an American novelist would be apt to see them romantically, as pitiful or
menacing.

But the greatest fun comes from Betty's naive but shrewd observations on the
English management of Nigeria, connubial sex, indirect rule, Nigerian marriage
customs, even watercolor painting. These make ''Tefuga'' educational, in an
unobjectionable way, and give the pleasant sense of edification by the careful
research or vast information of the author. THE character of Betty is
wonderfully well done, from the schoolgirlish and compliant bride who arrives to
the determined and mature young woman who has to leave (because of pregnancy).
Mr. Dickinson has an agreeable view of women as intelligent and active, here as
in other novels. In ''The Lively Dead,'' set among immigrants in London, Lydia
Timms engages in carpentry and makes prison visits, while her husband, like
Edward Jackson, is something of a casualty of the system.

The same attitude toward women occurs in ''The Poison Oracle,'' where the woman
is a terrorist. In all his books he defends a rich variety of underdogs - early
feminists, Africans, tarts, mythical Livonians, and even the British royal
family (''King and Joker''). It is his persistent and optimistic theme that
characters transcend (or betray) their stations, are not what they expected to
be or what we expect - prim ladies like Betty, who turns out to like ''it,''
articulate sultans, chatty chimpanzees.

One particularly admires the perfect equanimity with which Mr. Dickinson avoids
the pitfall of rendering the accent and cadence of African dialect in ''Tefuga''
by arranging that all the Nigerians speak perfect English or that the English
have learned the particular local language, Kiti.

It often happens that the best thriller writers leave a part of their audience
behind and cross over a kind of no man's land of virtue or effort into a
territory acknowledged as ''serious,'' even when, as here, they are funny. It's
interesting that this mutation does not seem to affect writers of romances or
westerns, the stern moral underpinnings of even the most workaday mystery story
lending it significance despite itself. Mysteries represent fears and
psychodrama, where romance, one supposes, represents dreams and wishes, which no
one approves of. But any evidence of art in these genres assuages any guilt we
may feel at the indulgence of light reading. WHY is ''Tefuga'' more serious than
Mr. Dickinson's earlier thrillers? For one thing, the characters seem more real,
that intangible standard. Then there's a matter of tone, where a certain
debonair flippancy is tempered; and the feminist and anticolonial agenda, while
never dominating the fascinating events, does tighten a narrative that might
otherwise seem farfetched. Mr. Dickinson always does realize events that another
writer couldn't: life in the royal family, for instance, in ''King and Joker''
or the adventures of a chimpanzee-language expert and zookeeper in the Middle
Eastern kingdom of Q'Kut in ''The Poison Oracle,'' if you've a mind to go on
with some others. Very likely, after reading ''Tefuga,'' you will.

'WRITE, THEN RESEARCH, THEN REWRITE'

''I make it up,'' Peter Dickinson said simply.

Pausing on a brief, rare trip to Boston and New York, he said, ''I believe the
crucial thing for a writer is the ability to make up coherent worlds. I'm like a
beachcomber walking along the shores of invention, picking up things and
wondering what kinds of structures they could make. I want it to be an
interesting structure, not a ramshackle, beachy thing. The imagination is like
the sea, full of things you can't see but can possibly harvest and use.''

His books arise from problems and ideas that come in images to the British
author. He writes without knowing exactly what is going to happen. ''King and
Joker,'' for example, was inspired by a joke about life in Buckingham Palace
told by a journalist friend writing about Prince Philip: ''I thought instantly
that's my kind of world, with its extraordinary customs and isolation.'' After
hearing a BBC radio talk on teaching language to chimpanzees, ''I thought it
would be fun to have the ape witness a murder and identify the murderer. But I
had to isolate the idea and contain it, so it couldn't take place in, say, a
British scientific establishment. I wouldn't have the technical skill to pull
that off.'' So he set ''The Poison Oracle'' in a mythical desert kingdom and
invented a palace shaped like a ziggurat, ''which really would work perfectly in
that climate.''

''I was raised with religion, read the Bible when I was about 9, but am
completely without faith,'' continued the 59-year-old author.

''But I write a lot about cults and isolating kinds of faith in both the adult
and the children's books. The trick is always to isolate the players, and what I
am interested in is the imaginative response to isolation.

''It's all very instinctive. I try to find a voice in my head. I write the books
first, then do the research, then rewrite them. I'm so bad at research because
everything I want to know seems to fall between the Dewey numerals. I do less
research than most writers, and I do it partly to find areas on which I feel
confident rather than write from the facts.'' For ''Tefuga,'' ''I could imagine
a Nigeria, but it wouldn't be the Nigeria,'' so he had assistance from a
scholar, but it was to check details. ''I had them going down a concrete road,
and she said that couldn't have been the case.''

Mr. Dickinson found Betty Jackland's voice ''easy,'' as he has found those of
many of his women characters. ''I regard myself as a feminine chap. I love
cooking, bake the bread, love to hold a baby on my hip. If I had one wish, it
would be to be a woman, just briefly, and not just for the sex, although one
wouldn't want to miss that. But I write in the women's voices for a technical
reason as well - the reader is unlikely to mistake you for the character.'' -
Eden Ross Lipson

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Peter Dickinson (NYT/Jack Manning)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 20, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONNECTICUT GUIDE

BYLINE: By Eleanor Charles

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 20, Column 4; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 902 words


CONCERT OF THE '50's Three great pompadours of the 50's will be united on the
stage of the Palace Theater in New Haven when Frankie Avalon, Fabian and Bobby
Rydell give a joint concert at 7:30 and 10 P.M. Saturday.

The program consists of their renditions of ''Venus,'' ''Volare'' and ''Turn Me
Loose''; a screening of decades-old film footage of the three former teen-age
idols, and a dance contest designed for audience participation. Tickets are
$13.50 and $15.50 and may be ordered through Ticketron, Ticket World or
1-800-682-8080.

READING FOR PEACE

From 30 to 40 writers will read from their work in an eight-hour period Saturday
in Salisbury. A sampling of the writers includes Arthur Miller, Francine du
Plessix Gray, Honor Moore, Robert Osborn and Ed Brecher, as well as Roy Blount
Jr. and Russell Lynes.

The event, ''Readings for Peace,'' was organized by the Northwest Corner
Coalition for Nuclear Disarmament, and it is thought to be the first such event
since the Vietnam War. It will take place in the St. John's Church Parish House
on Main Street from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. The works, to be read at 15-minute
intervals, were selected by the authors on the basis of the appropriateness to
the occasion. The readings will replace the Saturday morning Peace Vigil, which
has been held on the Salisbury Green for the last four years. There is no
admission charge but donations are welcome.

SCHENKER FESTIVAL

Heinrich Schenker, an Austrian Jew who died in 1935 and has achieved a
reputation as a musical theorist and an authoritative editor of the complete
Beethoven piano sonatas, is the subject of a festival at the Hartt School of
Music of the University of Hartford on Saturday.

''He had a degree in law from the University of Vienna, and he was an
accomplished pianist and composer as well as theorist and critic,'' said Patrick
Miller, assistant professor of theory at Hartt. ''But his life has been a big
mystery. His wife was interned in a concentration camp after his death;
consequently, the records of his work are fragmented.''

To ''illuminate Schenker's life,'' as Mr. Miller put it, Dr. Helmut Federhofer,
a professor emeritus from the Johannes Gutenberg-Universitat, Mainz, West
Germany, has been invited to lecture at 2:30 P.M. Saturday.. He has published in
Germany a biography of Schenker from lengthy research into his correspondence
and a 4,000-page diary.

''Schenker knew many of the great musicians of his time and is said to have
written a series of dances, which were orchestrated by Arnold Schonberg for a
concert in honor of Ferruccio Busoni,'' said Mr. Miller, who will give a lecture
on Schenker's published music at 3:45 P.M. Both talks will take place in Berkman
Recital Hall.

A concert at 7:30 P.M. in Millard Auditorium will present Schenker's piano and
vocal music, performed by six faculty keyboard artists, Anne Koscielny, Luiz de
Moura Castro, Watson Morrison, Anthony Rauche, David Westfall and Alexander
Farkas, as well as Howard Sprout, a baritone. Admission is free. Call 243-4454
for more information.

OFFBEAT SCULPTURES

Jeanne Steig, wife of the artist and cartoonist William Steig, has achieved a
reputation as an artist with her own sense of the comic and offbeat. An
exhibition of her recent sculptures may be seen through April 30 at the Almquist
Gallery, Main Street, New Preston.

The show is titled ''Improvisations'' for its theatrical depictions of a Chicago
gangland shoot-out, a Roman circus and families grouped for photographic
portraits. The gallery is open from 11 to 5 Thursday through Monday.

PROTECTOR OF CRANES

The man who danced with a whooping crane will give one of his entertaining and
informative lectures for a Greenwich Audubon Society benefit at 8 P.M. Monday in
the auditorium of the Greenwich Library, 101 West Putnam Avenue.

Dr. George Archibald, founder and director of the International Crane
Foundation, was seen on public television in a lengthy terpsichorean courtship
preparing a female crane for artificial insemination. He is widely noted for his
work in conserving endangered cranes throughout the world, for which he was
awarded the World Wildlife Fund's gold medal.

Admission at the door is $5, or $3 for students and the elderly.

THE HAZARDS OF ART

Working as an artist can be hazardous to your health. Mona Rossol, a founder of
the Center for Occupational Hazards in New York City, is to point out some of
the dangers of working with art supplies, some of which contain toxic
substances, in a talk at 7:30 P.M. Tuesday in the Stamford Museum and Nature
Center, 39 Scofieldtown Road.

Miss Rossol is a potter, chemist and art teacher with three degrees from the
University of Wisconsin. She has given health-hazard courses there and at the
Smithsonian Institution in Washington, the Cooper-Hewitt Museum in New York, the
J. Paul Getty Museum and the International Institute for Conservation in Canada.

She will cover a variety of topics, including acute and chronic illnesses,
multiple exposures to toxic substances in art materials, definitions of poisons
and carcinogens - cumulative and noncumulative - as well as how such materials
enter the body and precautions that may be taken. The use of art materials by
children is also to be discussed. The program is sponsored by the Stamford Art
Association and A. I. Friedman Inc. of New York. There is no charge for
admission.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 20, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT: NONFICTION

BYLINE: By John P. McKenzie

SECTION: Section 7; Page 23, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 305 words


MR. JUSTICE AND MRS. BLACK: The Memoirs of Hugo L. Black and Elizabeth Black.
(Random House, $22.95.) Unfortunately for historians and students of the Supreme
Court, Justice Hugo Black was 82 years old and only three years from death when
he started writing his memoirs in 1968. His personal ''jotting,'' as he called
it, got only as far as his first marriage in 1921, when he was an ambitious
lawyer with a promising political future. His truncated story amounts to little
more than notes to-ward an autobiography, a special loss because this very
influential judge owed so much of his success to powerful expression of
constitutional ideas. Yet these few pages provide anecdotal insight into early
teachers and experiences that helped shape his later judicial thinking. It
shows, for example, the champion of free speech nostalgic for his early school
days, when there were no student strikes or protests, and corporal punishment
was in force. The Justice's second wife, Elizabeth Seay Black, contributes diary
entries from their last seven years together. The two halves, somewhat awkwardly
bridged by a narrative chapter, add up to a touching love story with occasional
glimpses of the personal relationships among the Justices. Perhaps the most
informative passages concern the few but cutting misunderstandings with Chief
Justice Warren, Black's liberal ally, whom he occasionally challenged for
recognition as the Court's leader. Mrs. Black has a telling perspective: ''Hugo
has never been too keen on the Fourth Amendment,'' which forbids unreasonable
searches and seizures. Prophetically, after Black's eloquent concurring opinion
in the Pentagon Papers case, which freed the press to print the Defense
Department's Vietnam War history, she tells her husband, ''Honey, if this is
your swan song it's a good one!''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 21, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

POLITICS;
EXPERTS STUDY THE HABITS OF GENUS BABY BOOMER

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1299 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 20


As the 1988 Presidential election draws ever closer, Lee Atwater, a Republican
campaign consultant, is conducting political research in some unexpected places:
Disney World, the downtown Washington YMCA and a Manhattan rock-and-roll
nightclub blasting 60's music.

Patrick H. Caddell, the Democratic poll taker, is paying close attention to the
lyrics of singers such as Bruce Springsteen and Sting and warning members of his
party to prepare for a change in the old political rules and alignments.

Mr. Atwater, who was deputy director of the 1984 Reagan-Bush Committee, and Mr.
Caddell, who conducted polls for Gary Hart, are on the trail of the baby
boomers, the biggest and potentially most powerful generation in American
history.

Baby boomers are the 76 million men and women born from 1946 to 1964, a
generation researchers say boomed out of the prosperity and optimism that
followed World War II, when soldiers came home and started families.

Pursuit of the Prize

These younger people have shaped every aspect of American society: fast food,
music, television, education and the work force. Now, well beyond voting age,
they are coming of age politically, and Mr. Atwater, Mr. Caddell and a host of
consultants and potential candidates from both parties, many proud members of
the generation themselves, are in hot pursuit.

They want the baby boomers because there are so many of them. The demographics
indicate baby boomers could account for as much as 60 per cent of the electorate
in 1988.

''Baby boomers will be the singlest biggest bloc of voters in history in 1988,''
Mr. Caddell said. ''At every stage,'' he said, this generation ''has caused
major upheaval.''

''Anyone who doesn't pay attention to the numbers does so at their own peril,''
said John Buckley, press secretary for Representative Jack Kemp, a Republican
Presidential hopeful from upstate New York.

Gary Hart Turned Cards Up

The political world was alerted to the potential political impact of the members
of this generation as voters when Gary Hart connected with them in early 1984
and made his meteoric rise after New Hampshire. They demonstrated their
volatility when they deserted the Democratic Party by the thousands to vote for
Ronald Reagan.

What makes these voters so tantalizing, the experts say, is their lack of
allegiance to either party. ''They're de-aligned,'' Mr. Awater said. ''Baby
boomers are never going to be in the hip pocket of either party.''

''What you have here,'' said Robert D. Squier, a Democratic consultant, ''is a
new wheel.''

The experts disagree among themselves about what makes a boomer tick, but they
do agree that it is a diverse group. They are not just free-spending, glamorous
yuppies, as they were pegged in the early Gary Hart days. ''Most baby boomers
don't drive BMW's,'' said Mark Mellman, a Democratic poll-taker and consultant.
''They don't have Chinese dogs and they don't live in downtown areas of major
cities.''

More significant and more numerous than the BMW subgroup, Mr. Mellman and others
say, is the new collar, or blue collar, or Springsteen, subgroup: the teachers,
truck drivers and fast-food managers for whom the American dream has not yet
delivered.

Caddell's Quickie Quiz

Baby boomers grew up on television and rock-and-roll. Mr. Caddell, who is 35 and
says he grew up on television and rock-and-roll himself, has an instant quiz for
pegging baby boomers, or those with a spiritual affinity.

Question: What was the song Jo Beth Williams played on the piano in the opening
funeral scene of ''The Big Chill,'' a boomers film classic?

Answer: The Rolling Stones' 1969 hit, ''You Can't Always Get What You Want.''

''If right away you know the song or you know it's the Stones, you get it and
you're obviously of it,'' Mr. Caddell said, ''It works 9 times out of 10.''

This generation was shaped by the assassination of President Kennedy, the civil
rights and antiwar movements and Watergate, their researchers say. The members
are often anti-Establishment, and often disdain traditional politicians spouting
issues. They are concerned with the environment, health care, child care, tax
code revision and civil rights. The baby boomer cliche used by many experts is
that the generation is economically conservative and socially liberal.

The Object All Sublime

Almost since they were born, this generation has been courted by marketing
wizards with everything from hula hoops to Coca-Cola. Now, the Presidential
hopefuls are on their trail.

Gary Hart, 49 years old, the anti-Establishment candidate, has been out in the
Rockies, talking about writing novels and one day leaving the world of politics
behind him.

Joe Biden, 43, a Democratic Senator from Delaware, speaks to idealistic baby
boomers about ''our generation,'' the one that has lived through the civil
rights movement and the Vietnam War and will not give up its dreams.

Mr. Kemp, 50, is visiting black churches and strengthening his reputation as an
aggressive tax-cutter. It does not hurt that he is a former football player who
bears a slight resemblance to President Kennedy and that Mr. Buckley, his
29-year-old press secretary, once wrote rock reviews for the now-defunct Soho
News.

Bush as the Begetter

Mr. Atwater touts Vice President Bush as the boomers' ultimate candidate. Mr.
Bush at 62, Mr. Atwater says, has hands-on experience as the father of five
children aged 26 to 39. ''I don't think anyone is more plugged in to baby
boomers than George Bush and his wife,'' Mr. Atwater said.

Some people have expressed skepticism about the appeal of Mr. Bush, a Navy
fighter pilot in World War II. ''I'd like to be a fly on the wall when Lee
Atwater explains Heavy Metal to George Bush,'' Mr. Squier said.

In their relentless efforts to sort out this voter reservoir, the political
entrepeneurs are conducting polls and surveys, exchanging ideas at forums,
studying the lyrics to television commercials, as well as rock music, and
consulting academic experts as well as the baby boomers themselves.

The Republican Party has spent tens of thousands of dollars on polls and
surveys. The Democratic National Committee last month held a white wine and
Bruce Springsteen music party at the Palladium discotheque in Manhattan and was
immediately criticized by many experts on the genus for resorting to gimmicks
and forgetting the all-important new collars who live in New Jersey and do not
patronize the Palladium.

Fear on Democrats' Attention

The Democrats are also targeting baby boomers with direct mail talking about new
families and mortages instead of loyalty to the Democratic party. But Mr.
Caddell says the Establishment members of his party still are not listening.

''The Democratic party has not even yet admitted this is a problem,'' he said.
''Instead they're talking about selfish yuppies and saying things like, 'Why are
they doing this to us?' ''

In the end, the politics of this generation is either very mysterious or very
obvious, depending on who is explaining.

''The pollsters discover new demographic groups the way hemlines rise and
fall,'' Mr. Squier said, presenting one point of view. ''One year it's blacks,
the next year you have to have Hispanic surnames. Then it's women. This year's
hustle is the baby boomers.''

Or consider the point of view of Ralph Whitehead, a teacher at the University of
Massachusetts in Amherst who is studying the species.

''This isn't a big deal,'' he said. ''I tell baby boomer activists: 'You know
the guy who had the locker next to yours in gym class when you were 13 years
old? It's him. He's the baby boomer.' If a candidate can capture their
imaginations and bring them into the electorate, they can be a massive and
explosive force. But it hasn't happened yet.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 22, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

DOLING OUT JOBS UNDER KOCH: THE MAYOR KEPT HIS DISTANCE

BYLINE: The following article is based on reporting by Joyce Purnick and Martin
Tolchin and was written by Miss Purnick.

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 3624 words


The municipal scandal in New York City has put a sharp focus on a compelling and
elusive question: How has patronage in its most basic form - the doling out of
jobs to the party faithful -worked in the Koch administration and what role has
it played in making corruption possible?

Rudolph W. Giuliani, the United States Attorney in Manhattan, cited ''patronage
powers'' in the recent bribery and extortion indictments of 11 people, including
former Koch administration officials. But he has declined to say where patronage
existed beyond the city's Parking Violations Bureau.

He criticized a system that amounted to ''someone turning over blocs of jobs to
political leaders and letting those leaders fill jobs,'' the prosecutor
explained in an interview. Asked if that ''someone'' was Mayor Koch, he said he
was talking about patronage ''historically,'' and would not elaborate.

Mayor Koch, who came into office in 1978 as an insurgent promising to scuttle
the old ways of making job appointments, set up a different system, insulating
himself from the process by giving commissioners broad authority over jobs in
their agencies.

But many critics say that while there is less direct patronage under Mr. Koch
than before, there are also serious problems in the way he has run his
government. They point to a naivete born of a political beginning in so-called
reform politics, mayoral inattention to detail and Mr. Koch's closeness to the
same kinds of Democratic leaders he once fought.

''I think in some ways that naivete -that not really relating to and
understanding this political world, and moving from a very negative view of the
world of county leaders to essentially discovering they're nice guys - was part
of the problem,'' said Robert F. Wagner Jr., a close adviser to Mr. Koch and his
deputy mayor for policy from 1979 to 1984. ''It was essentially an
administration that didn't know that other world and what was going on, what
might be happening.''

He and others note that in many ways, government on every level, from the White
House to state houses, City Halls and borough halls, is run through patronage,
that it is not illegal or immoral, and that it is as old as politics itself.

In the case of the Parking Violations Bureau, though, the Federal prosecutor
charged that a racketeering enterprise was created through patronage that
flourished, by all appearances, without the Mayor's knowledge.

For a chief executive, there are hazards in any system of filling jobs. ''If you
use the political apparatus, it's called patronage,'' noted former Councilman
Edward L. Sadowsky. ''If you eschew the political apparatus and appoint people
you know, it's called cronyism. And if you don't use either, you put your life
in the hands of strangers with good job resumes.''

That some patronage exists in the Koch administration - what might be called
personal patronage, for instance - is clear. The Mayor has appointed friends to
jobs, as have mayors before him.

That a few appointees - among them some who have recently become the targets of
law-enforcement investigations - were politically connected holdovers from the
mayoral days of Abraham D. Beame, is clear, too. They were kept on for
nonpolitical reasons -on the merits - says Mr. Koch, who presides over about
120,000 people working in mayoral agencies, about a quarter of them non-Civil
Service employees who are subject to control by City Hall.

In scores of interviews over the last several weeks, political leaders, current
and former members of the Koch administration and elected officials have
assessed the Mayor's method of running his government. Few said that the
corruption found so far - detected in a Chicago-based Federal investigation -
could have been uncovered under even the best of systems.

But many cited what in their estimation were flaws in Mr. Koch's system that
made wrongdoing easier. These are among the problems they mentioned:

* While the Mayor's predecessors, John V. Lindsay and Mr. Beame, were more
direct in doling out patronage, Mr. Koch stepped back and directed his
commissioners to name their own staffs, though from the beginning he reserved
the right to name or approve the selections of deputy commissioners. That
approach, critics contend, left City Hall with little control over, or even
knowledge about, many top management appointees.

* The system - which Mr. Koch has modified because of the scandal - allowed
political leaders to control some jobs through the cooperation of commissioners.

* A small number of mayoral appointments that required the approval of the City
Council were controlled by county political leaders, until the Mayor set up a
screening panel in response to the scandal.

* Mr. Koch's closeness to county leaders, which started to develop when he
sought and got support from some of them during his 1977 mayoral contest and
grew over the years, sent a message to members of his administration that it was
acceptable to do favors for those leaders, the critics said.

* That message - an unintentional one, Mr. Koch has said - was sent early, when
the Mayor retained in his administration members of the Brooklyn Democratic
organization, which was led at the time by Meade H. Esposito. They include Alex
Liberman, the former director of leasing, who pleaded guilty in 1984 to
extorting $1.2 million in payoffs; Jay L. Turoff, the former chairman of the
Taxi and Limousine Commission, now under investigation by the State
Investigation Commission, and Anthony R. Ameruso, the former Transportation
Commissioner who resigned this year, saying he had to bear some responsibility
for corruption in the Parking Violations Bureau.

* By distancing himself from the actual granting of favors but signaling that
his administration would be responsive to party leaders, the Mayor increased
their power and decreased his authority over them, according to the critics. His
closeness to the leaders was an error, he has acknowledged. Because he had to
work with county leaders, ''my administration lost the distance and controls I
had hoped to maintain in order to avoid the undue influence of party leaders on
the workings of government,'' Mr. Koch said in a February speech.

* No one on the Mayor's City Hall staff was sufficiently sophisticated about
machine politics to be able to spot those pockets of government that had
apparently fallen under the direct control of various political leaders.
Uncovering 'Clusters'

Of Political Appointees

How extensive such political clusters are is not clear. Recent investigations
have asserted that at least three top appointees of the Parking Violations
Bureau, part of the Department of Transportation, came through the patronage
powers of Donald R. Manes, the former Queens Borough President, who who
committed suicide on March 13 after being implicated in the scandal surrounding
the bureau.

Two of the appointees - the former director, Lester N. Shafran, and the former
deputy director, Geoffrey G. Lindenauer - have been indicted on racketeering
charges in connection with a bribery and extortion scheme in the bureau. Mr.
Lindenauer has pleaded guilty. Mr. Shafran has pleaded not guilty and is
awaiting trial.

Last month, after he conducted a review at the request of Mr. Koch, First Deputy
Mayor Stanley Brezenoff said he had found a ''cluster'' of six to eight people
in the Bureau of Ferry and General Aviation Operations - also in the Department
of Transportation - who belonged to political clubs on Staten Island. He broke
up the cluster as a precaution, Mr. Brezenoff said.

The Mayor and his top aides say that they did not know about the Queens
predominance in the Parking Violations Bureau or the Staten Island cluster in of
the Ferry Bureau, and that they had no reason to know.

Embodied in that very attitude, according to experts in municipal government, is
a fundamental problem in the Koch administration. ''There has to be somebody who
has to keep his eye on what's going on,'' said Julius C. C. Edelstein, vice
chancellor emeritus of the City University of New York, who was once a top
adviser to Mayor Robert F. Wagner. ''What happened with Koch is that he has been
running an arm's-length government. You can't do that.''

Mr. Brezenoff attributes much of the criticism to the benefit of hindsight. The
Deputy Mayor, who oversees all city agencies, said he had not known that the
Parking Bureau's top staff came from the Queens Democratic organization. His
predecessor, Nathan Leventhal; Mr. Koch's chief political adviser, John
LoCicero, and the mayoral assistant in charge of job referrals, Joseph
DeVincenzo, all said the same.

The bureau was doing well in some measurable ways - collecting more parking
ticket fines than ever, the Mayor pointed out. And both Mr. Lindenauer and Mr.
Shafran, though promoted during his tenure, were already working for the city
before he became Mayor.

Moreover, Mr. Koch said in an interview, when Mr. Ameruso told him in 1978 that
he was promoting Mr. Shafran to head the bureau, the Mayor had no hesitation
because Mr. Shafran seemed well qualified.

''Since I said to commissioners, 'You appoint whoever you want, just don't
discriminate on the basis of race, religion or sex,' why would I say, 'You
shouldn't do it?' '' asked Mr. Koch. Last year, he added, when Mr. Manes asked
him to promote Mr. Shafran to first deputy commissioner of the Transportation
Department, he said no because Mr. Brezenoff said he had a better candidate.

Mr. Manes presumably appealed to the Mayor, Mr. Koch theorized, because he has
always reserved the right to make or approve the appointments of deputy
commissioners. ''For management reasons, I have put in deputy commissioners,''
he said. ''I have said you can appoint your own deputies but you have to bring
them in and get my O.K.''

Mr. Ameruso's earlier appointment of Mr. Shafran as head of the Parking Bureau
did fall right into line with the Mayor's philosophy of directing commissioners
to name their own staffs. Inherent in that philosophy, some critics have said,
were apparent loopholes that allowed for abuses.

Now, the Mayor is reviewing most new management appointments even below the
level of deputy commissioner, a change he put in place in response to the
scandal. Koch's Friendships With County Leaders A related issue is how the Mayor
himself made some top appointments, including Mr. Ameruso's. ''I decided early
on, and I have never deviated from this, that patronage was not going to be
helpful to providing the best government for the City of New York,'' Mr. Koch
wrote in ''Politics,'' his second book. ''And so I said to the Democratic county
leaders at our first meeting at City Hall, 'I want everybody to know, and I hope
everybody understands it, that my government will not deal in patronage with
respect to jobs in government.' ''

Asked how that squares with the personal patronage in his government and
appointees on commissions and panels controlled until now by county leaders, Mr.
Koch made several points. First, he said, he makes no apologies for naming
friends of his to government jobs as long as they are qualified, saying that no
more than 20 out of about 125 top jobs to date have gone to mayoral friends. He
had to go along with the politically supported appointees who went before the
City Council, he maintained, or they would not have been approved.

Asked how that differed from the kind of patronage he pledged never to bring to
his government, the Mayor repeated that he went along with political choices
only when he needed the Council's consent.

At the same time, the Mayor has acknowledged error in closely befriending some
county leaders.

The origins of those friendships can be traced to his 1977 mayoral runoff
campaign, when Mr. Esposito, the scratchy-voiced Brooklyn Democrat, endorsed Mr.
Koch over Mario M. Cuomo.

Mr. Esposito told of a subsequent encounter he had with Mr. Koch, about a month
after the Mayor took office in 1978, at a party for Mr. Esposito on New Utrecht
Avenue.

''I looked at Koch,'' said Mr. Esposito. ''I said, 'This kid Ameruso, I want you
to meet him.' I said, 'This is Tony Ameruso.' Believe me, that was the extent of
the conversation. And he never removed him.''

The Mayor said that while he did not remember that incident, he was sure that
Mr. Esposito wanted Mr. Ameruso to keep his job.

''It would be a supporting reason,'' the Mayor said. He kept Mr. Ameruso as
Transportation Commissioner, Mr. Koch said, because he had an excellent
reputation, was from Brooklyn and was Italian. ''I wanted an administration made
up of the five boroughs, diverse in its ethnicity,'' Mr. Koch explained. ''Also,
undoubtedly, he was supported by Brooklyn public officials.''

Mr. Turoff was reappointed and Mr. Liberman was promoted because mayoral
advisers thought they had done good jobs, Mr. Koch said.

Mr. Esposito and the Mayor agree that no promises were extracted or made when
the Brooklyn leader endorsed Mr. Koch in 1977. But did he expect something? Mr.
Esposito was asked. ''Of course I expected something - I'm a county leader,'' he
said.

Patronage, he and others note, is not inherently evil. In fact, some public
officials contend that a chief executive cannot govern without it.

''There's nothing devious about dealing with the political structure,'' said
former Mayor Beame. ''You've got to work with them, especially in pushing the
legislative program at the city, state and Federal levels. I had a very fine
relationship with them, because of the fact that I'd been active in the
Democratic organization.''

Mr. Koch is not an organization Democrat. He made his reputation in Greenwich
Village, fighting the machine and its traditional system of cooperating with
political leaders on job assignments.

Just how that system worked under previous mayors is open to interpretation.
Neither Mr. Lindsay nor Mr. Beame agree with Mr. Koch's contention that they
ceded city jobs assignments to politicians. But the patronage system was more
direct when Mr. Beame was mayor, and, in a different way, during Mr. Lindsay's
years, according to many politicians.

For instance, Mayor Beame's political aide, Stanley M. Friedman, was his
patronage dispenser. There is no question that Mr. Friedman, the Bronx
Democratic leader who has recently been indicted on bribery and fraud charges
for his role in helping a computer company get a city contract, made political
decisions about many jobs.

In one case that won considerable negative publicity nine years ago, Mr.
Friedman drew up a list of 200 politically connected youths for city summer
jobs. Once that became public, Mr. Beame set up a lottery system for the jobs.

In the Beame days, Mr. Esposito explained, he often recommended people for jobs,
and as long as they were deemed qualified, they got them. ''I'd call him, he
didn't call me,'' Mr. Esposito said. ''I'd say, 'Abe, there's a vacancy here.'
We had a list of commissioners, you know. I'd recommend somebody, but I'd always
say to Abe, 'Abe, if anyone I send you doesn't come up to snuff, don't give him
the job. I don't care if he's my own brother, don't do it.'' Agency Heads Able
To Resist Referrals Such conversations did not happen once Mr. Koch became
Mayor, Mr. Esposito said, and other county leaders agreed. What did happen?
Current and former commissioners in the Koch administration said in interviews
that resumes were often referred to them by Mr. Brezenoff, Mr. LoCicero and Mr.
DeVincenzo. They said, too, that the volume of resumes coming to them, including
many from political leaders, increased over the years as Mr. Koch got closer to
those leaders.

''It didn't start to get sticky until he lost the primary for governor and he
got concerned he might lose the mayoral race,'' said a former commissioner who
served several years in the Koch administration. ''It got stickier and stickier.
We got more and more from Joe DeVincenzo.''

But all of those interviewed said that they were never told they had to hire
anyone referred from City Hall, other than some deputy commissioners, whom Mr.
Koch has always reserved the right to select. Former Parks and Recreation
Commissioner Gordon J. Davis recalled recently that once Mr. LoCicero asked him
to grant a job interview to someone connected to the Brooklyn organization. Mr.
Davis did so. ''One day,'' Mr. Davis continued, ''John said, 'I guess you're not
going to hire him.' I said, 'I guess you're right.' That's the last I heard of
it.''

According to some commissioners from both the Beame and Lindsay years, it was
routine for appointees to be imposed on them by City Hall. Mr. Lindsay had a
talent search group working out of the Budget Bureau that selected people for
jobs, in what was considered a ''good government'' approach.

Many Republicans who worked in Mr. Lindsay's first campaign wound up at City
Hall, and some jobs were controlled by Alex Rose, the late leader of the Liberal
Party, according to Richard Aurelio, a former Lindsay deputy mayor, and others.
The Liberals strongly supported Mr. Lindsay.

At the same time, some Lindsay commissioners were left to fill jobs on their
own. Mr. Leventhal, who was the Housing Commissioner, said, for instance, that
he had never been forced to hire anyone.

In the Koch administration, it was Mr. Leventhal and Mr. Brezenoff, with the
Mayor's assent, who had the authority to impose deputy commissioners on agency
chiefs. Neither John LoCicero nor Joseph DeVincenzo had the power to tell anyone
whom to hire, according to many mayoral advisers.

''John knew from Ed that he didn't have authority to tell a commissioner who to
hire,'' said Mr. Leventhal, who is now the president of Lincoln Center. ''He was
not a patronage dispenser, he was not. Ed most of the time didn't tell a
commissioner who to hire, so John certainly didn't. That's how it worked, that
was the system.''

The system of job referrals generally involves Mr. LoCicero and Mr. DeVincenzo.
Mr. LoCicero, a former district leader and member of the Village Independent
Democrats who was an office manager for a fabric house before Mr. Koch won the
mayoralty, works closely with community boards. He refers people recommended by
politicians as well as by others. Some get jobs and some do not, he said.

Any parallel between his power and Mr. Friedman's during the Beame
administration, or the influence of Sid Davidoff, once a top political aide to
Mr. Lindsay, is exaggerated, according to a number of politicians.

Some suggest, in fact, that if he and his job were invested with more authority
and scope, Mr. LoCicero might have been in a better position to serve the Mayor.

Mr. DeVincenzo, a Civil Servant once assigned to the Sanitation Department, is
not a member of a political club and never has been, he said in a recent
interview. His job, in addition to overseeing the physical upkeep of City Hall,
is to run a computerized job-referral system, created by the Mayor to increase
the number of blacks, Hispanic people, women, disabled people and Vietnam
veterans in city jobs.

When vacancies open up, commissioners are required to ask Mr. DeVincenzo for
possible referrals from his system. So far, he has sent out the resumes of
32,000 and 1,400 of them have been hired, he said.

An issue raised, but not resolved, by the scandal is whether commissioners
filled job requests from political leaders because they believed it would please
the Mayor.

Mr. Koch said he had sent out referrals from county leaders but had never
required that any of the prospects be hired.

The question is whether he telegraphed to his commissioners that politicians
should be accommodated. That could easily have been the interpretation, said Mr.
Wagner. Mr. Koch often praised Mr. Manes, for instance, and in his first book,
''Mayor,'' he wrote that Mr. Friedman was ''one of the smartest, ablest, most
loyal people I know.''

Mr. Wagner agreed with the Mayor's recent assertion that his embrace of
political leaders had been an error. ''What he did was create a climate for
commissioners, and they all sort of try to read the tea leaves, that
accommodating borough presidents and county leaders was the order of the day,''
Mr. Wagner said.

That could have had a strong impact on ''weaker commissioners,'' Mr. Wagner went
on, who might have deliberately hired the politically connected, or supported
projects favored by politicians.

The status conferred on political leaders was clear to a job applicant, too:
When he applied to be president of the city's Public Development Corporation
three years ago, Steven Spinola asked Mr. Esposito and Mr. Manes for their
support. He got it, though that is not the reason Mr. Spinola received the job,
the Mayor said.

Mr. Koch routinely deferred to the county leaders on jobs that must go before
the City Council, appointing people recommended by Mr. Friedman, Mr. Manes and
other political leaders. Because of the scandal, the Mayor set up a new
screening panel to fill those jobs - a total of 50 positions on such panels as
the Board of Standards and Appeals and the City Planning, Landmarks, Tax, and
Taxi and Limousine Commissions.

''I have never said that in those areas where I needed the cooperation of the
Council for their approving individuals I wouldn't seek to cooperate with
them,'' said the Mayor. Trying to set up a screening panel before the scandal
emerged ''probably would have alienated everybody on the City Council,'' he
added.

Establishing the panel is only one of a number of changes Mr. Koch has made in
response to the scandal. The Mayor still believes ''the system works,'' he said.
''But in this climate, it's important that I make the changes, just to shake up
the system.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Mayor Koch (page B4); photo of Anthony Ameruso (page B4);
photo of Meade Esposito (NYT) (page B4); photo of Robert Wagner Jr. (NYT) (page
B4)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 22, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Judge Refuses to Block Execution in Florida

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 187 words

DATELINE: STARKE, Fla., April 21


A Fedral judge late tonight denied a stay of execution for David Livingston
Funchess, a Vietnam veteran who was to die in Florida's electric chair at 7 A.M.
Tuesday for killing a couple in a tavern in 1974.

Lawyers for Mr. Funchess said they would appeal to the United States Court of
Appeals for the 11th Circuit in Atlanta after Judge Howell Melton issued a
23-page decision denying the stay.

Veterans' groups supporting a stay for Mr. Funchess, a 30-year-old former marine
who was decorated five times for service in Vietnam, said that he suffered from
post-traumatic stress disorder and that the condition led to his crimes. His
lawyers argued that at the time of his trial in 1975 the disorder was not
completely understood.

Mr. Funchess was sentenced to death for the December 1974 murders of Anna
Waldrop and Clayton Ragan.

Another inmate scheduled to die Tuesday morning, John Earl Bush, was granted a
stay of execution Monday by the Florida Supreme Court. Mr. Bush, 27, was
convicted of the murder of Julia Slater, the 18-year-old granddaughter of Ralph
Evinrude, the outboard motor manufacturer, in 1982.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 22, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NICARAGUA POLICY ENDORSED BY NIXON

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 312 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, April 21


Former President Richard M. Nixon mixed political analysis and Watergate jokes
in an address here today to North American newspaper publishers that drew a
standing ovation from about half the audience.

Speaking at a luncheon given by The Associated Press at the annual convention of
the American Newspaper Publishers Association, Mr. Nixon drew laughter when he
was asked the greatest lesson of Watergate.

''Just destroy all the tapes,'' Mr. Nixon said.

The former President devoted his formal remarks to a strong endorsement of
American support for the rebel forces opposing the Sandinista Government in
Nicaragua.

Mr. Nixon said that a defeat for the rebels would probably lead to a violent
Marxist guerrilla movement in Mexico and in other Central American countries,
which he said could lead to intervention by American forces.

The best way to prevent a Vietnam war in Central America, Mr. Nixon said, was to
provide adequate support for the Nicaraguan rebels.

He said the Soviet Union was interested in preventing a counterrevolution in
Nicaragua because it could potentially inspire other efforts to unseat
Soviet-backed governments.

He said a strong rebel movement probably would not be able to overthrow the
Sandinista Government, but that it could force Nicaragua to agree to political
compromises, while halfhearted support - he gave the example of the unsuccessful
Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba - would not be enough.

Mr. Nixon predicted that Vice President Bush would be elected as the next
President, provided the economy remains as it is now, and that the Republican
Party would have a woman on its ticket before the Democrats nominate one again.

Mr. Nixon also endorsed President Reagan's decision to bomb Libya, and he
recommended that a blockade of oil exports be imposed on Libya if there are
future terrorist incidents linked to that country.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 23, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN SAYS SANDINISTAS SEEK TO 'BUILD A LIBYA'

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 696 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 22


President Reagan said tonight that the Nicaraguan Government was seeking to
''build a Libya on our doorstep.''

Mr. Reagan said the Sandinista Government, like that of Libya, ''provided a
refuge for all sorts of international terrorists.''

He said the terrorists included members of the Red Brigades of Italy, the
Baader-Meinhof gang of West Germany, the Palestine Liberation Organization and
groups from El Salvador, Uruguay and Spain.

''That picture making the rounds showing Daniel Ortega standing with Muammar
Qaddafi and raising his fist in a gesture of solidarity is very much to the
point,'' Mr. Reagan said in a speech to the Heritage Foundation, a conservative
public-policy group. ''I hope every member of Congress will reflect on the fact
that the Sandinistas have been training, supporting and directing as well as
sheltering terrorists.''

''And in this sense they are trying to build a Libya on our doorstep,'' he said.
''And it's the contras, the freedom fighters, who are stopping them.''

Mr. Reagan's comments linking Libya and Nicaragua came as the White House sought
to exploit public support at home for the bombing raid against Libya with the
Administration's effort in Congress to get $100 million in aid for the
Nicaraguan rebels. The House is still debating the issue.  End of 'Apologies'

Mr. Reagan made it clear that American foreign policy was in the midst of change
and no longer adhering to policies of previous administrations. The President
did not mention any specific administration, but seemed to be singling out
President Jimmy Carter.

''The old politics, the post-Vietnam syndrome, the partisans of 'blame America
first' are fading fast,'' Mr. Reagan said. He added that the United States was
no longer ''apologizing'' for its foreign-policy actions and would respond with
force, if necessary, if the nation felt under attack.

''We haven't been apologizing,'' he said. ''Things are different. Perhaps you've
noticed. I know Colonel Qaddafi has.''

Mr. Reagan, meanwhile, extended the nearly year-old embargo on trade with
Nicaragua today, saying in a statement to Congress that ''the emergency
situation created by the Nicaraguan Government's aggressive activities in
Central America has not eased since the declaration of the Nicaraguan emergency
on May 1, 1985.''

Mr. Reagan said that the Nicaraguan Government had failed to seek peace in
Central America and that as a result it was necessary to continue ''the national
emergency.'' The embargo also bars Nicaraguan aircraft and ships from the United
States.

In the speech at the Shoreham Hotel, Mr. Reagan said that ''the march of freedom
in Central America'' and the fight against terrorism were related.

''No nation - friend or foe, ally or adversary - should be surprised by the
events of last week and the United States Government's determination to protect
American lives and the world from terrorism,'' Mr. Reagan said.

Meanwhile, the Administration praised European allies for taking steps to curb
Libyan trade and diplomatic personnel.

The White House spokesman, Larry Speakes, noted the arrest of 21 Libyans in
Britain and moves by other European countries limiting the movements of Libyan
diplomats and curbing trade with the Government of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi.

''These are the kind of steps, this is the kind of cooperation that is essential
if we're going to combat terrorism on an international basis,'' he said.

A ranking White House official said some key European nations, who were publicy
critical of the bombing raid, were far more supportive privately.

Although officials in Bonn and Rome denied reports today that Chancellor Helmut
Kohl of West Germany and Prime Minister Bettino Craxi of Italy favored stronger
military action against Libya, United States officials repeated that the
European leaders and others were supportive of the raid.

The Administration said it had weighed ordering the 2,000 to 3,000 Libyans in
the United States out of the country. Most of them are believed to be students,
officials said.

''We have considered whether to send them home and have decided not to,'' said
John C. Whitehead, Deputy Secretary of State.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 23, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM VETERAN IS PUT TO DEATH IN FLORIDA

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 436 words

DATELINE: STARKE, Fla., April 22


A man who was wounded in Vietnam and convicted in the slaying of two bar
employees in Jacksonville in 1974 was executed here today in the electric chair.

The convict, David Livingston Funchess, 39 years old, was executed 90 minutes
after the United States Supreme Court voted 7 to 2 not to extend a five-hour
stay it issued earlier today. He was pronounced dead at 5:11 P.M.

''I feel sorry for his family,'' said Madge Stewart, whose father, Clayton
Ragan, was killed, along with Anna Waldrop, by Mr. Funchess. ''They're going to
lose a loved one. But they got to see him 11 years longer than I got to see my
loved one.''

She and Betti Shupe, the daughter of Mrs. Waldrop, hugged when told that Mr.
Funchess was dead.

The execution had been set for 7 A.M. but was stayed by a Federal appeals court
in Atlanta. It was later stayed again by the Supreme Court.

Convicted in 1975

Mr. Funchess, diagnosed as suffering from stress stemming from duty in Vietnam,
was the 56th person executed in the United States since the Supreme Court
reinstated the death penalty in 1976, and the third in eight days.

Peter Erlinder, a professor at William Mitchell College of Law in St. Paul,
Minn., who has researched the effects of post-traumatic stress disorder on
Vietnam veterans, said Mr. Funchess was the first veteran executed despite being
diagnosed as suffering from the disorder.

Mr. Erlinger said at least two Vietnam veterans had been acquitted of murder
charges after asserting that they suffered from the disorder, which was not
recognized until 1980. Mr. Funchess was convicted in 1975.

Mr. Funchess was condemned to die for killing a woman and a man in a holdup Dec.
16, 1974, in a Jacksonville bar, where he worked a year earlier.

Served Two and a Half Months

Mr. Funchess's lawyer, Jeff Thompson, also a Vietnam veteran, had argued that
Mr. Funchess was a victim of post-traumatic stress disorder, an affliction said
to have affected thousands of veterans who are unable to adjust to civilian life
after combat in an unpopular war.

Symptoms include experiencing flashbacks and suppressing memories of violence.

Mr. Funchess was 19, had no criminal record and had graduated in the top third
of his high school class when he was drafted in 1967. He was wounded when he
stepped on a land mine after serving two and a half months and was then
discharged.

Vernon Bradford, a spokesman for the State Department of Corrections, said Mr.
Funchess's parents, Wenis Funchess and Alice Roberts; his wife, Christine, and
three sisters and two brothers visited him from late Monday until early today.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of David Livingston Funchess (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 23, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

STATE DEPARTMENT;
OF RETIRMENT, MORALE AND THE SENIOR DIPLOMAT

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1459 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 22


For years, senior American diplomats have regarded themselves as somewhat like
university professors whose expertise only improved with age. But now, as part
of a new law designed to streamline the Foreign Service, the diplomats are being
treated like military officers who, if passed over for promotion, are forced to
retire years ahead of when they planned.

As a result of the new law, 200 of the Foreign Service's most experienced
diplomats will be involuntarily retired in the next two years. And this has
touched off a morale problem at Foggy Bottom, according to many officials.
Further, because many officers perceive the new law as putting a promotion
premium on managerial experience, rather than on more traditional diplomatic
work, a number are refusing to apply for what used to be regarded as choice
overseas assignments.

For instance, the department for months has had trouble finding someone willing
to serve as political counselor in Manila or as economics counselor in Moscow,
jobs that in the past would have been snapped up by senior level diplomats.

'Crisis in Management'

More than 100 Foreign Service officers have privately circulated within the
department a paper on ''Crisis in Foreign Service Management,'' which says that
the forced retirement of ''a disproportionately large number'' of top diplomats
''is likely to have profoundly adverse effects on Foreign Service morale and
harm the conduct of U.S. foreign policy.''

''We're at a really difficult moment,'' conceded George S. Vest, director
general of the Foreign Service.

Under the new law, which was enacted in 1980 but whose full force is only now
being felt, the State Department is in effect discarding a practice of allowing
most senior diplomats to remain in the ranks until they voluntarily retire at
age 65. Now, it must retire involuntarily senior officers if they are not
promoted in a set number of years.

Several top officials have compared the new system with that of the military. In
the armed services, it is relatively common for an officer to be promoted
steadily until he reaches the rank of colonel in the Army or captain in the
Navy. But only a very small percentage are then promoted to general or admiral,
with those not making that next step being retired. In the Foreign Service, the
plan being put into effect is to make the rank of FS-1, usually reached after a
dozen or so years of service, comparable to that of colonel or captain.

This annoys many diplomats who say that the State Department should treat its
personnel not as the Pentagon does, but as a university or law firm, in which
the expertise of senior people is valued as they grow older.

Under the new system, most officers are expected to be given ''tenure'' in the
Foreign Service within five years of joining. An officer with tenure then can
remain in the service at least 20 years unless he decides to put himself forward
as a candidate for what is known as the Senior Foreign Service, which he can do
after he makes the rank of FS-1.

In the parlance of the Foreign Service, that decision is known as ''opening the
window.'' If an FS-1 officer opens his window, he has six years to be promoted
to the grade of counselor in the Foreign Service, the first of four Senior
Foreign Service grades. But if he is not promoted in that six years, his window
is closed and he must retire.

Thus, if an officer of FS-1 rank decides not to open his window, he can remain
in that job, which pays, depending on time in rank, from $50,000 to nearly
$70,000, until his 20 years as a tenured officer run out. But if he chooses to
seek special promotion, he can be retired in six years.

What is happening now is that FS-1 officers are not ''opening the window'' until
they have been in a tenured post for 14 years, meaning that their 20 years and
six-year ''window'' end simultaneously. The first FS-1's to opt for promotion
were eligible to do so in 1980, and their window will close this summer if they
are not promoted.

The catch is, very few of them are likely to be promoted, according to
department officials. There are simply not enough openings for them up the line,
in part because of budget restrictions and because the Reagan Administration has
filled the upper ranks with an unusually large percentage of political
appointees.

The word has gone out throughout the State Department that there are too many
foreign policy experts but not enough officials with managerial experience. And
so, to avoid the re-tirement axe, officers at the FS-1 rank are desperate to
show such experience on their records, department spokesmen add.

As a result, instead of jumping at the opportunity to serve overseas for three
years in a post like Manila or Moscow, these officers are seeking assignments as
deputy chiefs of mission in smaller, less exciting posts, so that they can have
it noted on their personnel files that they have ''managerial experience.''

The new system is being directed by Ronald I. Spiers, Under Secretary of State
for Management, a veteran officer who ironically was against the law when it was
passed six years ago.

''I opposed it because I did not think the Foreign Service was really like the
military,'' he said the other day in discussing the system. ''I thought it much
better to have a very, very competitive entry system, which is what we have. It
is much more competitive to enter than the military is.''

Mr. Spiers said 18,000 people took the Foreign Service entry exam last year.
Only 250 eventually will enter the Service.

Despite the current crisis in the department, however, both Mr. Spiers and Mr.
Vest, the Foreign Service director general, believe that forcing the retirement
of many experienced officers will improve the Foreign Service over the long run,
because the number of officers will be more in line with the number of senior
jobs available, unlike in the past, when as many as 150 high-level officials
often were kept on with only make-work assignments.

But for the short term, the officials concede, there is considerable turmoil
within the department.

Gerald P. Lamberty, president of the American Foreign Service Association, the
official representative of the diplomats, said that of the nearly 200 officers
faced with imminent forced retirement, many are skilled linguists. They include,
he said, eight who speak Russian, seven Chinese, six Japanese, six Arabic, seven
Indonesian, 19 East European languages, eight Vietnamese, three Turkish, three
Hindi, four Greek, two Persian, two Swahili, two Swedish and individual officers
fluent in Hebrew, Somali, Burmese, Lao, Malay, Afrikaans, Cambodian and Dari, a
local language of Afghanistan.

''Our personnel system,'' Mr. Lamberty said, ''makes it more difficult for us to
develop and retain our best and brightest. There is no section of the Foreign
Service which will prosper because of this and, in the meantime, the nation will
see an uneasy bleeding of our foreign expertise at a time when it is more than
ever needed.''

Paul D. Molineaux, who has been in the Foreign Service for 19 years, is one of
those facing the possibility of involuntary retirement at the age of 48. He is
currently chief of the Current Intelligence staff of the Bureau of Intelligence
and Research of the State Department, responsible for making sure that the
latest intelligence garnered by various intelligence agencies gets to the right
hands. He previously served in West Germany, South Vietnam, Lebanon and Brazil.
He speaks German, French, Spanish and Portuguese and some Vietnamese and Arabic.


A 'Rube Goldberg' Mechanism

Most officers in his situation are reluctant to talk publicly for fear of
suffering reprisals. But he said in an interview, ''My feeling about the
'window' is that as a mechanism it is Rube Goldberg, devoid of rational
explanation.''

''It is counterproductive,'' he said. ''It penalizes people who want to get
promoted and allows others to just sit on the payroll.''

Had he not chosen to seek promotion, he said, he would have been assured of a
State Department job until 1990. Now, he could be retired this year.

Mr. Molineaux would change the system so that every FS-1 had 10 years in which
to be promoted. He noted that the Agency for International Development recently
raised to 10 from six the number of years a ''window'' could be opened. The
United States Information Agency gives its FS-1's seven years to be promoted.

Despite the State Department's problems these days, Mr. Spiers believes that the
quality of Foreign Service officers now is better than it was in the past.

''The guys today are better,'' he said, ''more energetic. They've a wider
vision. They are less specialized. They are products of a more competitive
system.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 23, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

The Political Presses Keep Rolling

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 506 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 22


Over the last three decades, political books have become fixtures in campaigns
for high office. John F. Kennedy wrote ''Profiles in Courage'' and Barry
Goldwater ''The Conscience of a Conservative.'' Ronald Reagan wanted to know
''Where's the Rest of Me?'' while Jimmy Carter asked ''Why Not the Best?''

Comes now ''America Can Win: The Case for Military Reform'' by Senator Gary Hart
of Colorado, who is among the leading aspirants for the 1988 Democratic
Presidential nomination.

It is a treatise, the Senator says, deliberately written to affect the 1988
contest and the Democratic Party, with at least two objectives in mind.

Advocating a 'Positive' Posture

One is to persuade Democrats to adopt what he calls a ''positive'' posture on
military policy. ''The Democratic Party,'' he says, ''has lacked a defense
policy, certainly a positive one, since Vietnam.''

The other objective is to make other potential Democratic contenders define
their policies before running for the Presidential nomination in 1988. ''I
believe that all Democrats, one way or another,'' he says, ''will be required to
articulate a foreign policy and a defense policy in '87.''

In his book, Senator Hart contends that the enormous sums the United States has
spent on the military over the last five years have done little to improve the
national security. ''One trillion dollars has not turned inferiority into
superiority anywhere,'' he argues.

Senator Hart concentrates on conventional rather than nuclear forces. He seeks
to change what he calls ''superstructure,'' urging better design and procurement
of weapons, more training time, more amunition and spare parts, better unit
cohesion and greater reliance on submarines and less on aircraft carriers. He
would strengthen the Joint Chiefs of Staff and restrain the interference of
Congress in military details.

The book, which Mr. Hart wrote with William S. Lind, a longtime aide who
specializes in military matters, is an outgrowth of the Senator's role in the
military reform movement. He describes that movement as ''a loose band of
intellectual and political guerrilla fighters'' who operate by ''ambushing the
defense establishment with unexpected questions, unwelcome facts and innovative
alternatives.''

''America Can Win'' is not Senator Hart's first political book; he came out with
''A New Democracy'' just before the campaign that brought him close to the
Democratic nomination in 1984. He and Senator William S. Cohen, a Republican
from Maine, also wrote a spy-thriller, ''The Double Man.''

Mr. Hart, in an interview, said he did not expect military spending or other
questions of military policy to be a national issue in the 1986 Congressional
elections. But he contends that Democratic challengers who take the initiative
will have a better chance of winning than what he calls ''aginners.''

''I would bet,'' he added, ''that you will find, as a general proposition, that
Democrats who win will be Democrats who have had something positive to say about
defense.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of book by Senator Gary Hart

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 24, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENT HINTS HE'LL HIT OTHERS LINKED TO TERROR

BYLINE: By GERALD M. BOYD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1497 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 23


President Reagan said today that he would not rule out military retaliation
against Syria and Iran if they were linked to terrorist acts.

At the same time, Mr. Reagan reaffirmed his readiness to ''act again'' against
Libya if evidence linked it to new terrorist attacks on Americans.

Meanwhile, military experts who have reviewed Pentagon reports said the Air
Force planes that attacked the Bab el-Azziziya military barracks in Tripoli,
Libya, on April 15 failed to hit two buildings that serve as the quarters for
Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi's elite guard. [Page A7.] 'Irrefutable Evidence'

In an interview with columnists to preview the economic meeting of key
industrial democracies in Tokyo next month, Mr. Reagan said the decision to bomb
Libya last week resulted from ''irrefutable evidence.''

Asked if a situation arose in which the United States had evidence of the same
certitude about the involvement of Syria and Iran, Mr. Reagan said he would also
order military action.

Earlier, in a speech before the United States Chamber of Commerce, Mr. Reagan
warned Libya that although terrorism ''must be dealt with forcefully and
collectively,'' the United States ''will never watch passively as our innocent
citizens are murdered by those would would do our country harm.''

''By nature, we prefer to solve problems peacefully,'' he said. ''But as we
proved last week, no one can kill Americans and brag about it. No one. We bear
the people of Libya no ill will, but if their Government continues its campaign
of terror against Americans, we will act again.''

No 'Exclusive Target'

Mr. Reagan made the comments about Syria and Iran when asked if Libya was to be
the ''exclusive target'' of American military response to terrorism or whether
similar means would be employed against such nations as Syria or Iran if there
was evidence linking them to terrorism.

''I think state-supported terrorism -we must have the same policy,'' Mr. Reagan
responded.

The President, making a distinction between Libya and the other two countries,
said, ''It is much more difficult to trace the source of terrorism sponsored by
others than it is with Libya.''

But he added: ''But yes, if we - if there's evidence and we can directly -that
we can have the irrefutable evidence that we've had with him, why, yes, I think
we should do that. State-supported terrorism is a form of warfare, and you just
can't sit by and let somebody else declare war on you and pretend that you're
still at peace.''

Mr. Reagan, when asked directly if he meant Syria or Iran, said, ''Yes, if we
had that kind of evidence.''

Both Iran and Syria are included on a United States list of countries engaging
in state-supported terrorism. But Administration officials have said there is no
evidence linking either country to the terrorist attacks that Washington has
tied to Libya.

Trying to Underscore Policy

A senior White House official said that Mr. Reagan was trying to underscore his
policy for using military force to retaliate against terrorists and that the
decision to attack Libya had come only after economic and political measures had
proved unsuccessful in deterring of the Libyan leader, Colonel Qaddafi, in
terrorist actions against Americans.

Administration officials said the speech to the Chamber of Commerce was
delivered in the hope of setting the stage for the Tokyo economic meeting, which
Mr. Reagan said would underscore that ''the winds of freedom'' are blowing
economically and politically across the globe. The President said terrorism
would ''undoubtedly be a topic of discussion.''

Drawing a Distinction

Seeking to broaden the Administration's effort among Western allies to isolate
Colonel Qaddafi, Mr. Reagan told the audience of several thousand that the issue
of combating terrorism was not a conflict between Western democracies and Arab
nations. Although Arab countries in general condemned the United States air
strike, Mr. Reagan drew a distinction between what he called a ''tiny minority''
and Arab nations at large.

''And let no one mistake this for a conflict between Western democracies and the
Arab world,'' the President said. ''Those who condone making war by cowardly
attacks on unarmed third parties, including women and children, are but a tiny
minority.''

Mr. Reagan added that ''Arab nations themselves have been forced to endure
savage terrorist attacks from this minority.''

''We hope and pray the Arab world will join us to eliminate this scourge on
civilization,'' he said.

Mr. Reagan's comment apparently represented a refinement of statements made at a
nationally broadcast news conference two weeks ago in which he said the Libyan
leader had the goal of a ''Moslem fundamental revolution.'' The comment had
caused some concern within the Administration among officials who said they
believed he was linking Colonel Qaddafi to broader and more moderate elements
among Moslems who do not engage in terrorism.

Says Qaddafi Is 'Hypocritical'

In the speech today, Mr. Reagan portrayed the Libyan leader as isolated from the
Arab world at large by suggesting that Colonel Qaddafi was engaging in hypocrisy
by calling for a united Arab, and by extension Moslem, condemnation of the
United States while failing to condemn the Soviet Union's invasion of
Afghanistan.

''I might add that Colonel Qaddafi's expectation of unquestioned support from
the Islamic world strikes me as hypocritical,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''Nowhere is
the slaughter of Moslem people greater than in Afghanistan. Yet, Colonel Qaddafi
allies himself with those perpetrating this crime on Islam and all mankind.''

Before the speech, a senior Administration official played down the likelihood
that the leaders at the Tokyo meeting would issue a joint statement on
terrorism. But he indicated that such cooperative steps as intelligence sharing
would likely be discussed.

''There has been I think right now a very widespread, firm conviction that Libya
is a responsible party for terrorism,'' the official said. ''Nobody argues that
point at all.''

Reagan to Leave Friday

Mr. Reagan is scheduled to leave Friday en route to Japan. He is scheduled to
stop in Los Angles, Honolulu and Bali before arriving in Tokyo. While in
Indonesia, he is to meet with the Foreign Ministers of Association of South East
Asian Nations, which he suggested today was an example of the 12-day trip's
overall theme of freedom aiding economic progress.

In making that point, the President cited the recent upheaval in the
Philippines, saying that ''a major cause of the discontent'' was that much of
the country's business and trade was not opened to all citizens. In addition, he
contrasted the relative prosperity among the members of Asean with the poor
economic health of Communist countries in the region, singling out Vietnam.

''Of course, those countries forced to endure centralized Communist planning
face the prospects of continued stagnation,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''This, while
much of the Pacific marches into an exciting new age of enterprise and
commerce.''

'In Glorious Defiance'

Mr. Reagan said the Tokyo meeting also ''stands in glorious defiance of the
totalitarian theory that sovereign democratic societies are too independent'' to
cooperate economically.

Administration officials have said the annual economic meeting is occurring at
what Mr. Reagan termed today a time of a ''dramatic opportunity'' for industrial
democracies as a result of the economic upsurge in the American economy and the
decline in world oil prices.

Sounding upbeat, the President said, ''In future years, I think we may look back
on the period we are going through as the vernal equinox of the human spirit,
that moment in history when the light finally exceeded the darkness.''

The President, however, signaled that the participants in Tokyo could face
disagreements on the trade front, which Administration officials have said pose
a potentially troublesome area. Mr. Reagan said that although he would reinforce
the United States intention to keep ''moving forward, aggressively and
vigorously, to keep the markets of the world open,'' he would also stress a need
for American interests to be ''treated fairly.'' ----Warning on Revenge
WASHINGTON, April 23 (UPI) - Secretary of State George P. Shultz has warned that
Colonel Qaddafi may seek revenge ''on a very personal level'' for the American
bombing of Libya, possibly by attacking members of President Reagan's immediate
family, ABC News reported tonight.

ABC News said it had learned that Mr. Shultz, ''in a confidential assessment
earlier this week,'' said Colonel Qaddafi was more dangerous now than before the
attack.

The report quoted Mr. Shultz as saying, ''Qaddafi may well seek revenge on a
very personal level, which could mean that in retaliation for injuring Qaddafi's
sons and allegedly killing his adopted daughter, the Libyan leader may go after
members of President Reagan's immediate family.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 24, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT NEW YORK;
THE MELTING POT BUBBLES IN REGO PARK

BYLINE: By William E. Geist

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1042 words


Roll call, the teachers agree, is the most difficult part of the day: Ho Suk
Ping He, Yana Katzap, Tkkun Amongi, Azaria Badebr, Rotcheild Boruhov, Eduardo
Yun.

Eduardo Yun? Sure, the Portuguese-speaking Korean boy who immigrated from
Brazil. His adjustment to America has been eased by the presence of other
Portuguese-speaking Koreans from Brazil, one of whom also speaks Hebrew,
enrolled at Stephen A. Halsey Junior High School, a polyglot school in Rego
Park, Queens.

''Even when you get their names right,'' the principal, Domenick Uzzi, said,
''some are from countries where they put first names last, last name first.
Impossible.''

Nicknames are popular. Chin Sheng Chu said, ''Call me George.'' Some students
pick an American name they like and, to add to the confusion, switch names when
they tire of the old ones.

''We've got everything imaginable, and unimaginable, here,'' said Mr. Uzzi, who
said his job was simpler when the neighborhood and the school was pretty much
made up of middle- or upper-middle-class Jewish students.

That was before a Chinese man bought the luncheonette and learned how to make
egg creams, and waves of immigrants from throughout the world began settling in
the neighborhood.

This is not a test, nor is Halsey a special project like the United Nations
School. This is real life in New York, once again a city of immigrants. There
are more foreign-born city residents now than at any time since 1930, with
almost one in three being foreign-born.

''New kids walk in every day,'' Mr. Uzzi said. ''We had a couple of kids from
Haiti register yesterday, which may have something to do with Duvalier's
overthrow.

''We always know when and where there's trouble in the world. We have
Nicaraguans coming in now. We expect to see some Libyan kids soon.''

''The diversity can be annoying,'' Mr. Uzzi said. ''We pair Chinese kids, and
one turns out to be Mandarin and the other Cantonese, or two Russians and one is
Georgian and the other Ukrainian.''

Recently, the school counted 34 different languages and dialects - Persian,
Hindi, Gujurati, Spanish, Portuguese, Cantonese, Mandarin, Greek, Japanese,
Korean and Russian, to name only a selection - spoken at Halsey. What is the
number of countries represented? Don't ask.

''Who has time for counting,'' Mr. Uzzi responded, ''when we're trying to
educate kids who get lost in the halls looking for the bathroom?''

The language survey did not include those contrived by students to communicate.
An Indian student, Chettan Patel, said he spoke five languages, two of them of
his own invention. One student is proud to say that he knows one four-letter
profanity in 25 languages.

''Cultural exchange,'' Mr. Uzzi said, ''it's great.''

''You can discuss the Vietnam War and have kids whose fathers fought on opposite
sides,'' said Jim Perine, a teacher.

Teachers believe the students learn tolerance. ''Kids this age call each other
'fatso,' 'retard' and 'pizza face,' '' Mr. Uzzi said, ''I admit. But we never
have fights over remarks about nationalities.''

''Never a dull moment,'' said Irene Clarke, a teacher. New students, according
to teachers, arrive asking if the school has a jai alai team, if there is a
place in the school band for a sitar player or if poori bread and envueltos de
maiz could be added to the school lunch menu.

Mr. Uzzi finally won a protracted battle with city dietitians and Federal
officials in Washington for dispensation from the rule that there must be a meat
course in every cafeteria lunch. Some of the Indian students were not eating
anything because there was meat on the plates.

For all the diversity, the school, at 102d Street and 64th Avenue, does not
appear any different from other schools, except maybe a bit cleaner and more
orderly.

There is not a sari or sarong among them. ''I think they issue these kids
designer sweatshirts and jeans and expensive sneakers at Kennedy Airport,'' a
teacher, Carol Davidson, said. ''They are all in a mad rush to be totally
American.''

Her students said they had attended schools where teachers meted out stern
punishment, usually with a rod or stick. Some of the Halsey teachers concede
they are slow to tell students they cannot be hit with sticks here.

''Our principal cut our hair if it was below our ears,'' a girl from Korea said.

''You couldn't even wear a watch in Russia,'' a girl from the Soviet Union said.

''Gross!'' commented a girl from Queens.

Teachers said they were amazed how quickly most of the students learned English,
and how quickly they adjusted. ''Eileen Chang came in from Taiwan as a seventh
grader and couldn't speak a word of English,'' one teacher said, ''and graduated
as valedictorian from ninth grade.''

The word is out among students that the Asians catch on quickly, with one
student from Guyana describing them as '' 'death' in math.''

''You see many of them in your math class,'' she said, ''and all you can do is
try to transfer.''

Mrs. Davidson said that Halsey students could be picked out by translation
dictionaries in their hip pockets and that there was a new trend to electronic
vest-pocket translators.

''It's nice sometimes,'' a student from Yugoslavia said, ''being in a country
where your parents can't read your report card.''

Teachers said they found the mix stimulating and energizing, if sometimes
confusing. ''It offers teachers great rewards,'' Miss Clarke said. ''The
students want to learn, and you can watch their progress.''

She said the teachers had recently discussed an enticing help wanted
advertisement for teaching jobs in a wealthy suburb. ''We agreed we could never
go to a place that dull,'' she said.

''It's true that these students try very hard,'' said Sara Tsinberg, a counselor
and recent immigrant, but she added, there is a tendency to stereotype them as a
quaint group of happy toilers.

''We have students ranging from the children of ambassadors to children of the
unemployable,'' she said. ''They all struggle, but not all succeed.''

The final bell rang, and the students filled the hallways, yelling and laughing,
before pouring out the front door past an old wood desk by the front door with
names carved on the desktop in traditional fashion: Takiyaki, Carlos, Trikona,
Shreeti.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of teacher Carol Davidson, with Dong Yoon, Carlos Yun, and
Eduardo Yun (NYT/Vic DeLucia)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 24, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HERS

BYLINE: By Lesley Hazleton

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 1; Home Desk

LENGTH: 1057 words


IT'S over 20 years since I first read Kerouac's ''On the Road.'' It was as
powerful then in England as it was in the States - the voice of adventure and
experience and Life with an upper-case L, the way I wanted it as I hitchhiked up
and down the country in my army-and-navy surplus coat, eyes rimmed in black,
hair wild, making up stories of being a White Russian princess in exile to
entertain the truck drivers who were the best rides.

The road was romance for me - not the least because the purpose of those rides
was to see my boyfriend on weekends. Those were the years we marched from
Aldermaston to London to ban the bomb, convinced that the only war we'd ever see
would be the third world war, the big one, the nuclear one.

In fact I was to see other wars, in the Middle East, and to discover that death
is as final by conventional as by nuclear means. But I didn't know that then. I
was innocent. I hungered for experience, and ''On the Road'' was part of my
education. So this semester, I put the book on the reading list for a course I'm
teaching as writer-in-residence at Pacific Lutheran University in Tacoma, Wash.

I was the same age when I first read Kerouac as my students are now. They seem
more innocent than I was, yet less romantic. This is a solid middle-class
university in a lumber and pulp port town that seems to deliberately turn its
back on the misty beauty of Puget Sound. The stupendous view of nearby Mount
Rainier is anchored by a line of Red Robin eateries, Piggly Wiggly supermarkets,
used-car dealerships and Live-Nude-Dancing bars servicing the military stationed
south of town.

There's a respect for the military here. A respect for authority. I was afraid
I'd made a mistake with the Kerouac. How would these students relate to him,
now, nearly 30 years after he first rocked and shocked America?

I decided to dress the part for class. I tried for Ms. Cool, came up looking
more like a French whore, and went with it anyway. ''Who's that?'' said the
provost as I slouched past his office. But the students loved it: they'd dressed
for class too.

We stretched out on the floor as Diana, a Beat vision in black beret, black
turtleneck, torn jeans and bare feet, long blond hair hanging over her
shoulders, began her report on the book. ''Their attitude to women was
terrible,'' she said, ''but listen to what else was going on . . .''

She read out long passages of Kerouac's jazz prose, snapping her fingers to the
impassioned discovery of great things capitalized: Life, Love, Time, Beat - ''oh
yes man, Life, oh yes yes, Life!''

Some students smiled beatifically, others looked confused. I translated. Tea
meant grass meant marijuana. Bop meant beebop meant jazz. Hitchhiking was done
so, by the side of the road, thumb high in the air.

More translation: the development of the counter-culture in America, and the
ways the 80's are being compared to the 50's, as though the whole country were
yearning for a return to a pre-Vietnam innocence - and a pre-Vietnam ignorance,
with McCarthy waving his lists and people terrorized into shame and silence.
''But the strange thing is how much Kerouac loves America,'' said Diana. ''The
whole of this book is one big love affair with this country.''

Ah yes, he was everything traditionalists have always abhorred. So how come he
loved America? There is a language of patriotism, of course, and Kerouac's
wasn't the conventional one: ''Great beautiful clouds floated overhead, valley
clouds that made you feel the vastness of old tumbledown holy America from mouth
to mouth and tip to tip.'' No, that wouldn't cut conservative ice. But there's
love in it all right - a passionate commitment that breaks through
preconceptions to strike home with these students. There's more than one way to
love your country.

''It's an amazing book,'' Diana concluded. ''I mean, it could have been written
for us today. This restlessness, I can relate to that. Because there's something
like it happening now - not just on this campus, on others too. It's undefined,
just a restless feeling. Like there must have been then, in the 50's. Like we're
looking for something but don't know what it is we're looking for. And a book
like this speaks to that feeling. It wakes you up!''

''But isn't this sort of life dangerous?'' asked Scott. Bright and sensitive,
he's the best writer in the class. ''It seems irresponsible, as though they're
refusing to grow up. I mean, what happens to such people later?''

A good question, with Kerouac dead in his 40's from alcohol and phlebitis. ''I
saw the best minds of my generation destroyed by madness,'' I quoted. They'd
heard the line before, but hadn't heard of ''Howl.'' I read out as many verses
as I thought they could take. And as I read, in this spring of 1986, I had the
eerie sensation that I was reading the poem for the first time ever. I felt the
intensity of the response, saw the stares of concentration and the open mouths
of shock and awe, terror and pity. Thirty years have passed - and yet they might
never have been.

We talked it over awhile. ''Did you put Kerouac's book on the list because you
think this is what we should do?'' asked Scott.

''No,'' I replied. ''This was the voice of a different generation, more mine
than yours. Every generation has its own books, its own ''On the Road'' and
''Howl.'' I don't know what yours will be. They haven't been written yet. You'll
write them'' - a surge of energy in the room, a palpable sense of strength and
possibility - ''and if not you right here, then someone else sitting in another
classroom somewhere in America right now. It will take time, because it takes
time to find the courage of your own voice. But those books will come, and your
generation will find its voice.''

It was an impromptu speech: I hadn't thought it out before. But when I saw their
faces, I felt sure I was right.

They won't be beats or hippies or punks or yuppies. They'll be something else,
all their own. And if they're lucky it will be some time before the media latch
onto it and grace or disgrace it with a name and write about it so much that
nothing will be left but a stereotype. I don't know what it will be, but I
suspect it will be gentle. A slow, gentle determination, grounded in reality.
Not a howl, but a quiet persistent drumming - the drumming of change.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 25, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM'S FALLEN: 108 MORE FOR MEMORIAL

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 334 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 24


Stonecutters today began etching into the Vietnam Veterans Memorial the names of
108 servicemen killed or missing in action in the Vietnam War that were omitted
when the monument was dedicated in 1982.

By Memorial Day, when the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund, a private group, has
scheduled a re-dedication for families and friends of the servicemen, the list
on the black granite slabs is to include all 58,130 casualties of the war,
officials said.

At a news conference today John Wheeler, fund chairman, said the number of
visitors, more than three million a year, showed that ''people who didn't
realize they were deeply touched by the war now realize that they were - this
isn't just a Vietnam memorial, it is America's memorial.''

The 108 names are those of 95 servicemen who died on combat missions but outside
the combat zone in aircraft crashes at distant airstrips, and of 13 who died of
wounds in hospitals.

On the slabs the names are listed by date of death, and the new ones are being
added where space is available, under a $70,000 grant from the Ford Motor
Company. The initial 50,000 names were engraved by sandblasting stone slabs
lying flat in a workshop. Today mid-morning sun halted engraving the new names
on the upright granite slabs.

James H. Lee, vice president of Great Panes Glassworks of Denver, had just begun
to engrave the name of Airman 1st Class Paul D. Grosick of Wexford, Pa., who
died in a plane accident on Wake Island Sept. 24, 1968, when he had to quit. The
company has perfected a hand-held sandblaster that forces abrasives through
plastic stencils. Sun softened Mr. Lee's stencil.  The names of Pfc. Charles K.
Fink of the Army, who lived in Bedford, Va., and Airman 1st Class Larry E.
Wright, of Ceres, Calif., were etched in earlier.

The Vietnam Veterans Memorial Family Search is seeking to contact as many of the
next of kin of the 108 as possible from Suite 305, 2550 M Street N.W.,
Washington, D.C. 20037. Its telephone number is (202) 659-9419.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Kirk Bockman and James H. Lee engraving names on Vietnam
Veterans Memorial (NYT/Marilynn K. Yee)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 25, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TV WEEKEND;
RACIAL CONFRONTATION IN 'HALLMARK' DRAMA

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 34, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 636 words


ALWAYS stretching a bit higher than the bulk of the competition, television's
''Hallmark Hall of Fame'' has compiled an unusually distinguished production
record, hailed with everything from top awards to a retrospective at the Museum
of Broadcasting. Its latest presentation, on CBS this Sunday at 9 P.M., is
''Resting Place,'' directed by John Korty and starring John Lithgow and Frances
Sternhagen. Once again, the sense of making an extra effort is palpable.

Set in 1972, the film opens with Maj. Kendall Laird (Mr. Lithgow), connected
with United States Army Survival Assistance, accompanying back to a Southern
town called Rockville the body of an officer killed in Vietnam. Wanting to make
formal funeral arrangements, Laird discovers that they have already been
arranged. The body is to be buried that same day in the town cemetery. But it
soon becomes apparent that there is a problem: the dead officer is black and the
cemetery is restricted to ''caucasians.'' Supported by the town ''liberal,''
Mrs. McAlister (Miss Sternhagen), the officer's parents are determined that he
will be buried inside the ''town he brought honor to.'' They quietly declare
that ''people belong where they want to be, not where they are told to be.''

Here, in short, is the kind of racial confrontation and subsequent
soul-searching that television drama tackles every once in a great while, and
for which it is showered with praise for being bold or sensitive. It can hardly
be a coincidence that Mr. Korty's more prominent directorial credits include
''The Autobiography of Miss Jane Pittman,'' a landmark television production
that had a final ''payoff'' scene not dissimilar in emotional clout to the one
devised for ''Resting Place.''

Before getting to that point, though, the teleplay by Walter Halsey Davis gets
involved in a second story. In an effort to find out more about the dead
officer, Laird begins interviewing several members of his Army company, Although
the men have recommended that their former officer be decorated posthumously for
bravery, they are mysteriously evasive about the circumstances of his death in
battle. Trying to discover what the men are covering up, Laird is faced with a
crisis of his own as he tries to decide whether to push on with the
investigation and possibly hurt a great many people in the process.

Unfortunately, the Vietnam inquiries are not nearly as absorbing as the
situation concerning the pending burial. The people of Rockville are far more
interesting and complicated than any of the soldiers. The dead officer is
depicted vividly through the memories of the survivors. His parents, played with
affecting strength by Morgan Freeman and C. C. H. Pounder, recall the bright
child who became a football hero and a West Point graduate. ''He was a
wonderment,'' the mother says.''You feel like you brought a gift to the world -a
message.'' Mrs. McAlister, remembering that he was ''something special,'' warns
Laird that ''if he can't turn tradition around, we may have to wait another 30
years.''

Produced by Bob Huddleston for Marian Rees Associates, ''Resting Place''
dissipates some of its potential power by paying too much attention to the
fairly predictable Vietnam investigation. But the film, especially that ending,
provides more than enough moving moments, thanks to Mr. Korty and his first-rate
cast. Mr. Lithgow is, as usual, quietly extraordinary, getting under the skin of
still another character with a precision that seems effortless (among his many
other credits, the actor can list Roberta Muldoon, the transsexual football
player in ''The World According to Garp''). And Miss Sternhagen takes a
relatively small role and gives it indispensable dramatic weight. The ''Hallmark
Hall of Fame'' can register another impressive addition to its record.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of John Lithgow

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 26, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

CHILLY RECEPTION AWAITS REAGAN IN BALI

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 895 words

DATELINE: PORT MORESBY, Papua New Guinea, April 24


President Reagan's meeting in Bali next week with the foreign ministers of
non-Communist Southeast Asian countries is not likely to be the friendly
encounter the White House has been predicting, according to officials in the
region, who say feelings toward the United States are now frostier than at any
time since the end of the Vietnam War.

Mr. Reagan is scheduled to meet the foreign ministers of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations - Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, Brunei and
the Philippines - after talks with President Suharto of Indonesia.

In addition to raising problems between their association's member nations and
Washington, the ministers are to brief Mr. Reagan on a peace plan for Cambodia
recently proposed by the guerrilla coalition fighting the Hanoi-backed
Government in Phnom Penh.

Economic issues are the immediate cause of the anti-American feeling. Farm
legislation approved by Congress at the end of last year and a recently
announced decision to put subsidized American rice on the world market, at
prices undercutting those of traditional rice exporters, have infuriated some
members of the association, known as Asean.

Anti-U.S. Feeling on Rise

''Superfriend America Cuts Thailand's Throat,'' a headline in Thai Rath, a
Bangkok newspaper, said.

''Over the recent past, the U.S. has been less sensitive to the well-being of
Asean than it might have been,'' said an editorial in The Straits Times, a
newspaper in Singapore, where Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew has been
uncharacteristically harsh in recent assessments of Washington's policies.

Anti-American feeling is also on the rise elsewhere in the region. In the South
Pacific, the opposition to the United States centers on the American tuna boats
that small island nations say have been poaching in their waters, their only
resource. The ships, they say, are protected by United States legislation
favoring the American tuna industry.

One small Pacific nation, Kiribati, has already concluded a fishing agreement
with Moscow, which offered to pay for regional fishing rights. Another country,
Vanuatu, is considering a similar pact.

Success Punished, Official Says

Although regional complaints are voiced mostly in economic terms, the
unhappiness with the United States has more profound roots, according to
Malaysia's Deputy Foreign Minister, Abdul Kadir Sheik Fadzir.

The Southeast Asian and Pacific nations, he said in a recent interview, adopted
democracy and the free-enterprise system in the face of pressure from other
developing countries to choose a different path. They welcomed American
corporations, he said, even when they thought promises to share technology had
not been fulfilled. They sent their children to American universities, and they
carved for themselves a niche in international trade.

''We are a model for Africa and Latin America,'' Sheik Abdul said, referring to
the great strides in living standards and stability this region has made.

But the United States has responded to their success, he said, by enacting
legislation to protect American textile industries, farmers, fishermen and other
groups threatened by Asian exports. Sheik Adbul said the Southeast Asians were
also disgruntled by what they see as Americans' tendency to overlook the region
in their pursuit of business and political ties in China.

''We are working very hard,'' Sheik Abdul said. ''We are following the right
road. What we need is very little: fair trade practices, access to American
markets, things like that.''

Some American and other Western diplomats in the region argue that the Southeast
Asians are exaggerating their problems with Washington and failing to recognize
their own shortcomings. They cite the persistent subsidizing of domestic
industries and a poor record in copyright protection, which discourages foreign
investment in local economies. Some of the nations, they suggest, have become
''spoiled'' by a decade of boom.

Other diplomats take a different view, saying the influence of lobbyists seeking
to protect American industries has led to a fragmented American foreign policy
in Southeast Asia. One diplomat suggested that American foreign aid to the
region would soon be little more than compensation for damage done by American
special-interest groups.

Relations with Bangkok, considered Washington's firmest friend in the region,
are now at a dangerously low level, according to some diplomats.

The Reagan Administration's public rebuke of Thailand this week for its vote in
the United Nations Security Council to condemn the United States raid on Libya
is expected to have serious repercussions, Thais say.

Thai rice farmers have been drawn into a crusade against Washington, a campaign
being led in many areas by newly radicalized student activists. They are
encouraged by both conservative and liberal commentators, among them Thongbai
Thongpao, the country's leading human rights lawyer.

In a recent column in The Bangkok World, Mr. Thongbai wrote: ''I tend to agree
with a student slogan that warned against Thailand becoming a slave to the U.S.,
and agree that we should learn to be self-reliant. We must stop hoping only for
mercy from America, because the more we ask from the U.S., the more it will take
advantage of us. We must have the courage to openly face enemies in the guise of
friends.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 6, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
Because of an editing error, a dispatch from Papua New Guinea on April 26 about
American relations with Southeast Asia referred incorrectly to Abdul Kadir Sheik
Fadzir, Malaysia's Deputy Foreign Minister. He is known as Mr. Abdul Kadir, not
Sheik Abdul.

GRAPHIC: Photo of Indonesian police officers checking identifications near
location where President Reagan will be staying (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 26, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

...WHILE ACROSS THE ATLANTIC, ANGLOPHILIA RULES

BYLINE: By ANDREW H. MALCOLM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1063 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, April 25


Whenever Alan Christian has gone on the air on WFBR radio in Baltimore lately,
he has known exactly what most callers were going to talk about: affection for
Britain and distaste for other European allies who did not support the bombing
of Libya.

''The general feeling,'' the talk show host said, ''is that Britain was there
when we needed a friend and to hell with the other allies.''

In the United States, Britain and its myriad diplomatic and commercial
representatives seem to be riding a swelling new wave of British-American
friendship since Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher allowed United States planes
to bomb Libyan targets from bases in Britain last week.

Mrs. Thatcher has come under heavy political attack at home for her willingness
to support the Reagan Adfministration's action, and there have been angry
protest rallies against both Mrs. Thatcher and the American attack.

But in the United States, the British Embassy in Washington and its nine
consulates scattered across the country have received thousands of calls,
letters and telegrams of gratitude in recent days.

'Everyone Is Very Positive'

''It's been wonderful, you know,'' said Lindsey Thomas of the embassy.
''Everyone is very positive, and the calls are still streaming in.''

The consulate in Chicago has received a growing stack of mail, including a
postcard from Valparaiso, Ind., showing Betsy Ross and saying: ''Thank you so
much for supporting us and our President. Much appreciated.''

In New York and Los Angeles, dozens of American travelers told British tourist
authorities that they had canceled trips to other European countries and booked
reservations instead to Britain. In San Francisco, a huge $150 floral
arrangement arrived at the consulate from a grateful florist on Sansome Street.
''We wish to take this opportunity to thank your Government for its assistance
and brave stance,'' the card said.

In Northbrook, Ill., Congregation Beth Shalom donated a tree to an Israeli
forest in the name of Britain.

Support for Canada and Israel

Canada and Israel have also come in for good words for their public support of
the American military action, although the gratitude does not seem to match the
outpouring of warm words, hotel discounts and other signs of appreciation
offered to Canadians in 1980 after that country spirited half a dozen would-be
American hostages out of Iran under false passports.

British representatives have also found themselves popular attractions for
television camera crews and for radio call-in shows, where they are subjected to
caller after caller heaping lavish praise on Britain. ''Sometimes it's almost
embarrassing,'' said a spokesman in New York City.

There are, however, indications of some growing popular American indignation
aimed at less supportive allies. Mr. Christian, among others, is championing a
local Baltimore boycott of goods from Italy, France and West Germany.

''We don't have to buy Italian wine, French perfume and German beers and cars,''
Mr. Christian said. ''They want all our support, all our troops to help defend
them with billions of dollars. But they are nowhere to be found when we need
them.''

'Bought a Jar of Marmalade'

He said angry callers to his show had suggested letting those countries try to
sell their wares in Libya. ''How much wine do you think France would sell in a
Moslem country?'' he asked.

''I had one guy the other day,'' Mr. Christian added. ''He said he didn't know
what to do to show his appreciation. So he went down to his local grocery store
and bought a jar of British marmalade as his little way of saying thanks.''

Last week, in a speech to several hundred business executives gathered in
Manhattan at the Waldorf-Astoria, Vice President Bush drew the biggest ovation
of his appearance when he said, ''That Margaret Thatcher, she really stood tall,
didn't she?'' The response was thunderous.

According to aides, Britiain's chief representative at the United Nations, Sir
John Thomson, has drawn effusive praise from Americans and, more quietly, from
other nationalities for a tough Security Council speech on Libyan terrorism.

'Abominable' Qaddafi

''Nearly everyone thinks Colonel Qaddafi is abominable,'' the Ambassador said,
''But not everyone is prepared to say so. And fewer still are prepared to take
action to persuade him to cease his abominable acts.''

A New York Times/CBS News Poll on April 15 found that nearly half (47 percent)
of 704 Americans polled believed the French were being poor allies for refusing
permission for American planes to fly over their country; 38 percent said it was
an understandable position, and 15 percent had no opinion.

A question about Britain's permitting use of bases there for the raid on Libya
found 45 percent saying they thought the British were being especially good
allies, 34 percent saying theey felt they were acting in their own best
interests, 10 percent saying both and 12 percent saying they had no opinion.

Members of the Senate and the House also introduced resolutions of praise for
Britain. ''I want to tip my hat to Margaret Thatcher and to her Government,''
said Senator John H. Chafee, Republican of Rhode Island. ''I think it is
wonderful that we have an ally that is really an ally.''

Alan Huckle of the British Information Service in New York has gone to work
early every morning since the raids last Monday night. But he says he has got
very little Government work done.

''The phone is ringing all the time,'' he said, ''We get Southern accents and
Western accents and one Iowa farmer called to say, 'We like Britain for standing
up to people like in the Falklands, and we like Britain for standing by us when
we stand up to people.' ''

Mr. Huckle has also been on radio programs in Detroit, Los Angeles and New York.

Anyone passing by the receptionist at the British Consulate in Chicago can
overhear the operator, Christine Morris, answering call after call. ''Yes,'' she
says. ''Well, thank you very much.

''Yes, thanks. Were you really? Well, thank you again. It's T-h-a-t-c-h-e-r. No.
10 Downing Street, London, England. Yes, thank you.''

''People have been wiring flowers to the Prime Minister,'' said Caroline
Cracroft, a Vice Consul, ''And a group of Vietnam veterans wants to parachute
over the city carrying the Union Jack. We're, uh, still talking with them.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Alan Christian in the WFBR studio (NYT/Marty Katz)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 26, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

JOHN KORTY, A FILM DIRECTOR WHO PREFERS TV

BYLINE: By STEPHEN FARBER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 50, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1091 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, April 25


According to the established wisdom in Hollywood, film is a director's medium
while television is more likely to be a producer's medium. But John Korty, who
has just directed ''Resting Place,'' a ''Hallmark Hall of Fame'' presentation to
be shown this Sunday evening on CBS, disagrees.

''It's true that at the final stages of a television film,'' Mr. Korty says,
''there are other people who have a lot of input, and there is a danger of
making films by committee. But the biggest change that ever happened to one of
my films was when Paramount simply chopped off the last 15 minutes of 'Oliver's
Story' right before the movie was released. I've never had anything like that
happen in the television films I've done.''

Although Mr. Korty has worked in both media, he has done some of his best work
for television. ''Go Ask Alice,'' which he made in the early 70's, was one of
the first television films to deal with teen-age drug addiction. ''The
Autobiography of Miss Jane Pittman,'' starring Cicely Tyson as a 110-year-old
black woman who had been born in slavery and lived to take part in the
civil-rights movement, remains a landmark. Just two months ago, Mr. Korty won
praise again for directing ''Deadly Business,'' a film starring Alan Arkin,
about the Mafia's involvement in toxic-waste disposal.

''Resting Place'' returns to the terrain of ''Miss Jane Pittman.'' John Lithgow
plays an Army officer assigned to aid the family of a black soldier killed in
Vietnam; they want him buried in an all-white cemetery in a Southern town, and
Mr. Lithgow finds himself involved in a racial confrontation as well as in an
investigation of the mystery surrounding the soldier's death.

'Wouldn't Give Up TV Movies'

Mr. Korty has gone against the advice of some people in the industry who urged
him to concentrate his energies on feature films. ''When I finished 'Jane
Pittman,' '' he said, ''people at my agency said, 'That should be your last
television movie; you've hit the top.' And I upset them when I insisted on doing
'Farewell to Manzanar,' about the Japanese internment camps in this country
during the Second World War. I wouldn't give up television movies. There is
nothing like the response you get. Fifty million people saw 'Jane Pittman' in
one night. That's very different from even the biggest hit movie.''

If he continues to work in television, that may be because Mr. Korty has won the
kind of control over his films granted to very few television directors. Part of
this control is visual; he is a member of the cameramen's union and actually
operated the second camera for much of the shooting of ''Resting Place.''

''I have a lot more feeling of possession of a film if I'm operating a camera,''
Mr. Korty explained. ''It sort of burns its way into the retina. I can go back
to my hotel room, plop down on the bed, close my eyes, and watch the dailies in
my head.''

Mr. Korty first attracted attention in the 1960's by making low-budget
independent features - ''Crazy Quilt,'' ''Funnyman'' and ''Riverrun.'' Since
then he has worked on many different kinds of films. His documentary ''Who Are
the DeBolts?'' won an Academy Award as best documentary of 1977, and he has also
made children's films - the animated feature ''Twice Upon a Time'' and the
television special ''Ewok Adventure.'' His home base is in Mill Valley, Calif.,
where he has a complete studio of his own.

''I guess I'm hooked on film making as a process,'' Mr. Korty said. ''It's hard
for me to imagine working in an office, where I wouldn't have an editing bench
and cameras around. I just wish I had three or four lives, because then I could
be an animator in one life, a documentary film maker in another, and a maker of
dramatic films in the third. It's very invigorating to move back and forth. You
may do a documentary, and the next thing you do is a dramatic film with actors,
and you come into that with the experience of these real people. You're able to
bring the actors closer to reality, to get them away from some of the actorish
things they do. And besides that, I think every film director's education has a
direct relationship to the number of feet of film he's shot. The more films you
do, the more you learn.''

Welcomes the Contrast

Mr. Korty feels fortunate to have made two television films in the last eight
months. He welcomed the contrast between them. ''Directors can get typecast as
easily as actors,'' Mr. Korty said. ''A lot of people think of me as doing warm,
humanitarian films about social issues. It was important for me to do 'Deadly
Business' because on the surface it was a gangster film. All the reviews said
was what a tense, taut, suspenseful, action-filled movie it was. I needed to
prove I could do that.''

He finished ''Deadly Business'' in February and immediately went to work on
''Resting Place.'' He undertook the film, he said, chiefly because of the
''Hallmark'' cachet.

''Everybody knows a 'Hallmark' film is going to be something special,'' Mr.
Korty said. ''One great advantage of working with them was that there was no
pressure to use TV names in the cast. We could go for the best actors.''

The story appealed to him not simply because of the obvious content about
Vietnam and civil rights. He explained: ''John Lithgow and I both felt that this
was really a story about how the dead affect the living. The dead soldier and
the major are very different. One was a black Southerner, one is a white man
from Wisconsin. The dead man was outgoing and confident, whereas Lithgow's
character is the kind of man who is comfortable in the Army because he is always
getting orders. Suddenly he has to take action, and he becomes a different
person because of this dead man whom he'd never met.''

Mr. Korty hopes that the growing videocassette market will eventually make it
easy for him to make more of the specialized films he prefers.

''One of my analogies is to the magazine world,'' he said. ''When I was growing
up, the big magazines were Life, Look and Saturday Evening Post -magazines that
tried to appeal to everybody, much as the networks do today. Those were the
dinosaurs that got stuck in the tar pits and disappeared. Today there are
hundreds of specialized magazines. I'm looking forward to the day when
videocassettes are like that. I like the writing of John Updike, and I've
thought about doing some short stories of Updike on film. I know it's a limited
market. You're never going to make $50 million. But I think that kind of film is
going to be more and more possible.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of John Lithgow in ''Resting Place''

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 27, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN, LEAVING FOR TALKS IN ASIA WARNS TERRORISTS

BYLINE: By GERALD M. BOYD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 989 words

DATELINE: HONOLULU, April 26


As he began a 13-day trip to Asia, President Reagan declared today that the
world's ''dictators and terrorists'' had to be prepared for the consequences if
they perpetrated ''cowardly acts'' against Americans.

The warning was made in remarks to members of the United States Pacific Command
at Hickam Air Force Base here after Mr. Reagan arrived from Los Angeles.

Before he left California, he indicated in his weekly radio address that his
Administration was determined to remain involved in economic and security
matters in the Pacific.

Denounces Cambodia Occupation

Denouncing the continued Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia, Mr. Reagan said
Vietnam's refusal to withdraw damaged its own interests.

''The United States has made it clear that it's ready to participate
constructively in an overall settlement,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''The Communist
Government of Vietnam, however, to the detriment of their own national interest,
remains intransigent.''

Mr. Reagan's warning was the latest about Washington's willingness to retaliate
for attacks on its citizens. Mr. Reagan did not cite countries or leaders, but
the comments were similar to recent warnings to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the
Libyan leader.

Second Stop on Trip

The President's two-day stay in Hawaii is the second stop of a trip that will
include a meeting of seven leading industrial democracies May 4-6 in Tokyo.

Mr. Reagan spoke to more than a thousand military personnel and their families
at the air force base after arriving to full military honors, including a 21-gun
salute. He also reviewed a contingent representing all branches of the armed
forces. A lei was placed around his neck.

Hickam Air Force Base is where President Ferdinand E. Marcos of the Philippines
stayed after fleeing Manila in February. He later moved to a rented house in a
Honolulu suburb.

The White House said in a statement this evening that Mr. Reagan telephoned Mr.
Marcos this afternoon and spoke briefly with him. It was the first conversation
the two men had since the Philippine leader's ouster. The statement added that
Mr. Reagan's wife, Nancy, also talked to Mr. Marcos's wife, Imelda. The
President's remarks at the base indicated again that he intended to focus on
terrorism as much as on economic matters at the Tokyo conference, where he will
meet with leaders from Britain, Canada, France, Italy, Japan and West Germany.

On April 14, in a move that had significant implications for the meeting, Mr.
Reagan ordered an air strike the next day against targets in Libya in response
to what he said was Libyan involvement in terrorism against Americans.

On the five-hour flight here from Los Angeles, Vice Adm. John M. Poindexter, the
President's national security adviser, said that at the Tokyo meeting Mr. Reagan
would be ''more interested in action'' than in a joint statement on terrorism.
Admiral Poindexter said the issue of terrorism would represent a ''good part of
the conversation.''

In his remarks at the air force base, Mr. Reagan praised the American armed
forces for performing a ''difficult duty'' at a time when the world ''is a
dangerous place - even, in some regions, a savage place.''

''Today, America is standing tall,'' he said. ''We're rebuilding our defenses,
setting in place innovative weapons programs and giving you the pay and
equipment you need. We're reminding the globe that America still stands for
liberty - indeed, since 1980, not one inch of territory has fallen to Communism,
and Grenada has been set free.'' He was referring to the American invasion of
Grenada in 1983, which deposed a Marxist regime.

Mr. Reagan added, ''We're showing the world's dictators and terrorists that when
they perpetrate their cowardly acts upon citizens of the United States, they had
best be prepared for the consequences.''

Mr. and Mrs. Reagan will be staying at the Honolulu home of Chris Hemmeter, a
wealthy real estate developer and onetime president of the World Football
League.

Mr. Reagan's comments on Vietnam in his radio address touched on some concerns
raised by the Association of Southeast Nations, known as Asean, which has sought
an end to the conflict in Cambodia. Last year the Administration, in a shift of
policy, agreed to provide about $10 million in economic assistance to
non-Communist rebels in Cambodia.

''America, along with our Asean friends, believes that Vietnam should withdraw
its forces from Cambodia and permit the Cambodian people to determine their own
destiny,'' Mr. Reagan said.

A Major Trading Partner

Although the six members of Asean - Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the
Philippines, Singapore and Thailand -together represent the fifth largest
American trading partner, they have faced economic problems as the prices of oil
and other export commodities have fallen.

Mr. Reagan, who will meet with the foreign ministers of the six countries on
Thursday in Bali, Indonesia, said he would underscore that they share ''an
energetic pursuit of commmerce'' with the United States. In addition, he said he
would pledge that the United States would continue to play ''a constructive
role'' in the region.

While in Bali, Mr. Reagan will also meet with President Suharto of Indonesia,
whom he described in the radio address today as ''a most responsible influence
in world affairs and a force for the economic progress of his people at home.''

There have been strains between the two countries in areas such as trade and
Middle East policy.

On Friday, when the President leaves Bali for Tokyo, Mrs. Reagan will fly to
Malaysia, where she will press her campaign against drug abuse. The next day, as
part of the antidrug campaign, she will fly to Thailand. She will rejoin her
husband in Tokyo on May 5.

After leaving the air force base here today, the Reagans made a brief stop at
Kappiolani Women's and Children's Medical Center to visit a 13-year-old leukemia
patient, Randy Raquion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of President Reagan wearing leis (Agence France-Presse); Map
outlines Reagan's itinerary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 27, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. AIDES DIVIDED ON FURTHER RAIDS

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1434 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 26


Senior Reagan Administration officials say that since the American bombing of
Libya on April 15, no consensus has developed within the Government on how far
to go in repeating such attacks to counter an expected rise in anti-American
terrorism around the world.

Since the raid, President Reagan has warned that the United States is ready to
use its military power to retaliate again if there are new attacks.

But in interviews in recent days, White House and State Department officials
expressed concern that the public support that developed for the bombing of
Libya would not necessarily be repeated if Washington became engaged in a
regular pattern of tit-for-tat retaliatory raids.

'Relatively Easy Target'

Such raids might be mounted not only against Libya but also against such nations
as Syria and Iran, which are believed by the Administration to support terrorist
groups.

''Libya was a relatively easy target, and we lost one F-111,'' a State
Department official said. ''Syria and Iran are more dangerous. We probably won't
get away with such minimal losses. I wonder how long the polls will show a high
approval rating in this country if the losses begin to mount without any
evidence of ending terrorism.''

There is also concern here that what one counterterrorism expert described as a
''fear psychology'' is setting in among Americans. The State Department has been
bombarded in the last two weeks, he said, by Americans asking if it is safe to
carry out plans for tourist trips to Europe.

''Mrs. Jones from Sioux City, Iowa, calls up the Libyan Task Force and says,
'I'm supposed to go on a tour of Britain for two weeks July 15; do you think it
is safe to go?' '' the official said. ''Sure it is safe to go, but who wants to
be responsible? So we say, 'Just act prudently.'

''We know people are scared,'' he said, ''and so you have the paradox of polls
showing that Americans by and large supported the raid but many Americans are
now afraid to go anywhere. We even hear of school groups afraid to visit
Washington.''

Administration officials said one reason for the lack of consensus about future
moves was that the raid was decided upon as a separate and distinct response to
evidence that Libya was behind the bombing of a discotheque in West Berlin on
April 5, in which an American soldier was killed, and that Libya had urged that
other attacks be waged against Americans. It was not undertaken as part of any
new policy to use force more readily against nations believed to be behind
terrorism.

They said differences persisted between Secretary of State George P. Shultz and
Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger on the value of such military operations,
with Mr. Shultz much more willing to engage American power than Mr. Weinberger.

Mr. Shultz said recently that the raid demonstrated American readiness to use
force, but Mr. Weinberger said Friday that the raid had been undertaken only as
''a last resort'' because it had not been possible to get allied backing for
meaningful economic sanctions. The National Security Council staff has sided
with Mr. Shultz.

But within the State Department, there was no sign of exultation in the
aftermath of the attack on Libya.

''I think you can say that for the moment, the pluses outbalance the minuses,''
a high State Department official said. ''On the plus side, the American people
seem solidly behind the raid. The Europeans, who had been doing nothing, are now
galvanized into taking political reprisals such as kicking out Libyans, and in
sharing more closely their intelligence information about possible terrorists.
And the Arabs, by and large, have taken the attack on Qaddafi with equanimity.
They have not poured into the streets to burn down American embassies.''

Qaddafi Seen as 'Off Balance'

Another official said, ''I think it is fair to say that we have thrown Qaddafi
off balance, that he has been forced to wonder where he goes from here.''

The official said Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader, had been forced to
bring some other high officials into the tight leadership circle in the wake of
the attack because of widespread complaints in Tripoli about the ineffectiveness
of Libyan defenses. A leading Libyan newspaper, for instance, published an
article Friday calling for an investigation and criticizing Libyan claims that
as many as 22 American planes were shot down.

No Sign of Mutinies

On the deficit side, officials made these points:

* Despite hopes for a coup against Colonel Qaddafi, which had been encouraged by
Egyptian reports of significant unrest in the Libyan armed forces, there is no
indication that the American raids provoked any mutinies, or that Colonel
Qaddafi has lost power. Some White House officials, notably Donald T. Regan, the
chief of staff, reported in the days after the raid that they had learned of
uprisings in some barracks that had to be quelled. But senior intelligence
officials said the White House put too much credence on rumors.

* There is no consensus within the Administration on where the United States
should go from here in what the Administration sees as a ''war against
terrorism.'' One official said it is ''an open question on what we do if there
are renewed terrorist attacks, linked to Libya, Syria or Iran.'' Officials said
the United States had ships and planes ready, but it is assumed that retaliation
will only provoke more terrorism.

* The raid on Libya has tended to give much higher priority to problems related
to terrorism than some officials would prefer. For instance, it has had an
impact on American relations with the Soviet Union and its allies. Moscow, the
main arms supplier to Libya, decided to demonstrate its support for Colonel
Qaddafi by suspending talks with Washington on the next summit meeting, and it
has sent Colonel Qaddafi messages of support. The Vietnamese have also suspended
talks with the United States on servicemen missing from the Vietnam war.

* Security is already a major problem for American embassies, with personnel in
a very high state of alert. American Embassy officers have been shot in the
Sudan and Yemen, and police action has averted some potentially devastating
attacks. In Ankara, many Americans might have been killed if Turkish police had
not caught two Libyans carrying explosives near an officers' club a week ago.
Even though the United States has not officially blamed Libya for two recent
shootings of Americans in the Sudan and North Yemen, the assumption in the State
Department is that they are Libyan-related.

* The Europeans, who seem willing now to join in more concrete nonmilitary
actions against the Libyans, would probably distance themselves from Washington
if they believed that the United States was determined to use force again. And
Arab states, some of which detest Libya as much as the United States does, would
probably be compelled to take harsher anti-American measures if, for instance,
Syria was attacked or if there was another raid on Libya. Although some Arab
governments would welcome a raid against Iran, the Iranians would see it as
American support for Iraq in the Persian Gulf war.

Mr. Shultz, who for months had urged the United States not to shy away from
using force against nations that back terrorists, has been cautious in saying
what might happen next. He recognizes that there is no agreement on follow-up
attacks and does not want to alarm allies and Americans.

''We will judge every situation as it goes,'' he said, ''and we're not going to
get put in the position where there's some sort of automatic pilot here.''

Last Wednesday, Mr. Reagan, in a meeting with columnists, indicated that he
would sanction military raids against Syria or Iran if there was solid evidence
of backing terrorism.

'We Don't Have Any Plans'

But on Thursday, Mr. Shultz said, ''We don't have any plans for such
operations.''

''What the President has done and said is, first, it has been shown that the
United States will use its military power in this fight against terrorism,'' Mr.
Shultz said. ''Our action against Libya shows that. And second, the President
said we regard terrorism in general as a very important problem. And when the
terrorists have the support and connivance of a state, it's particularly
ominous, and so you have to focus on that.''

But Mr. Weinberger, stressing his own wariness about using force, said on Friday
that that attack on Libya was ''a decision that we did very reluctantly, and we
are very hopeful that it will send the message that terrorism of this kind has
too high a cost.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of George Shultz and Caspar Weinberger (NYT; UPI)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 27, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TRIAL IS AWAITING TESTIMONY OF SPY

BYLINE: By KATHERINE BISHOP, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 25, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 892 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, April 26


Although there are months of testimony and dozens of witnesses to come, the
Government's case against Jerry A. Whitworth, who is charged with espionage, may
reach a peak in the coming week with the anticipated testimony of the
prosecution's most crucial witness, John A. Walker Jr. Mr. Walker, who has
acknowledged heading a spy ring for the Soviet Union, is to testify against Mr.
Whitworth as part of an agreement made with the Government when he pleaded
guilty to espionage charges in Baltimore last October. Prosecutors say Mr.
Walker recruited Mr. Whitworth, a longtime Navy friend, as a spy in 1973.

In the first four weeks of the trial, prosecutors have presented a strong but
circumstantial case that Mr. Whitworth, a former Navy radioman, stole or copied
sensitive information regarding Navy cryptography equipment and the material
used to decode messages, a portion of a classified Navy warfare contingency plan
for the Middle East, information regarding the Navy's communications satellite
system and message traffic between ships and their land bases. Mr. Whitworth has
denied the espionage charges and has pleaded not guilty.

No Direct Link to Espionage

Evidence presented so far has included a classified document found in Mr.
Whitworth's home and handwritten notes and diagrams detailing cryptography
equipment, the satellite communications system and a secret warfare publication
for Navy air forces that were found in Mr. Walker's home and bore the
fingerprints or handwriting of Mr. Whitworth.

With the exception of one witness who testified that she saw Mr. Whitworth place
unidentified documents in his briefcase on one occasion at the Navy's
telecommunications center in Alameda, Calif., there has been no direct evidence
that the defendant stole or copied information. There have been no witnesses who
said they saw Mr. Whitworth give information to Mr. Walker or that the
information was subsequently passed to Soviet contacts.

The Government has conceded that Mr. Whitworth was not heard on wire taps of Mr.
Walker's telephone, which proved to be the key in building a case against Mr.
Walker.

Thus the prosecution is relying on Mr. Walker, the only person in the spy ring
that was accused of passing classified information directly to agents of the
Soviet Union, to link Mr. Whitworth to the espionage conspiracy. Mr. Walker is
expected to testify that he gave the defendant a total of $332,000 over a
10-year period in payment for stolen data.

Meaning of Cryptic Note

Besides implicating Mr. Whitworth in the espionage ring that included Mr.
Walker's son Michael, and his older brother, Arthur, Mr. Walker must also tie up
several loose threads in the prosecution case left dangling in anticipation of
his testimony.

One is a cryptic note bearing no fingerprints that was found in Mr. Walker's
home. A portion of the note that Federal handwriting experts have testified was
in Mr. Whitworth's handwriting says, ''I got all 'S' and above plus important
'C' GENSER TFC of the 12 mo's.'' Its meaning has been left unexplained thus far,
although Assistant United States Attorney William S. Farmer, who heads the team
of four prosecutors, has called it ''a virtual confession'' by the defendant.

Another area of evidence left for Mr. Walker to explain has been testimony
regarding technical manuals with programming diagrams for Navy cryptographic
equipment. While Mr. Whitworth's access to such manuals as a radioman with a
top-secret security clearance is noted in the 13-count indictment, Mr. Whitworth
was not charged with taking such a manual.

Over strenuous objections by defense attorneys that a Government witness had no
engineering background or expertise, Federal District Judge John P. Vukasin Jr.
allowed the witness, Earl D. Clark Jr., a former National Security Agency
communications security expert, to testify that a foreign power could reproduce
a cryptographic machine from the manual's diagrams alone.

Walker's Credibility Questioned

The inference that the spy ring may have passed copies of the diagrams that
would allow the Soviet Union to build reproductions of the machines or correctly
modify machines in the Vietnam War has hung over the trial for weeks without
being proved.

Mr. Whitworth's attorneys, James Larson and Tony Tamburello, have indicated that
a major thrust of their defense will be an attack on Mr. Walker's credibility.
The defense won a ruling earlier this month that will allow them to present to
the jury evidence that Mr. Walker failed portions of a polygraph examination
administered by the Government last July.

The polygraph, or lie-detector test, indicated that Mr. Walker was ''deceptive''
in some areas of questioning, including questions dealing with names of people
who provided him with classified materials or assisted him in passing them to
the Soviet Union.

But it remains to be seen whether the ruling will aid or hurt the defense. On
April 23, prosecutors filed a motion saying that the Government did not ask Mr.
Walker questions regarding Mr. Whitworth in the July polygraph examination.

However, after Judge Vukasin's ruling, Mr. Walker was given a second test and
specifically asked about his reports to agents of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation that the defendant had furnished classified materials to him in
exchange for money.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 27, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN FLORIDA, A WAITING LIST TO WATCH EXECUTIONS

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 33, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 670 words

DATELINE: STARKE, Fla., April 26


A father hopes to relieve the pain of his son's murder by watching the slayer
executed. A writer watches an electrocution to help with his novel. A legislator
watches and wonders if the process is humane.

''It was much worse than I expected,'' said State Representative Willie Logan.
''I didn't think they would actually burn.''

Commissioner Maxie Carter Jr. of Bradford County has witnessed two executions.
''Neither one bothered me,'' he said. ''I'm 110 percent for capital punishment.
I don't know what would happen to this country without it.''

Anyone Can Watch

More than 40 people are waiting to witness executions for the state.

By law, anyone can watch, and the witnesses so far have included college
students, professors, police officers, teachers, lawyers and businessmen. Harry
Singletary, the Department of Corrections' assistant secretary for operations,
has never denied a request. He just adds names to a waiting list. He said
motives vary for asking to see someone die in Florida's electric chair.

''Those infamous murderers get more interest,'' Mr. Singletary said, citing
Theodore R. Bundy, who some law-enforcement officials say may have killed more
than 36 young women in sexual crimes. Mr. Bundy's scheduled execution last month
was blocked by the Supreme Court.

For members of victims' families, he said, it ''completes the grief cycle.''

For police officers, it may mark the end of a case.

'I Just Felt Relieved'

In 1975, Patrolman Tommy Weathington of Jacksonville witnessed James David
Raulerson shoot to death a fellow officer, Michael Stewart. Patrolman
Weathington took a front-row seat in the witness chamber at Florida State Prison
near Starke when Mr. Raulerson was executed last year.

''I just felt relieved. I waited for it three months short of 10 years,'' he
said. ''I saw him kill a police officer, a friend of mine, not two feet in front
of me.''

Patrolman Stewart's father, Jack Stewart, also sat in the front row, hoping to
relieve lingering emotional pain, Mr. Singletary said.

One request came from a writer in Orlando, said Mr. Singletary, pulling out his
file of about 100 letters.

''I'm married, I'm 48, I worked in the Federal service,'' the request read.
''This could help me in the completion of my novel.''

Lee Peters, a Vietnam veteran who has graduated from the University of Florida
law school, wanted to see if an execution differed from a combat death.

''There is a significant difference,'' he said. ''In battle, you're at a high
state of stress, trying to survive. In a penal atmosphere, it's going on before
you.''

Anthony Proto said his desire to witness an execution was practical. He works
for the Florida Parole and Probation Commission and said that in the course of
an investigation he might be called on to suggest whether a life sentence or
execution would be more appropriate for a convicted murderer.

''I wanted to see what I was recommending - I thought I might have a better
perspective,'' Mr. Proto said. ''It was surrealistic. I was haunted for several
days afterwards.''

Rituals of Punishment

David Agresti, a professor at the University of South Florida who has studied
capital punishment, witnessed the execution of John A. Spenkelink in 1979. ''It
only takes a few minutes for the ceremony,'' he said. ''It's the pageantry
society's looking for.''

The ritual walk from the death row cell to the execution chamber, the last
words, the hand motions from the executioner, the black face mask dropped in
place, were etched into the memory of Richard Jorandby, the public defender in
West Palm Beach.

''The ritual was the worst thing,'' he said, recalling the executions of two of
his clients. ''I could just see somebody standing there saying the gods are
appeased.''

''I was very depressed. I was waking up in the middle of the night,'' he said,
leafing through a journal he kept of failed legal moves before the executions
and visits with the condemned men. ''It's important I never forget the horror.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 27, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LOCAL BOARDS LIST CITY PARKS AS TOP CONCERN

BYLINE: By JOHN T. McQUISTON

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 38, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 599 words


Park maintenance has replaced police patrol as the No. 1 concern among New York
City's 59 community boards, according to a recent survey by the Mayor's office.

Of the 70 services provided by 22 city agencies, park maintenance was put at the
top of the list of priorities, followed by police patrol, trash collection and
street cleaning.

''This marks the first time that a service other than police patrol has been
picked as the most important item since community boards began ranking city
services seven years ago,'' said Henry J. Stern, Commissioner of the Department
of Parks and Recreation.

''I think it's because people are more conscious of their parks and want
urgently for them to be improved,'' he said.

Mr. Stern said he viewed the results of the poll as ''a compliment, not a
complaint about a lack of performance on the part of the Parks Department.''

''It indicates a feeling among people that money spent on parks brings visible
results in neighborhood improvement,'' he said, ''and we're happy about that.''

He said the department's budget had grown to $165 million, from $140 million
last year and $124 million in 1984.

A better measure of the department's strength, Mr. Stern said, was the increase
in staffing - to 4,919 employees, from about 3,900 employed three years ago.
However, he noted, this was still below the more than 6,000 positions 20 years
ago and the 5,500 employed just before the city's fiscal crisis in 1975.

Green-Up Day in City

The Commissioner joined Mayor Koch and about 100 volunteers from Chapter 118 of
the Vietnam Veterans Association and Boy Scouts from Queens and Brooklyn
yesterday morning at the year-old Vietnam Veterans Plaza in lower Manhattan for
Green-Up Day, an annual citywide effort to spruce up New York's parks.

Mayor Koch promised to extend the cleanup to the removal of drug pushers who,
some veterans complained, loitered in the park at 55 Water Street, selling drugs
to office workers.

''I'll see what I can do to bring in more police to reduce the drug traffic,''
Mr. Koch said. ''But you should know it's a problem we're having in parks all
over the city, just not here.''

More than 2,000 people from 200 volunteer groups were prepared to paint, plant
and prune at 200 parks and playgrounds throughout the city yesterday, but rain
showers kept some away. Mr. Stern said next Saturday would be the rain date for
those who did not attend yesterday.

The Commissioner said that 290 city parks had been improved in the last two
years under the Neighborhood Park Restoration Program, and that major repairs
were planned for 200 more parks this year.

Under the program, a team of painters, plumbers, carpenters and others
concentrate on one park for three weeks, repairing drinking fountains,
bathrooms, buildings and benches. When the team leaves, a parks maintenance
worker is assigned specifically to that park to keep it in good repair.

Keeping Ahead of Graffiti

''His first order of the day,'' Mr. Stern said, ''is the removal of any
graffiti.

''But the most important part comes next,'' he said. ''And that's where the
community volunteers come in.''

In yesterday's cleanup, about 200 Little Leaguers, age 5 to 16, ignored the rain
and stuffed trash in plastic bags at Highbridge Park in Manhattan, between West
170th and 174th Streets and Amsterdam Avenue.

It was one of more than a dozen cleanup sites that Mr. Stern visited throughout
the day.

The youngsters, wearing ''We Care About New York'' T-shirts, were from the
Francisco Alfonso, Pablo Chino Morales and Alexis Fereyra Baseball Leagues.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 27, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HERMANN GMEINER OF AUSTRIA, 66; ESTABLISHED SHELTERS FOR CHILDREN

BYLINE: By GEORGE JAMES

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 40, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 553 words


Hermann Gmeiner, an Austrian who had no children of his own but who had provided
homes for tens of thousands of homeless children around the world since World
War II, died yesterday in the Innsbruck University Hospital after a cancer
operation April 8. He was 66 years old.

Touched by the suffering of children he had seen as a German soldier and their
deprivation after World War II, Mr. Gmeiner founded the first S.O.S.-Children's
Village in 1949 in Imst, a Tyrolean village. Since then, the movement, which
emphasizes a family-style atmosphere, has spread to five continents.

Today, 30,000 orphaned and abandoned children live in more than 225 villages in
85 countries in Western and Eastern Europe, Latin America, Africa, Asia and
North America, according to the organization, from which he retired last year.

''Where is mankind going if it is no longer mindful of the child?'' he said in
1969 while opening a village in Saigon, Vietnam. ''What use are political
successes and technological marvels if we are no longer able to prevent
thousands of children from starving to death day after day?''

Nominated for Nobel Prize

The short, stocky bachelor, who started his first village with $42 in his pocket
and the donations of ordinary fellow Austrians, was twice nominated for the
Nobel Peace Prize for idealistic efforts grounded in sound financial and
organizational planning. Private donations, which amounted to $100 million last
year, pay for the villages.

Albert Schweitzer, the Swiss humanitarian and himself a Nobel laureate, once
recommended him for the prize.

He was born June 23, 1919, the seventh of eight children of a poor farming
couple in Alberschwende, a village in Vorarlberg Province, Austria. His mother
died when he was 4 years old, and at the age of 12 he was attending secondary
school on his own, with little aid from his father. A devout Roman Catholic, he
earned money for school by serving mass as an altar boy and by tutoring.

In 1939, he was drafted in the German Army, rose to an officer's rank, and spent
six years on the Russian front, where he was wounded five times.

Saved by Russian Child

Once, a 7-year-old Russian farm boy, who at first was terrified of him, saved
his life by yanking on the arm of a Russian soldier who was about to shoot him.
The experience, he said, in an interview in The New Yorker magazine in 1962,
made him vow to repay the boy by helping the world's children. After the war,
the sight of homeless children made him abandon his medical studies at the
University of Innsbruck to pursue his idea for a children's village, which many
said was impractical.

Today, a typical village consists of an average of 20 houses, with eight
children of different ages in each, organized as families cared for by a
''mother,'' who gets the position after two years of training. The village
manager represents a father figure. Brothers and sisters are kept together.

Asked why he pursued his idea so steadfastly, he replied: ''Someone has to do
it. I just happened to be that person.''

Mr. Gmeiner will be succeeded as head of the organization by Helmut Kutin, 45,
who was one of the first children to be taken into the first village.

After a funeral service next Saturday, Mr. Gmeiner will be buried behind the
chapel of the first village.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 27, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK AREA SCHOOLS FIND LIBYA A HOT TOPIC

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 48, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 763 words


On the night that United States planes bombed Libya, boarding students at the
private Wooster School in Danbury, Conn., rushed to the apartments of their
dormitory masters to ask what the action meant.

In Montclair, N.J., social studies teachers hastily rewrote lesson plans to
satisfy their students' demands for information about the strike. And at
Canarsie High School in Brooklyn, teachers noticed that some students with
spotty attendance records showed up several days running for classroom
discussions of the bombing.

Across the New York metropolitan area, social studies and history teachers have
rushed to take advantage of a current event - the American attack on Libya,
announced the night of April 14 by President Reagan - that they say has deeply
engaged their students.

Richard Davis, chairman of the history department at the Taft School, a
preparatory school in Watertown, Conn., said the bombing raid was ''among the
most discussed subjects at the school since the Vietnam War.''

Morality and Ethics Debated

Although most students felt the strike was justified, he said, it started
debates about morality and ethics that spilled over from American history
lessons into philosophy and religion classes.

At Midwood High School in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn, the degree of
interest among students was clear last week as 30 juniors in Roy Lobel's
American history class wrestled with questions about the air strike.

Would the Libyans retaliate with new terrorist acts, Antonietta Wilson wondered.
David French asked whether the attack would make Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the
Libyan leader, a hero in the Middle East. Steven Rosenfeld wanted to know why
America's allies had not supported the action.

Class discussions are often animated, Mr. Lobel said afterward, but ''usually
they are not as opinionated as they were today; this really touches them.''

'It's Not the 60's'

At Canarsie High School, Carl Fryberg, chairman of the social studies
department, said, ''A lot of kids who are regularly truant came in to talk about
this. We'll use anything that grabs a student's interest.''

Most students were ''very strongly behind the President,'' he said, adding,
''It's not the 60's anymore.''

Donald Schwartz, an English teacher at the Wooster School, said his students
were less sure of what to make of the attack. ''At first, the students wanted me
to tell them what to think,'' he recalled.

He said he told them to decide that for themselves. ''Like all teachers, I felt
I had to try to get the students to open their minds, because the only hope of a
school is to expand somebody's thinking, not to confirm it.''

Social studies teachers said they had to scurry to find materials on Libya. But
they noted that they were better prepared than they had been for other events -
such as the American invasion of Grenada - that they have had to present on
short notice.

Middle Eastern studies are in the curriculum at most high schools, they said,
and many teachers had saved newspaper and magazine clippings on the Navy
maneuvers in the Gulf of Sidra that ended with air strikes against Libyan
missile bases last month.

Edward Reynolds, director of social studies at Teaneck (N.J.) High School, said,
''Any good social studies teacher is aware of what is going on in the Mideast
and that if they are going to teach about something that's going on there, it
may have to be done pretty quickly.''

Looking for Lessons

Mark Willner, chairman of the social studies department at Midwood, said that,
by a fortunate coincidence, all 20 teachers in his department had received extra
materials about terrorism from a seminar the Foreign Policy Association gave at
the school in January. The association, based in New York, is a nonpartisan
study organization that encourages public debate about international relations.

In class last week, Mr. Lobel tried to get students to see parallels between the
Libyan action and the origins of World War II. ''The question is, when is a
nation justified in using force and violence?'' he said.

But World War II drifted rapidly into the background as students vied with one
another to talk about the lessons of last week's military action.

Among other morals to be drawn, said Christian Burns, it reminded Colonel
Qaddafi that ''we can blow the country right off the map.''

Mary Egan found the situation more complex. Now, ''they know the U.S. won't just
sit back'' if there are new terrorist incidents, she said. But, she added,
''blowing up a country is not what the U.S. stands for.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Roy Lobel teaching class (NYT/John Sotomayor)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 27, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TWO MUSICALS TURN BACK THE CLOCK TO THE EARLY 60's

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1613 words


''Beehive,'' a delightfully lighthearted show celebrating pop women of the
1960's, begins as a teen-age girl inserts a coin into a giant jukebox. When the
machine lights up, it frames the stage on which the cast of six
singer-actresses, sporting lumpy oversized ''beehive'' hairdos, introduce
themselves to ''The Name Game,'' the mnemonic jump-rope ditty popularized in
1964 by Shirley Ellis. The word ''beehive,'' they sassily announce, means many
things, from ''a skin irritation caused by an excessive use of Aquanet'' to ''a
group of incredibly overworked hair stylists.''

Wanda (Adriane Lenox), the show's narrator who activated this pop music time
machine, steps forward and remembers when ''everybody dug the Twist, and Sandra
Dee got engaged to Bobby Darin, and I was a 13-year-old girl who wanted to run
away from home to become a 'Shindig' dancer.'' The girls squabble amiably about
which singing group they want to be, then end up performing songs by the
Chiffons, the Angels and the Shangri-Las. ''Beehive's'' comic high point comes
as cast members burlesquing Brenda Lee, Annette Funicello and Connie Francis
cheer up a lovelorn Lesley Gore with oldies oozing sympathy and advice. Alison
Fraser, as Miss Lee, histrionically hiccups through ''I'm Sorry'' and ''Rockin'
Around the Christmas Tree,'' then disappears for a moment to return as Connie
Francis simpering ''Where the Boys Are.''

In ''Beehive's'' second act, the mood shifts from silly to stirring, as the cast
offers powerful recapitulations of soul and and rock standards by Tina Turner,
Aretha Franklin and Janis Joplin. Pattie Darcy and Gina Taylor offer a
show-stopping duet medley of ''A Natural Woman'' and ''Do Right Woman,'' while
the cabaret singer Laura Theodore, wearing hippie garb and long straight hair
that she whips about abandonedly, does an uncanny impersonation of Janis Joplin,
growling ''Piece of My Heart'' and ''Ball and Chain.''

While ''Beehive'' is doing excellent business at the Top of the Village Gate, a
few blocks away at the Bottom Line, the clock has also swung back to the early
60's in the book musical, ''Just Once.'' The show weaves 23 songs, written by
Barry Mann (music) and Cynthia Weil (lyrics), into a ''Romeo and Juliet''-styled
tale of star-crossed lovers, who meet and fall in love at Brooklyn's Thomas
Jefferson High School. But because of class differences - the boy is the poor
immigrant son of the housekeeper in the girl's home - it takes them 20 years to
finally get together.

The songs, arranged and performed as idealized re-creations of the original hit
records, go as far back as ''Who Put the Bomp?'' a 1961 doowop hit for Mr. Mann,
who wrote it with Gerry Goffin. ''Never Gonna Let You Go,'' which captions the
lovers' final clinch, is a Mann-Weil collaboration that became a top-five hit
just three years ago for Sergio Mendes.

While ''Beehive'' is a revue that sticks to the 1960's and ''Just Once'' a book
musical with a plot that spans two decades, the shows' similarities are far more
striking than their differences. Both give short shrift to the social and
political upheavals of the 60's. For the narrator of ''Beehive,'' the Vietnam
War, political assassinations and racial unrest are a sobering but distant
procession of events remembered in a monologue inserted into a reprise of the
Sonny and Cher hit, ''The Beat Goes On.'' And although ''Just Once'' uses news
bulletins to signal the passage of time, none of the news has a direct impact on
the characters' lives.

Both shows also recognize a cultural fact that Broadway producers tend even now
to ignore: that pop-rock records have been the common denominator of American
music for more than 25 years. Their producers are gambling on the existence of a
huge, untapped market of baby boomers hungry for the theatrical presentation of
pop-rock nostalgia.

''I''m 43, and my generation is still much more involved with pop music than our
parents were with their music,'' Allan Pepper, a co-owner of the Bottom Line,
which is producing ''Just Once,'' observed recently. ''The people who grew up in
the big band era went out dancing when they were young, but once they assumed
grownup responsibilities they put that music behind them as a part of their
childhood. Because pop music was so much more important to my generation, we
didn't put it aside. We still buy records and still go to concerts.''

''Just Once'' is the Bottom Line's second attempt to create a hit show organized
around old records instead of original show tunes. ''Leader of the Pack,'' the
revue of Ellie Greenwich songs that flopped on Broadway, originated at the
Bottom Line, where it was a roaring success. By the time it reached Broadway,
however, Mr. Pepper and his partner, Stanley Snadowsky, had dissociated
themselves from the show because of artistic differences.

''The music wasn't kept pure, the band was taken off the stage, and there was a
lot of extraneous choreography,'' Mr. Pepper commented. ''Yet even while that
fiasco was taking place, Melanie Mintz, who had written the book for 'Leader,'
approached me with the idea of a love story using the music that, in effect,
orchestrated our lives. Her idea was to take music that was popular in its own
way and adapt it to an original book as though it had been written for that
book. The lead characters wouldn't sing. Instead, the songs would act as a Greek
chorus, extending the dialogue and commenting on the action.''

Miss Mintz investigated a number of pop song catalogues, including those of Neil
Sedaka, Carole King and Gerry Goffin, and Burt Bacharach and Hal David, before
settling on Barry Mann and Cynthia Weil. Mr. Mann and Miss Weil, who met and
were married in 1961, have been collaborating during the entire 25-year span of
their relationship. Their standards include ''You've Lost That Lovin' Feeling,''
the collaboration with the producer, Phil Spector, that became the cornerstone
of what has been called ''blue-eyed'' soul; ''On Broadway,'' the pop-jazz hit
written with Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller, and ''Just Once,'' the pop-soul
ballad that made a star of James Ingram, after he recorded it on Quincy Jones's
1981 album, ''The Dude.''

The score of ''Just Once'' also includes songs the couple wrote with other
collaborators, like ''Sometimes When We Touch'' (Mr. Mann and Dan Hill), and the
Pointer Sisters' hit, ''He's So Shy'' (Miss Weil with Tom Snow). The couple
cooperated with the producers by making their entire catalogue available, and
Mr. Mann assisted in the casting of the show, which features seven top-flight
studio and backup singers.

''Beehive,'' which was first produced last fall at the Upper West Side cabaret,
Sweetwater's, is the brainchild of the writer and director Larry Gallagher, a
35-year-old transplanted Texan. Last year, Mr. Gallagher, who used to book the
acts at Sweetwater's, put together a jubilant revue of Motown hits, ''Ain't No
Mountain High Enough,'' which ran at the club for five weeks until Motown
threatened to sue. When the revue folded, the club invited him to put together a
second show, and he came up with the concept of ''Beehive.''

''The show started out a bit more serious, because it dealt with the formation
of the women's movement, but that came across as pretentious, so we made it more
general - about women coming of age in the 60's,'' Mr. Gallagher explained. ''It
was difficult to cast because most theatrical agents don't have a feeling for
rock and roll. I ended up auditioning 150 to 200 singers. Getting the rights
from 21 publishers was also a big headache.''

When ''Beehive'' opened last fall at Sweetwater's, it was exciting but flawed.
Without a mention of Motown, it seemed incomplete. But in the new version, a
medley of three Supremes songs has been inserted with Motown's approval. Another
problem was the central monologue in which the narrator sandwiched a
recapitulation of current events between choruses of the Leiber and Stoller
cabaret song, ''Is That All There Is?''

''After Jerry Leiber came to see the show, he mentioned to me that he didn't
think it was right,'' Mr. Gallagher said. ''The song was written about a
middle-aged woman looking back on her life, while I had it sung by a teen-age
girl looking forward to hers. Jerry suggested 'The Beat Goes On,' which was
perfect because it has key lyrics about men marching off to war and history
turning a page.''

Though it has been reviewed, ''Just Once'' is still ''a work in progress,''
according to Mr. Pepper. ''The scope of the show is much larger than I had
anticipated,'' he said. ''Just amassing the wigs and costumes to show 20 years
of changing styles is a massive job. The last third of the book is being
rewritten, and a couple of the songs will probably be dropped.''

Although Broadway producers have expressed an interest in ''Beehive,'' its
producers, the theatrical publicists Betty Lee Hunt and Maria Cristina Pucci,
have decided not to take the gamble. The team, who were the original press
agents for the ultimate 50's nostalgia musical, ''Grease,'' plan to license the
show, which was capitalized at $175,000, to companies in various cities across
the country. A touring version is already in the works.

The future of ''Just Once,'' which represents a $150,000 investment, is unclear.
''It's possible that after its 6-to-10-week engagement at our club, it will have
run its course,'' Mr. Pepper said. ''But I think we're breaking new ground. I
see the Bottom Line as a space where new projects of this nature can be
developed, and I believe in my heart and soul that a show like this, which deals
with the music in its pure form, could be successful uptown.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 27, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

POLISHING THE TEEN-AGE MOVIE IMAGE

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE VAN GELDER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 18, Column 3; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1210 words


''Teen-agers have no advocate,'' maintains David Seltzer. ''I think any other
minority so maligned by Hollywood would have pickets around the theater saying:
'We are not just idiots.' ''

The 46-year-old Mr. Seltzer was explaining how he came to write and direct
''Lucas,'' a romantic comedy about an intelligent, 14-year-old boy that has
gathered unusually fine reviews and a growing audience.

''I'm a single parent of four teen-agers,'' Mr. Seltzer said, discussing
standard teen-age depictions. ''I really felt the potential damage these films
do by portraying teen-agers as idiots and sex objects and drug freaks had to be
counteracted by somebody who'd treat teen-agers with some dignity and deal with
a story line that had a legitimate human base.''

So, he said, he resurrected some notes for a story he had first jotted down
about 15 years ago. ''It had the name 'Lucas' and was the story of a misfit - a
very original, individualistic kid.''

In the movie, Lucas, a slight, bespectacled, accelerated high school student
with a predilection for insects, a deep reservoir of scientific knowledge and a
taste for classical music, mistakes the friendship of a 16-year-old girl for
love; and when the girl - a newcomer to the suburban Illinois community - is
attracted to a football player closer to her own age, Lucas is heartbroken.

Mr. Seltzer, himself a product of a the surburban Illinois community of Highland
Park, had never directed a feature film prior to ''Lucas.''

But he had written, directed and produced documentaries for David L. Wolper,
including films for National Geographic and for Jacques Cousteau. He had made a
documentary about Robert F. Kennedy and another about the half-American orphans
in Vietnam, two of whom he had adopted. He had written ''The Hellstrom
Chronicle,'' a 1971 documentary about insects that won an Oscar and the grand
prize at Cannes. And he had made the transition into fiction films, he said, by
doing some rewrite work on the 1971 movie ''Willy Wonka and the Chocolate
Factory.''

Mr. Seltzer followed that by writing such films as ''The Other Side of the
Mountain,'' ''The Omen,'' several well-received television movies and two films
about children - ''Six Weeks'' (1982) and ''Table for Five'' (1983) - that were
largely savaged by the critics.

''This is such an unforgiving business,'' Mr. Seltzer said. In a period of
re-evaluation of his life, he went to school and became an emergency medical
technician, working in hospital emergency rooms; and he fantasized about
becoming a doctor.

But eventually he returned to writing. The first studio executive Mr. Seltzer
approached after writing ''Lucas'' told him the film should never be made. ''He
really objected to anyone investing their money in it,'' Mr. Seltzer said,
''because what I didn't understand is that teen-agers are cynical and would
never accept this story of good will.

''And the next person I brought it to embraced it. He was himself the father of
teen-agers but wouldn't hear of me directing it. He definitely would have made
it with anybody, including some 22-year-old who came out of U.S.C. with no
experience whatsoever. But I had been typecast in Hollywood as a writer, and
people felt if God had ordained me a director, He would have ordained me a lot
earlier.''

But 20th Century-Fox was receptive not only to the script but to Mr. Seltzer as
director. The film, with a budget Mr. Seltzer puts at less than $7 million, was
shot in the Chicago area during 44 days beginning last April.

No stranger to movie sets, Mr. Seltzer says he found directing exciting. ''I
would say it's not as hard as writing, because when you're a writer, you walk
right into the pit all by yourself, but when you're a director, there are at
least 80 people who scream 'Don't do that!' when you make a mistake.''
Discussing the failure of some his previous films, he said, ''I think the
success of any movie is dependent upon it being a singular vision. If the writer
and the director or even the director and all the actors approach it with a
different tone, you wind up with something very undefined and blurry, and I
think the best way to make films - if, in fact, the writer can direct and
communicate well with actors - is for the writer to do that.''

With specific reference to the shortcomings of ''Six Weeks,'' about a dying
girl, and ''Table for Five,'' a somewhat autobiographical film about a divorced,
single father, Mr. Seltzer pinpoints ''being unable to resist the temptation to
indulge in the sentiment of the story.''

''There is an inalienable law,'' he said. ''Whenever a character on screen
pities himself, the audience stops pitying him. They will cry so long as the
character doesn't.''

So, he added, ''In 'Lucas' I exercised restraint. I permitted one tear at a
point so late in the movie we knew we were in the finale and it was really all
right.''

Mr. Seltzer says parenthood and film making are related: ''Parenthood is
essential for any director because you have to assume a role of authority. You
have to be firm and benevolent. You have to be able to be angry without having
an actor feel you've stopped loving him. These are all parental skills. I don't
mean just children actors. I mean grown-up actors, too.''

With the success of ''Lucas,'' Mr. Seltzer said, ''The old stuff of Hollywood is
happening. I'm getting a lot of recognition within the industry. There are at
least a dozen scripts -all with big movie stars attached to them - that have
been offered to me, waiting to be read.''

Mr. Seltzer's current success represents the culmination of an ambition to
become a director that began when he was an undergraduate at Northwestern
University. After spending his high school years thinking he might become a
doctor or a scientist, Mr. Seltzer decided to become an actor.

''Like everyone else in show business,'' he said, ''I didn't feel loved enough,
so I would need applause to survive.''

But when he began studying acting, he said, ''I didn't like being told what to
do all the time.'' During the same period, he was being exposed to such films of
the New Wave as ''Hiroshima, Mon Amour'' and ''The 400 Blows.'' ''I got excited
about the overall aspect of creating something,'' he said. He switched to film
studies, graduated in 1968, took a job with the Goodson-Todman television game
show empire in New York, and after a few years - hearing that David Wolper was
doing a series of films about animals - Mr. Seltzer called and offered his
services. As he recalls it, he said something about being curator at Chicago's
Lincoln Park Zoo, and he was hired.

Mr. Seltzer's representation of his scientific credentials was, of course,
something of an exaggeration.

To be sure, he had been born in Chicago and grown up in the vicinity. During his
boyhood, he said, there was this girl - ''somebody I adored who delivered a
crushing blow by turning her back on me and informing me her friendship wasn't
all that I interpreted it to be.''

Those were the years when David Seltzer carried a butterfly net and walked along
the railroad tracks looking for insects. Those were the years when, Mr. Seltzer
said, ''I was ridiculed by the jocks.'' Thing are different now. But then, he
said, ''I was Lucas.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of David Seltzer with Cory Haim

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 27, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE 'IRRITANT' THEY CALL PEROT

BYLINE: By N. R. KLEINFIELD

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 3154 words

DATELINE: DALLAS


H. ROSS PEROT, the quixotic founder of the computer-services company Electronic
Data Systems, champion of prisoners of war, crusader against drug abuse,
advocate of educational reform, super-patriot, second-richest man in America, is
having a frisky time with his new hobby.

On weekends, he pulls on khaki pants, buttons up a smudged shirt and settles his
baseball cap on his head. Then he drives out to a General Motors dealership and
pokes around. For about 15 minutes, he usually is treated in the blase way
reserved for someone who looks like he can't afford a car radio, let alone a
car. Then, inevitably, a senior hand will recognize him as a G.M. board member
and its most powerful single shareholder, and, in Mr. Perot's words, ''it's a
full court press.''

What he would like, he says, ''is for every customer to get the sort of
attention I get after the first 15 minutes.''

Since Ross Perot sold his company to G.M. in October 1984, the pint-sized,
56-year-old Texas billionaire has emerged as probably the auto maker's most
unorthodox director.

''He's livened the board meetings up quite a bit,'' chuckles Charles Townes, a
physics professor and fellow G.M. director.

Last February, when the Winston Churchill Foundation bestowed its leadership
award on him (Prince Charles jetted to Dallas to present it), Mr. Perot searched
for an apt summation of just what he was. He told the dinner audience that he
once dreamed of being a pretty pearl, but with his jug ears and crooked nose
that seemed unlikely. Then he realized that his lot was to be the grain of sand
that irritates the oyster enough to make the pretty pearl.

''That's what I am,'' he says. ''An irritant around here. I stir things up.''

The latest oyster he is rubbing against is the world's largest auto maker.
Fellow directors say that Mr. Perot can be a talking idea box at G.M. board
meetings, and it's been reported that he alone of G.M. directors objected to
some aspects of the recent Hughes Aircraft acquisition.

As sharp-tongued as he sometimes is, though, Mr. Perot is fussy about what he'll
discuss openly. Though he says G.M. cars are not as good as they ought to be and
dealer service is not attentive enough, he says he is pleased with G.M.'s
management. Any specific ideas, he saves for the ears of the brass. He admits,
though, that ''I'll always be a proponent for push, push, push, harder, harder,
harder. That's my nature.''

He doesn't mind offending tradition. One perk of G.M. directorships is you get a
new car every three months or 3,000 miles. Mr. Perot took the cars a few times,
but then he heard that the machines were getting special inspections. He wanted
to sample ordinary cars, so now he buys one off a dealer floor. (G.M. insists
the cars don't get microscopic reviews, though they might be driven around the
block a few extra laps.) This exercise has meant personal sacrifice, since Mr.
Perot liked to wring a good 10 years out of a car. The day in 1984 that he met
Roger Smith, G.M.'s chairman, Mr. Perot was behind the wheel of a 1979 Chevy.
Now he has upgraded to a 1985 Oldsmobile. He bought it at a Dallas dealership
and bargained the price down.

''E

VERY good and excellent thing stands moment by moment on the razor's edge of
danger and must be fought for.''

You read that quote on the right-hand wall just before you enter Ross Perot's
office (Mr. Perot doesn't know where the quote comes from). The office, on the
seventh floor of the stark E.D.S. building, north of downtown Dallas, could be
mistaken for a museum of American patriotism. Frederic Remington bronzes,
including the first and last ones he did. A portrait of George Washington. The
eagles. Eagles are all over E.D.S.; one of Mr. Perot's pet sayings is: ''Eagles
don't flock. You have to find them one at a time.''

It is a warm and breezy Dallas morning, and Ross Perot sits in a rocking chair
in his office, nursing a cup of coffee. He has just finished taking calls from
reporters wishing his views on the Libya air strike. ''We don't ever like to put
our fighting men at risk,'' he says. ''But I think that we're finally back to
when we have to do these things, we're doing them the right way.'' He adds: ''My
strongest feelings are about the French. We saved their nation twice in this
century. I would like for every French leader to go to the cemeteries at
Normandy, where the American fighting men who fought for France are buried, and
examine their consciences. . . . If we ever start to consider spilling a drop of
American blood for the French, I'll use every resource to see that we don't.''

Ross Perot says he is a businessman and that if he has a role in life it's to
create jobs. But he gets distracted. He recently spent a year and a half
battling for education reform that is now being implemented in Texas. Before
that, he spearheaded a war on drugs that has brought about harsh drug laws in
the state.

For the last year, he has been back plugging away full-time at E.D.S. The
company is now the second-largest in the $30 billion services-and-software
market, tackling tasks like processing health care claims, shuffling tickets
between airlines and clearing bank checks. These days, Mr. Perot describes
himself as a ''father figure'' at E.D.S. Morton Meyerson, E.D.S.'s president,
runs the company, and, as Mr. Perot phrases it, ''Mort doesn't need me to send
signals from the bench.'' Still, Mr. Perot busies himself. He huddles frequently
with younger E.D.S. people, tries to figure out how cars work, weighs what to do
with his personal fortune of $2 billion and listens to entreaties to rescue
someone or to run for some office.

''I refuse to program myself,'' he says. ''Most business people at my level, if
you look at their schedules, they're just like a dentist's. Like a dentist's.
Mine's not.''

He talks to anyone who seeks him out, though he says ''talking about myself is
sort of a waste of time. I've only lived one life. It's been overdocumented.
Half of it is truth. Half of it is myth. I would think readers are probably sick
of it. I'm sick of it.''

BASIC facts about Henry Ross

Perot would include that he was born on June 27, 1930, in Texarkana, in east
Texas, the son of a cotton broker and horse trader. As a child, he broke horses
(and his nose), sold saddles, cut grass, strung barbed-wire fences, sold cards,
delivered The Texarkana Gazette by horseback. He entered the United States Naval
Academy in 1949. While a midshipman, he had a blind date with Margot Birmingham
and liked her enough to marry her in 1956.

One day while aboard an aircraft carrier, he shook hands with a visiting
executive from the International Business Machines Corporation, which Mr. Perot
thought made only typewriters. The executive liked him and said to look him up
some day. Mr. Perot did, and became an I.B.M. salesman in Dallas. He developed
into such a supersalesman that in his fifth year he sold his annual quota in 19
days, leaving himself with a lengthy vacation break.

He quit, and on June 27, 1962, wrote a check for $1,000 as the seed money to
found E.D.S. His brainstorm was that companies knew they needed computers but
didn't know what to do with them; E.D.S. would design, install and operate them.
At first, when Dallas people saw the building with E.D.S. etched on it, they
thought it was a restaurant called ''Ed's.''

The company grew on the strength of state contracts to administer Medicare and
Medicaid programs, a specialty that eventually prompted Rampart's, a leftist
magazine, to scorn Mr. Perot as ''America's first welfare billionaire.'' When
E.D.S. shares were offered to the public in 1968, Ross Perot found himself worth
about $300 million.

He also began to find himself drifting into all sorts of odd situations:

* In 1969, he tried to deliver 26 tons of Christmas packages to American
prisoners of war in North Vietnam, but Hanoi sent him away.

* On April 22, 1970, Mr. Perot lost, on paper, about $450 million, when E.D.S.
stock, caving in to a weak market, plunged from $150 to $85. Mr. Perot's beating
was the most money anyone ever surrendered in a single day, though he regarded
it as some sort of abstract comedy, pointing out that the money was never
readily realizable anyway. ''That was Mickey Mouse,'' he says.

* In 1974, two Wall Street firms that he took over finally failed, costing Mr.
Perot $60 million out of his own pocket. ''I was suckered,'' he said.

* In 1979, he dispatched a former Vietnam commando and a band of E.D.S.
executives to rescue two employees imprisoned in Teheran. The successful
escapade was recounted by Ken Follett in the 1983 best seller, ''On Wings of
Eagles.'' Next month, NBC will air a five-hour mini-series about the mission.
E.D.S. people now like to ask Mr. Perot whether, if they were trapped, he would
save them. ''Nah, I doubt it,'' he jokes, ''The hell with you.''

* In 1984, he bought a copy of the Magna Charta for $1.5 million and gave it to
the National Archives.

According to Forbes magazine's latest tally of American wealth, Mr. Perot ranks
behind only Sam Walton, founder of Wal-Mart stores, among America's deepest
pockets, though Mr. Perot just shrugs off the immense fortune. ''It's kind of
like Halley's Comet,'' he says. ''It just comes around every so often and hits
somebody. It happened to have hit me.''

In 1984, Forbes had him eighth and nobody said much. When he rose to second, the
Governor of Texas groused that he was an embarrassment to the state, why can't
he get to the top. He has heard a blizzard of Avis jokes. His second-oldest
daughter, at least, is merrier, since when he was eighth, she scolded him that
eighth was nowhere, that she couldn't show her face in school anymore. MR.
PEROT'S new hobby had its origins when Roger Smith called about buying his
company. Mr. Perot agreed to see him because he figured he would wangle some
G.M. business. Then, ''we realized when we got there that there would probably
be nothing that would be more fun than to do what we could to make G.M. the best
auto maker in the world.''

So G.M. bought E.D.S. for $2.5 billion. Mr. Perot got 11.3 million shares of a
new G.M. Class E stock tied strictly to E.D.S.'s performance, and he got $1
billion in cash. The agreement made it clear that E.D.S. was to function largely
free of G.M. shackles. Mr. Perot visits Detroit for board meetings, talks
periodically to Roger Smith on the phone, but otherwise does as he's always
done.

What E.D.S. is trying to do for G.M. is save it money by overhauling its
fragmented computer systems. Before, there were 100 data communications networks
and over 100 data centers. E.D.S. is struggling to reduce that to 18 data
centers and one digital network. ''My belief,'' Mr. Meyerson said, ''is that at
the end of five years they will save money in real terms and their computing
power will be substantially improved.''

What's good for G.M. is very good for E.D.S. The car maker has tripled E.D.S.'s
business, showering it with 70 percent of its revenues and 60 percent of its
earnings. Last year, all told, E.D.S. earned $190 million on sales of $3.4
billion. Around 15,000 people had to be hired last year to tackle the new work,
raising employment to 43,000.

The transformation at G.M., both Mr. Perot and Mr. Smith acknowledge, has gone
slower than expected. E.D.S. has also found its margins at least temporarily
pinched by some low-profit G.M. work. And the absorption of some 10,000 G.M.
data-processing employees triggered early clashes. Quite a few G.M. people
worried about the strait-laced dress code at E.D.S. and the supposed
militaristic atmosphere (Mr. Perot calls that ''Myth No. 508''). Others told Mr.
Perot that they felt more secure at G.M. His answer: ''Get up in the morning and
look in the mirror. You're your own job security. This is a business, not a
social service.''

At G.M., unlike the stereotypical corporate soldier, Mr. Perot can be testy. He
sneers at its cumbersome bureaucracy. He teases executives who whimper about the
competition (He talks a lot about how Toyota ''outperforms us in every way'' and
says things like, ''I am thrilled to see what Ford is doing''). G.M. employees,
he said, ''come from an industry that complains about the playing field not
being level; in my view, the playing field is never level.''

Roger Smith has made clear his intention to shake up the sleepy G.M.
bureaucracy, and so he says he welcomes Mr. Perot's views: ''He always has
comments on car quality and styling and everything else.'' He adds that Mr.
Perot has been learning plenty about cars, though ''I wouldn't yet put him on
the assembly line and hand him a welder's torch.''

As is their wont, G.M. people wander into E.D.S. a fair amount, checking up on
finances or on marketing or whatever. Mr. Perot handles them.

''Some well-meaning guy from General Motors will show up and want us to do
something, and if it's a good idea we'll do it,'' he said. ''If a guy comes down
and just wants us to fill out forms, then we don't do it. . . .''They're all
good people, but their little view of the world is of cluttering away in some
little corner and their first impulse is to make us look like them.. . . . We
give them a hot meal, pat them on the back and say, no, we're not going to do
this and that's it.''

Mr. Perot glanced out the window. ''There may be one guy circling the block
right now, who knows.'' JUST about every day, it seems, the pile of gold that
Ross Perot sits on pushes him further skyward. Until the big call from Detroit
to Dallas, the Perot personal fortune consisted of about $400 million of
investments and 46 percent of E.D.S.'s stock. Now it has swelled to some $1.6
billion worth of investments and 11.3 million shares of G.M. E stock.

Mr. Perot doesn't spend much time tending what he refers to as ''that big
bubble.'' Merv Stauffer, a long-time associate, manages the bubble, and Mr.
Perot's 27-year-old son, Ross Jr., is entrusted with making the business
decisions. His eldest daughter, Nancy, 25, recently signed on to learn
investment analysis; since G.M., the people employed in studying opportunities
have risen to 22 from 8.

The money has been sprinkled among gas and oil exploration, real estate,
fixed-income securities and some venture capital projects. ''Since G.M., we've
done bigger deals,'' said Ross Jr. ''Instead of taking 100 acres of land, we'll
go out and do 200 acres.'' The plunge in oil prices has put ''amazing'' real
estate bargains up for grabs and he's buying them.

All kinds come knocking. Someone wanted money to build a bullet train between
Houston and Dallas. Somebody else was interested in making cars that could fly.
Another person insisted he had a engine that ran on water. Well, no, they were
told.

Ross Jr. got an early indoctrination. When he was 16, his father struck a deal
with him to plant bushes around the perimeter of E.D.S. He would get 70 cents
per hole and 45 cents per bush. He agreed. He hit rock. ''He spent all summer
digging that rock,'' his father said. ''He'll never bid a job again without
checking things out.'' ROSS PEROT gives away lots of money. He feels he has to.

''That's about all you can do with it,'' he said.

He intends for his five children to inherit no more than modest sums (besides
Nancy and Ross Jr., he has a daughter about to graduate from college and two
teen-age daughters), for he believes that ''you can curse a child by dumping
money on him.'' Queried about this philosophy, Ross Jr. said, ''It's his money.
It's up to him what he wants to do with it. He's given us a great childhood.''

Since March 1969, Mr. Perot has given away more than $100 million. His sister,
Bette Perot, who he persuaded to quit her job as a school vice principal,
directs the dispersal.

The Boy Scouts have gotten $1 million. A large plot of land went to the Girl
Scouts. A $100,000 annual gift goes to the Salvation Army of Dallas. The Dallas
Symphony Orchestra got $10 million for a new symphony hall.

Curiously, though, Ross Perot's money keeps accumulating faster than he hands it
out. Why, then, not give away more, or just give it all away in one swoop?

''Because you can't give it all away,'' Mr. Perot said. ''Giving money to
charitable causes, you're always stopped by, 'Can the charitable organization
manage the money?' . . . Again and again and again, we have people come in here
whose intentions are noble, their purpose is pure, but they don't have any idea
of how to execute their idea. . . . So there's no point in funding that.'' THE
life style of Ross Perot is simple, if anyone's life with $2 billion can be
called simple. He has a comfortable house, bought in 1969, with no servants.
There is no Rome villa or personal island. He buys suits off the rack. ''People
wrote I shop at K Mart,'' he said. ''I'm in and out of K Mart. I'm in and out of
Sears. I'm in and out of Penney's. I'm in and out of Neiman-Marcus. Someone
wrote that at the Churchill dinner my tuxedo didn't look as good as Prince
Charles's. I bought it off the rack, but I had it pressed. I thought it looked
all right.''

He eats in the company cafeteria or drives over to local cafes like the Dixie
House. He flies on commercial flights. He walks wherever he feels like walking.

Like anyone of fabulous wealth, he has been the subject of relentless media
attention. There have been innumerable inaccuracies, persistent myths impossible
to rebut. (Thus if a reporter chooses not to tape-record an interview, Mr. Perot
will do so and hand over the tapes.) Yet, unlike many others who retreated into
shadows, he keeps his door open.

''Historically in our country, the individual who makes the money has to be a
cartoon character,'' he said. ''We're stuck with that . . . . You go back to
Andrew Carnegie, he finally got so upset he quit and went to Scotland . . . .
John D. Rockefeller finally even quit doing business. Howard Hughes became a
recluse. John Paul Getty went to England.''

Back in the 1970's, he says, Mr. Getty asked him to visit him in London. When he
arrived, all Mr. Getty wanted to know was how it was that Mr. Perot lived a
normal life.

Mr. Perot told him, ''I'm not going to do anything but live a normal life.''

Mr. Getty said, ''Well, I'd give anything to see my museum.'' Mr. Perot said,
''Go see it.'' ''I can't. Someone'll harm me.''

''I don't mean to be disrespectful, Mr. Getty,'' Mr. Perot said, ''but not many
people will recognize you.'' ''Oh, I don't know,'' Mr. Getty said.  ''I felt
sorry for him,'' Mr. Perot recalled, ''but I learned if you are the person who
gets hit with the golden horseshoe in this country, this all comes with it.
There's nothing you can do about it except just keep enjoying life and don't let
it turn you into a person who is bitter.''

Then he said, ''I had a friend who died at 94 - dancing with a beautiful woman.
That's the way I want to go. And I hope it's my wife.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Financial data on General Motors and EDS; Photos of H. Ross Perot in
1962, 1969, 1976, 1984, and 1979; Photo of the chairman in his office at
Electronic Data Systems in Dallas (NYT/Bill Janscha)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 27, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WRITER-IN-RESIDENCE: Norman R. Augustine;
TEACHING MARIETTA THE LAW OF DIVERSITY

BYLINE: By NATHANIEL C. NASH

SECTION: Section 3; Page 6, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2444 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


IN the 1960's, as a rising middle-level manager in the aerospace business,
Norman R. Augustine felt like a frustrated prophet of doom. Everywhere he saw
projects taking pratfalls, efficiency being destroyed by too many auditors, too
many Government regulations, and too many managers demanding too many meetings
and too much paperwork.

''I'd make speeches and write articles about the evils of bureaucracy,'' Mr.
Augustine recalls. ''Everyone would nod yes, and promptly forget what I said.''

Then, Mr. Augustine discovered the power of exaggerated truth. Sitting down one
night and projecting cost trends for the development of new military aircraft,
he concluded that ''by the year 2054 the entire defense budget would buy only a
single plane.'' A little hyperbolic, he admits - but when he used it in his next
speech, people got the point.

After that, he sprinkled his speeches with aphorisms. ''The optimum committee
has no members,'' he would tell his audiences. ''The more one produces, the less
one gets.'' ''The last 10 percent of performance generates one-third of the
costs and two-thirds of the problems.'' ''It costs a lot to build bad
products.'' Augustine's Laws were born. In 1983, a collection of them was
published by a specialty publishing house. The volume became a best seller at
the Pentagon bookstore. This year an expanded version of Augustine's Laws was
published by Viking Penguin Inc. for the mass market.

Now, as the president and chief operating officer of the Martin Marietta
Corporation and the likely successor to chairman Thomas G. Pownall, the
50-year-old Mr. Augustine will have ample opportunity to put his principles into
action. The former engineer, who assumed Marietta's presidency on April 1, says
that he will fight excessive management - not a surprising plan for the creator
of the Law of Propagation of Misery: ''If a sufficient number of management
layers are superimposed on top of each other, it can be assured that disaster is
not left to chance.''

Through its association with the nation's space program, Marietta has indeed had
two brushes with disaster this year. Though the company enjoys considerable
prestige as a military contractor, and is at the forefront of many of the
Government's most sophisticated weapons programs, the recent Challenger and
Titan mishaps have at least temporarily shaken the company and affected its
earnings potential.

In the aftermath of the space shuttle disaster in January, management breathed a
sigh of relief since the shuttle's external fuel tank, built by Marietta, was
apparently not the cause of the explosion. However, to the extent that the
tragedy delays the next launching, it means fewer tanks will be made for NASA.
Analysts say the external fuel tank accounts for almost 10 percent of the
company's $4.4 billion in revenues per year, and an even larger chunk of its
profits.

''That business is not going to go away entirely, but it is going to be
slowed,'' said Wolfgang Demisch, an analyst with the First Boston Corporation in
New York.

Of greater concern, perhaps, was the explosion nine days ago of a Marietta-built
Titan rocket at the Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. It was the second
consecutive launching in which the $150 million Titan exploded right after
takeoff. ''The trouble,'' said Mr. Demisch, ''is now you have to go back through
the lengthy process of finding out what went wrong before you launch again.''

Mr. Augustine says the shuttle and the Titan launching are off-limits for
comment because both incidents are under investigation by NASA, and any public
statement might undermine the space agency's efforts.

Analysts are less reluctant to speak out, and some defend the company as a
victim of bad luck. Paul Nisbet, an analyst for Prudential-Bache Securities
Inc., said, ''There have been 134 Titan launches, with 98 percent reliability. I
don't see that they could consider anything fundamentally wrong with the
design.'' Mr. Nisbet says that the Government has not ruled out sabotage in both
incidents.

ON TOP of the two launching mishaps, experts in the aerospace industry say that
the Department of Justice is currently investigating bribery allegations against
Marietta by subcontractors. But Mr. Nisbet again defends the company. ''As many
as several dozen such investigations are going on at any one time,'' he said.
''Usually the problems involve one crook, not the whole company.''

Clearly, the Government is not turning its back on either Marietta or the Titan.
The company has been granted a $2.5 billion contract to build 10 high-powered
versions of the Titan to launch 10,000-pound satellites and a $600 million
contract for scaled-down versions of the Titan to lauch payloads of 4,200
pounds.

Few analysts expect the current problems to have a huge long-run effect on the
company. But Marietta is going through another form of transition that promises
to have far more impact on the company in the years down the road. The giant
manufacturer of missiles, rockets and guidance sytems is branching heavily into
the design of computer systems and the art of tying together highly complex
operations through computer software - elements that will be increasingly
critical in weaponry.

''While companies like Boeing will remain major competitors, as we move into
information systems, more and more we will be taking on the I.B.M.'s, the A.T. &
T.'s, E.D.S.'s and Honeywell's,'' Mr. Augustine said. The thought seems not to
daunt Mr. Augustine at all. ''We may be smaller than the I.B.M.'s, but we know
the U.S. Government, and we know Government contracting, and we have a good
reputation, so we think we can do it,'' he said. Marietta already has
semiconductor facilities that are producing customized chips for its computer
systems, and ''we're writing millions of lines of computer code a year,'' he
noted. Having read Mr. Augustine's book, a stranger might expect its author to
be an Art Buchwald type. Mr. Augustine, in fact, is quite the opposite. In his
spare but spacious corner office in Martin Marietta's corporate headquarters in
Bethesda, Md., the tall, dark-haired executive does seem relaxed, making a light
reference to going bald, talking easily about the company and himself. But there
is no trace of his literary personality - the pundit, the scold who attacks
Government shortcomings with witty vengeance.

''You could work with Norm for six months and see nothing but the serious,
business-like side,'' said Robert H. Callaway, chairman of the Colorado
Republican Committee and Secretary of the Army in the Ford Administration when
Mr. Augustine was Army Under Secretary. ''He's not the kind of guy who would
break up a crowd with humor.''

HOWEVER, former associates are quick to list Mr. Augustine's other assets - a
careful tact, an engineer's caution, a military contractor's secrecy, and the
ability to say no with a smile. Donald H. Rumsfeld, Secretary of Defense during
the Ford Administration, says those attributes are among the reasons Mr.
Augustine was tapped to be Army Under Secretary. ''I was not at all surprised to
see Norm selected,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said. ''He's a roll-up-your-sleeves,
work-it-out type of person. He dealt easily with people above him, below him and
sideways.''

Mr. Augustine's private-sector colleagues and competitors also speak admiringly
of his ease with people. He is ''a great salesman in person,'' said Sanford N.
McDonnell, chairman of the McDonnell Douglas Corporation in St. Louis.

Mr. McDonnell says that, although ''we've lost a number of competitions to
him,'' Mr. Augustine has been a charming winner. Mr. McDonnell recalls running
into Mr. Augustine and his wife in the Tahitian Islands a couple of years ago,
when both their companies were bidding for a contract. ''While we were having a
drink together, he got a phone call. He came back and said, 'Sorry to tell you
this, but we just won a contract in which you were a bidder.' ''

However, the creator of the Law of Propagation of Misery practices what he
preaches about removing excessive management. Mr. Callaway recalled: ''We had a
couple of real problem personnel cases in high Army positions - the type in
Government that you tend to leave in place because it's so hard to do anything
about. Norm jumped right in and carefully nudged the people out, without
creating a storm.'' Martin Marietta's country-club-like headquarters, with its
duck pond, rolling lawns and winding drives, is a long way from the Denver of
Mr. Augustine's youth. In the wake of the Western gold rush, his
great-grandfather left the East and headed for the Rockies, eventually becoming
the assistant county clerk in the small central Colorado town of Buena Vista.

In the early 1950's, when Norman Augustine was a lanky senior graduating from
East Denver High School, his ambition was to be a forest ranger. He confided
this to a crusty old English teacher, who took strong exception to this career
plan. After swearing at the bright young student, the teacher handed him
applications to Princeton University and Williams College. Mr. Augustine chose
Princeton, and eventually earned a bachelor's and a master's degree in
aeronautical engineering.

After briefly studying business at Columbia and U.C.L.A., the young engineer
ended up working for what was then the Douglas Aircraft Company in Santa Monica,
Calif. While there, his former Princeton roommate asked Mr. Augustine to show
his Swedish girlfriend, Margareta Engman, around California. Mr. Augustine did
more than that: He fell in love and married her.

They have two children, Gregory, 22, who is studying electrical engineering at
Texas A.&M. University, and Rene, 20, a junior at Duke.

In 1965, he joined the Department of the Army as head of research and
development. ''I intended to serve for only two years, but I stayed for five,''
he said. He left in 1970 to join the LTV Aerospace Corporation, but three years
later was recruited back to the Defense Department by Mr. Callaway.

''That was a hard period for the Army,'' Mr. Augustine said. ''Morale was not
great and public support was low. We were pulling out of Vietnam, trying to get
the Vietnamese army on its feet. Whenever you flew out of Andrews Air Force
Base, you saw the wounded soldiers coming home with no welcome. I could never
understand that.''

During that time, Mr. Augustine played a key role in developing the volunteer
army, as well as a host of new weapons systems such as the M-1 tank, the Bradley
fighting vehicle, the Patriot air defense system, and the Apache attack
helicopter.

Early on, he learned to deal with Congress. Two and a half hours into his first
day as Army Under Secretary, Mr. Augustine was called to Capitol Hill to testify
on the Vietnam War effort. ''I spent the first three days in the job on the Hill
and many days therafter,'' he said.

The Marietta opportunity was totally unexpected. In 1977, after his second
five-year stint with the Army, Mr. Augustine had just handed in his resignation
as Under Secretary, and was due to start work the next day for another military
contractor.

While attending a luncheon gathering of Air Force officials, he found himself
sitting next to Thomas G. Pownall, then president of the Martin Marietta
Corporation. He mentioned his new job. As Mr. Augustine recalls Mr. Pownall's
reaction: ''Gee, don't do that. Let's talk about it.''

MR. AUGUSTINE was more than open to discussion. He remembered Martin Marietta
favorably from his days in the aerospace industry. ''I had competed with this
company and knew they were very tough,'' Mr. Augustine said. ''And Marietta,
along with FMC and Bell Helicopter were the three best contractors the Army
dealt with.''

Mr. Augustine did, in fact, join Martin Marietta in 1977 as as vice president
for aerospace technical operations. By 1982, he was running the company's
all-important Denver Aerospace division, which makes the external shuttle tank
and the Titan rockets. Then, in 1985, he moved back to headquarters as senior
vice president of information systems.

He now is running a company that is the 11th largest defense contractor, and
considered one of the healthiest ones. Analysts say that Marietta has made a
strong recovery since 1982, when it fought off a hostile takeover bid from the
Bendix Corporation. Marietta emerged from that battle with its independence
intact, but burdened by $1.3 billion in debt. By the end of last year, that debt
had been reduced to $220 million. The company had earnings of $249 million, and
its stock, after plunging as low as $20 a share in 1984, was trading around $42
on Friday.

Mr. Augustine appreciates the relative calm now after the turbulence of the
Bendix imbroglio. ''Most people who take over don't have the luxury of going in
when things are very healthy and management is stable,'' he said. ''Often a
transition like this is during a time of turbulence.'' His succession, by
contrast, was an orderly one; his immediate predecessor, Laurence J. Adams,
turned 65 and faced mandatory retirement. AWAY from the office, the former
Coloradan spends a lot of time outdoors. Besides skiing, snorkeling, riding and
hiking, Mr. Augustine has taken vacations by canoe, by dogsled, by covered wagon
and by camel, usually with his family.

Mr. Augustine credits his daughter, Rene with pestering him to put his thoughts
and droll comments into book form. Though he made his acerbic comment about the
rising price of military aircraft in 1967, it wasn't until 1980, and some dozens
of laws later, that he began the process of putting his speeches and articles
into book form. While on a West Coast trip, he contracted an acute case of
appendicitis and faced a number of days in the hospital recuperating.

''The day after the operation, my daughter bundled up all my notes and shipped
them out to me and told me to start working,'' he said. That initial burst, plus
''a lot of writing on airplanes,'' produced the first edition of his book of
laws in 1983.

He also credits Rene with inspiring what has become an absorbing hobby for the
whole family: building doll houses. These are no ordinary playthings. ''We do
everything from scratch, no kits involved,'' Mr. Augustine said. ''We make our
own furniture, have electical wiring, dumbwaiters going up and down, doorbells,
the works. Each one represents thousands of hours of work, and both my children
get very involved in them also.'' The Smithsonian Institution has even asked to
display a couple of them, he said.

He added, however, that on these projects, he abandons the concern for
managerial efficiency that has made him famous: ''I do it to unwind.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Norman Augustine, with one of his handcrafted doll houses
(NYT/Den Heinen); Photo of the Titan missile; Table lists Martin Marietta
financial data

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 27, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'A HERD OF INDEPENDENT MINDS'

BYLINE: Frank Kermode; Frank Kermode is a literary critic whose most recent book
is ''Forms of Attention.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2407 words


PRODIGAL SONS The New York Intellectuals & Their World. By Alexander Bloom. 461
pp. New York: Oxford University Press. $24.95. READING this book I was
continually thinking of a moment - perhaps a critical moment, though Alexander
Bloom makes nothing of it -in the summer of 1965. Dozens of people had been
flown in to New Brunswick, N.J., from all over, their tickets paid for by some
vaguely benign foundation, to take part in a Partisan Review conference on the
Future. Happy as we all were to attend this grand affair, few of us visiting
firemen made much of a mark on the proceedings, which were dominated by a large
contingent of the very persons Mr. Bloom has been studying, the New York
Intellectuals; full of polemical vigor, contemptuously anti-Socialist, they
allowed no consideration of courtesy to old or new acquaintances to qualify
their freedom of expression.

I was less familiar with their scene than I am now (though it is precisely
because I have no part in it, no alliance, no inveterate quarrel, that I am
writing this piece), so it came as a surprise, though now it wouldn't, to
discover that considering the Future was apparently much the same thing as
conducting a minute and acrimonious examination of New York intellectual life in
the 30's. Since 1965 we have learned from many a memoir that the Future began
around 1934, the year when Partisan Review was born. Thirty years later that
periodical was being sponsored by Rutgers University, which is why we were all
in New Brunswick to meet the people who had founded the Future.

They can hardly, in their old bohemian indigence, have dreamed that they would
earn so costly a retrospective. But by now they were well accustomed to high
life at conferences, many sponsored by the Congress for Cultural Freedom.
Indeed, as many present were already aware, their true sponsor, working through
front organizations, was the Central Intelligence Agency, and very soon this
information was to break upon a largely impassive world. Whether the C.I.A.
financed the Rutgers affair is still uncertain; if it did, the motive was of
course not a desire to honor the radicalism of the 30's but to coordinate the
talents of anti-Communist intellectuals, a task which at that time the C.I.A.
thought very important.

Herbert Marcuse was there for the opposition - he was greeted, I recall, with
some reverence; and Hans Magnus Enzensberger made a spirited attack on the
ersatz poverty of middle-class American flower children. But the only address I
remember in any detail was given by Leslie Fiedler. It was called ''The New
Mutants,'' and as I was sharing the platform with him I had a grandstand seat.
Leslie announced that on the way to New Jersey he had been possessed by an idea
of such power that he threw away the speech he had originally planned to give
(it wasn't the first time he had used this exordium). He liked his new idea so
much that he appropriated nearly all of our two-hour allotment of time; I didn't
mind this, as it was already clear to me that I had nothing to say about New
York in the 30's or about anything else that would have been of the slightest
interest to this company.

Leslie announced that we were at a turning point of time and that henceforth the
human race would be sharply divided into the old, who would continue to use
boring, archaic drugs like alcohol, and the young, whose daily fix was
marijuana, with frequent psychedelic excursions into more splendid ecstasies. It
was a brilliant and absurd performance. There is nothing like a proclamation
that human nature is, at this very moment, being transformed, to enliven your
listeners. Leslie also asserted that the mutants would have absolutely no
interest in the past, so it was a reasonable inference that going on and on
about the 30's would stamp you as obsolete as surely as if you asked for a
martini. Anyway, Leslie was given a rough passage at question time - the
Intellectuals have always been famous for bruising colloquies. Yet it must have
occurred to some of them that perhaps times really were changing. They had come
a long way since they lunched on potato chips and fought about Trotsky, and it
was pleasant enough to look back, under the auspices of whomever, at those
heroic times. But it might just have struck them that it was hard to see how
national policy could benefit from the apocalyptic nihilism of Leslie or
Marcuse's anticapitalism, or, for that matter, my own mild, aborted reflections.

Mr. Bloom's purpose in ''Prodigal Sons: The New York Intellectuals & Their
World'' is to explain how the Intellectuals progressed from their original
obscurity to positions of eminence and authority in American life and letters.
He does the job very thoroughly and, where I've been able to check, accurately.
His prose is somewhat flat-footed and he is often repetitive, probably because
he quotes a lot from informants who all tell roughly the same story. An
assistant professor of history at Wheaton College, he cultivates the detachment
of the historian, perhaps too assiduously, so that the reader gets a wicked
little thrill when his noncommittal prose can't quite conceal his deep dislike
for some of the personalities he is discussing.

The historian's manner he cultivates is proper to the occasion, since he
believes that the story of the New York Intellectuals has now ended. There are
many happily surviving members of the group who might be reluctant to accept
this premise, though they can hardly deny that the Family, as it is sometimes
called, has been pretty thoroughly dispersed. Most of them are certainly remote
from the political and literary avant-gardism of their youth, and most enjoy the
measure of fame and fortune that the system they once ferociously condemned has
bestowed on them. But they still look back to the 30's, and beyond, to their
childhood, with understandable nostalgia, as to a past that for them at any rate
is not dead.

Harold Rosenberg once described the group, of which he was so distinguished a
member, as ''a herd of independent minds.'' The herd had assembled as if in
illustration of Bishop Berkeley's contention that not only the course of empire
but also the course of learning moves inevitably in a westward direction. From
the ghettos of Eastern Europe the parents arrived in the ghettos of Brooklyn,
whence their sons streamed over the bridges into Manhattan; there they studied,
with a remnant of Talmudic fervor, the secular subjects offered by the
universities of New York, and especially by City College. As Daniel Bell here
remarks, none of them was of ''eminent pedigree,'' but all had inherited a
desire to study and to succeed by studying. They became acquainted, they argued
and fought, bringing to the life of the mind what Irving Howe calls their
''gutter-worldliness,'' their ''harsh and abrasive skepticism.'' They knew all
about being underdogs and moved as naturally to the left as their gentlemanly
contemporaries in the South moved to the right.

Their instrument was language - English, not the Yiddish of their homes. And the
curse of all bright working-class boys, whether Jewish or not, fell upon them;
for they grew rapidly away from their parents, whose ambitions had driven the
children into the world they had no part in, and whose reward was at worst
contempt and at best a vicarious success they did not understand. The bright
boys had little time for traditional Jewish pieties; they were scaling the
commanding heights of a secular radicalism. Later - too late for the parents -
they would be forced to think seriously about their Jewish heritage.

They hit the streets at the time of the Depression, which, as it happens, was
also a time of sharpening antiSemitism. The wonder is that they had time for
anything other than political strife; but since there were among them talents as
various, and as concerned with the arts, as Meyer Schapiro's and Lionel
Trilling's, there never was a time when everything became wholly a matter of
politics. Trilling himself remarked that it was the radical politics of the 30's
that ''created the American intellectual class,'' but to him and to others
modernist literature and the art of the avant-garde were necessary to an
informed radicalism, essential agents of social change.

This alliance of politics and art didn't always take the same form. Partisan
Review was founded with the stated purpose of criticizing literature from the
point of view of ''the revolutionary working class.'' That sort of criticism was
essential to the program of opposing ''imperialist war, fascism . . .
oppression,'' and of working for ''the abolition of the system which bred these
evils.'' But soon the editors, William Phillips and Philip Rahv, had serious
doubts about proletarian literature. A definitive split with the Communist Party
meant that modernism in the arts was no longer closely associated with the
defense of Soviet Russia. Partisan Review became fervently anti-Stalinist and
flirted with Trotsky, who understandably exposed his doubt about the commitment
of the editors to revolutionary Socialism. What they were really committed to
was the belief that the avant-garde they represented was in itself a
revolutionary force, independent of all parties, an intellectual elite whose
freedom of expression was a precondition of social changes no longer to be
sought on the barricades but in the operations of critical intelligence.

After a great deal of internecine strife Partisan accepted the necessity of
American participation in World War II; and then began the move of the
intellectuals into Government service, with the recognition that the System was
for all its faults a lot better than the alternatives; and (for some) positions
of some influence in Government and in the formation of middle-class political
opinion.

So Partisan Review gave, and continues to give, a picture in miniature of what
Rahv called the embourgeoisement of the New York Intellectuals. One can say of
them, as of almost any such group, that they were continually thrown into
convulsions of mind and conscience by events over which they had no control: the
Moscow trials, the Nazi-Soviet pact, the war, the Holocaust, the Hiss and
Rosenberg trials, Vietnam, the Beats, the Beatles . . . And the independent
minds that formed the herd responded each in its own way to such events, so that
the group was bound to lose its cohesion. The strongest voice was probably
Trilling's, affirming that literature might still be subversive, but that its
authority derived not from the proletarian but from the liberal imagination.

Other voices found other journals. Commentary, edited by the formidable Elliot
Cohen and then by the formidable Norman Podhoretz, had a leftward move but has
since become the organ of right-wing intellectualism, the terminus, as it now
appears, of the younger members of the Family as they continue the business of
''making it.'' Some of the difficulties attendant upon liberalism were brought
out by the challenge of Joseph McCarthy; the Senator threatened to corner the
market in anti-Communism and make the more intelligent forms of it redundant.
The sheer difficulty of maintaining a non-un-American liberal stance has hardly
diminished - though the immediate threat of McCarthyism is long past - and the
memory of such difficulties was with us at Rutgers. Indeed it persisted in
recent years, when Lillian Hellman was at the center of certain quarrels about
the past which ended only with her death.

Mr. Podhoretz has spoken of ''the lust for success'' as replacing sexual lust,
but the expression may be a little too vivid. All these people are very talented
and could hardly help succeeding - among the survivors of the 30's we still have
Alfred Kazin, Mary McCarthy, Daniel Bell, Irving Howe, to give only a few
instances. Their years of obscurity, their first steps toward making it,
coincided with a moment when it was natural enough to choose a radical cause.
They moved toward the center, as is quite usual; they looked back nostalgically
at their origins and sideways suspiciously at new forms of political dissent,
like the New Left. In remaining faithful to their genuine gifts they left the
convoy and sailed on their various independent courses.

Irving Howe, whose fidelity to the past (and to the left) is as undoubted as his
talents, remarked 30 years ago that when intellectuals are absorbed into the
accredited institutions of society, ''they not only lose their traditional
rebelliousness but to one extent or another they cease to function as
intellectuals.'' This is a severe, and in the end probably a just judgment. And
I suppose it could be said that when a lust for success replaces a passion for
criticism, some kind of treason is committed. Yet as George Orwell remarked, in
a passage quoted by Mr. Bloom, there are some things only intellectuals are
crazy enough to believe, and if these intellectuals came to concur with the
opinion of most of their compatriots, that the American system, whatever else
you might want to say about it, is preferable to the Soviet system, who can
honestly blame them? Yet they have changed less than might have been expected.
They are still tenacious, loquacious, contentious. Most appear to have avoided
the cynicism some will suspect in any alteration of opinion that also brings a
higher degree of prosperity. They express these changed opinions with something
of the forcefulness they learned in the old days, between classes at City
College perhaps. None has opted for the really cozy solution, an easy
skepticism.

And there is something more to be said. Mr. Bloom may in a sense be right in
regarding the chapter as closed, the Family dispersed. But it did create an
enduring style, urban and not urbane, based on hard reading, hard argument and
constant self-examination. Few intellectuals can have spent so much time
debating what it is to be an intellectual, and that in a society that doesn't
care much about the question.

A great metropolis should certainly have some intellectuals who aren't ashamed
of the title, and New York got some, nurtured improbably in the Brownsville to
which they now look back with such fondness, in a Jewish tradition they no
longer disregard. The city has rewarded them accordingly, and since they
specialize in controversial self-examination we can safely leave them to argue
about any embarrassment they may feel in consequence.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings of Irving Howe, Mary McCarthy, Leslie Fiedler, Lionel
Trilling, William Phillips and Daniel Bell

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 27, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT: FICTION

BYLINE: By Christopher Benfey

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 280 words


PRIZE STORIES 1986: The O. Henry Awards. Edited by William Abrahams. (Doubleday,
$17.95.) In his introduction to the 66th O. Henry Award prize stories, William
Abrahams laments the way writers today stress artifice at the expense of truth.
He wants to ''open the windows and let life in,'' and the 19 stories he has
chosen from more than 100 magazines address serious issues: race relations,
homosexuality, battered women, divorce. The pregnant stand-up comic in ''The
Comedian,'' by John L'Heureux, reflects that ''the only subject you can't make a
good joke about is abortion.'' But the biggest issue for these writers is the
Vietnam War, which looms behind at least five of the stories. ''I believe in
Vietnam,'' says the grandmother in Stephanie Vaughn's superb ''Kid MacArthur,''
which is about an Army brat bred for battle, who only survives the war
physically. In Bobbie Ann Mason's ''Big Bertha Stories'' a veteran tells his
wife and son tall tales about a huge strip-mining machine. ''Strip mining is
just like what we were doing over there,'' he explains. ''We were stripping off
the top. . . . Here, at least the coal companies have to plant vetch and
loblolly pines.'' Since most of these stories hinge on what happens to family
ties in the face of extreme experience, it is fitting that first prize was
awarded to Alice Walker's ''Kindred Spirits,'' which recounts a family's
resentment at the daughter-sister-niece who writes stories about them. The main
formal characteristic these stories share is (in homage to O. Henry perhaps) the
surprise - or enigmatic, or missing - ending. Stuart Dybek's brief, exquisite
''Pet Milk'' has the most inventive conclusion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 29, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENT BEGINS TRIP TO INDONESIA

BYLINE: By GERALD M. BOYD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 647 words

DATELINE: AGANA, Guam, Tuesday, April 29


President Reagan declared today that the United States must be willing to defend
its values and its citizens ''unflinchingly'' in the face of terrorism.

In remarks at a brief rest and refueling stop at Andersen Air Force Base in
Guam, Mr. Reagan continued to focus on terrorism as he once again pledged
resolve in combatting such attacks.

In his speech for American servicemen and their families at the Pacific base,
Mr. Reagan said:

''Many of you are thousands of miles from your own homes, and as beautiful as
Guam is, I know you must miss familiar sights and sounds, and above all, your
families and friends.''

'Willing to Sacrifice'

''Yet, you're willing to make that sacrifice, willing because you've understood
all along what recent events have once again made clear.

''In the name of freedom, in the name of decency, we have no choice but to
defend American values and the American people themselves, and to do so
unflinchingly,'' he said.

Administration officials have said that the recent terrorist attacks on
Americans and Western Europeans are expected to continue. On the flight to
Hawaii, John M. Poindexter, the President's national security adviser,
characterized the incidents as a ''rampage,'' which he said would be
''short-lived.''

Secretary of State George P. Shultz, speaking Sunday on the CBS News program
''Face the Nation,'' said that the economic summit in Tokyo, where Mr. Reagan
will go on Friday, presented a ''juicy target for terrorists'' because the
leaders of the seven major industrialized democracies would be gathered there.
#90-Minute Stopover Mr. Reagan left Honolulu early Monday for Bali, Indonesia,
with a 90-minute stopover in Guam during the 14-hour flight.

The President's Guam speech was similar to his appearance Saturday at Hickam Air
Force Base, shortly after he arrived in Honolulu. In both cases, Mr. Reagan
spoke in generalities and declined to accuse specific countries, individuals or
groups of the terrorist attacks.

Also in his Guam speech, Mr. Reagan set the stage for his first Presidential
visit to Indonesia, saying that in the days ahead, he will be bearing a
''message of freedom.''

So far on this trip, Administration officials have avoided direct criticism of
President Suharto of Indonesia, whose 20-year authoritarian rule has been
assailed over human rights abuses. The Administration has praised Mr. Suharto
for bringing economic progress and growth his to country.

Rights Concerns Raised

Critics of the Suharto Government, including some American legislators, have
expressed concern over its suppression of dissent and allegations of human
rights abuses on a large scale in the East Timor and Irian Jaya regions, where
independent movements have been under way.

Reagan aides have argued that while Indonesia has had serious human rights
violations in the past, the situation has improved in the last year. The
Administration has also tried to contrast the situation there with neighboring
Communists countries, such as Vietnam, saying that they are some of the worst
violators of human rights in the world.

The White House spokesman, Larry Speakes, would not say Sunday whether Mr.
Reagan would discuss human rights when he meets with President Suharto. Mr.
Reagan will also meet with the foreign ministers of the member countries of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

Speaking in general terms, the President minimized human rights concerns in his
Guam remarks.

''The foreign ministers I will meet in Indonesia,'' he said, ''represent nations
that have each in large part embraced human liberty, both political and
economic, and in recent years the people of these nations have produced a
remarkable record of economic growth.''

The member nations, the Philippines, Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Brunei and
Indonesia, have some of the world's fastest-growing economies.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 29, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

OUR TOWNS;
ON THE TRAIL OF A WIDOW'S MURDERER

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINERIP, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 958 words

DATELINE: WANTAGH, L.I., April 28


''Mother was murdered last June,'' Susan Hitchcock said. ''Basically what
happened, she was stabbed several times and the house was set on fire.''

The daughter was home, asleep in the small Maine town where she and her husband
live, when the phone rang that Sunday morning at 3 A.M. ''In a real deadpan
voice,'' the daughter recalled, ''someone from the Fire Department said there's
been a fire at 26 Wavy Lane and the sole occupant is dead.''

By the time the daughter drove here from Maine, it was afternoon and the police
knew from stab wounds on the burned body that it was really murder, though they
had no suspect, and still do not.

Detective Albert Martino of the Nassau County Police says he has spent 90
percent of his working hours on the case these last 10 months. Three times a
week the 36-year-old daughter calls from Maine to see if there's progress. The
detective and daughter have become friends.

''It makes me feel good, she hasn't forgotten,'' said Detective Martino. ''It
gives you a shot in the arm.'' Unsolved murders are a thankless business.

Last week Mrs. Hitchcock again returned to the street where she grew up. For the
second time since the murder, she put up 200 posters, offering a $5,000 reward.
She is trying to keep her mother's murder alive.

The mother, Rita Brown, was a widow who had lived in this middle-class suburb
for 35 years and was known for her extraordinary neatness. She stapled garbage
bags so nothing would fall out, and washed her front windows daily. Things in
Mrs. Brown's house were always in place.

The fire June 8 destroyed almost all of it, blackening the insides. ''The fire
was so hot,'' Mrs. Hitchcock said, ''her shower doors and crystal completely
disappeared.''

A few odd items survived: photos, Christmas ornaments, an accordian, a rosary
and the knife presumed to be the murder weapon. When the police opened the
charred refrigerator, they found food lined up in neat rows.

Ever since that day, the daughter has had a recurring dream: ''I see myself
running with my mother, trying to get away from somebody.'' No matter how late
she goes to bed on a Saturday night in Maine, she still wakes Sunday at 3 A.M.

On days she calls Detective Martino, she tries to think of a new theory, so they
have something to chat about. ''He never shuts me off,'' she said. ''My most
recent theory is maybe it was someone who had burned villages in Vietnam. I know
it's farfetched.''

''He has different farfetched theories, too,'' she said. ''He'll say, 'I just
got another lead - now don't get your hopes too high.''

On some days the daughter is sure a neighborhood teen-ager did it. On others,
she thinks a teen-ager would not be calm enough to burn the house down.

The detective told the daughter that cracking an old murder was partly a
question of keeping it in people's minds. So Mrs. Hitchcock puts up posters. She
asked if a $5,000 reward for information leading to the murderer's conviction
would be big enough. The detective felt it was a generous sum.

The first time she put up posters, last August, she concentrated posters on
residential streets. This week she put more emphasis on bars. ''I figured in
bars, what do people do beside talk?'' she said. ''Someone had to be missing
from somewhere that night.''

Many people said they were pleased to see her again; the old posters were
wearing out. Others told her of posters pulled down by neighbors trying to sell
their homes.

Saturday morning, while adjusting a poster, she ran into Clare Worthing and
Matilda Albert, out for their regular walk. They spoke of what a close
neighborhood it has always been, a Levitt community where everyone started
together 35 years ago. Now the original settlers are getting old, the grown
children have moved away, and the person still at home is often a widow. ''The
widows were particularly nervous about this murder,'' said Mrs. Worthing.

The murder is not exactly forgotten, Mrs. Worthing said, ''but after a while you
tend to relax.''

''You can't live in tension all the time,'' she said. She knew someone who did
seances, she said, if the daughter was interested.

The daughter also met with Detective Martino. ''He filled me in on a lead he had
last week, which ended up in another dead end,'' she said. Later she stopped by
St. Francis Episcopal Church, where her mother was a regular, and made a
donation to the organ maintenance fund.

The daughter had always said it was healthy for her mother to keep the house
after being widowed. ''I told her you've got to stay independent, keep
walking,'' she said. ''I told her, 'You've got to eat three good meals a day. I
don't want to hear you had a bagel for breakfast.''

Mrs. Hitchcock's brother, David, put up half the reward money, but he feels it
is hopeless. The daughter knows, too, her mother would have said, ''Don't pursue
it.''

''Mother never liked to trouble anyone,'' Mrs. Hitchcock said.

Still, the daughter puts up posters. ''I want to know the detail as bad as it
might be,'' she said. ''I want to know if she put up a struggle - I know she
kept a police whistle I'd given her beside the bed. Part of me wants to know was
it quick? Was she harassed or tortured?''

Shortly after the murder, the family sold what remained of the house. Now a
large new home is going up in its place, with a modern skylight.

On Wavy Lane the forsythias are in full glory. As Mrs. Hitchcock taped posters,
three little boys played in the street with a model airplane. A young father and
his son eyed her curiously.

Sunday morning she got into her '79 Ford and drove to Maine. She runs an
all-volunteer ambulance service there and was needed, she said. She plans to
return in June for the first anniversary of her mother's murder.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Susan Hitchcock (NYT/Tony Jerome)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 29, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

The Nation At 120

BYLINE: By Charlotte Curtis

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 816 words


THE NATION magazine's response to President Reagan's air attack on Libya was
predictable. The small, aggressive, 120-year-old left-liberal weekly was
indignantly opposed, and so was its coolly understated publisher.

''What the polls show isn't going to matter,'' Hamilton Fish 3d said, referring
to the surveys indicating that between 70 and 77 percent of the American people
approved of the raid. ''Three months from now the Reagan Libya policy will be a
discredited policy.''

As he saw it, the raid heightened rather than diminishing international
tensions, making the world a far less safe place. He said it handed
international terrorism revenge as a motive, thereby inciting freelance
terrorism and setting up Israel as a target for reprisals. He argued that the
death of innocent Libyan citizens made it difficult for the United States to
sustain a moral superiority over the terrorists.

Far from weakening Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi's political position, he said, the
raid seemed to have strengthened it while severely undermining American gains
within the Arab world. He thought a Russian base in Libya was now within the
realm of possibility.

The raid didn't just rekindle Europe's anti-Americanism, as illustrated in
numerous recent demonstrations, he said, but would probably increase its
virulency. ''It's an incomplete policy,'' he added. ''The only follow-up is
further escalation. It fails to recognize that terrorism has no address.''

The tall, auburn-haired publisher paused a moment and shut his eyes.

''In Libya, as in other areas of the world,'' he said, ''we need to exhaust all
possible diplomatic initiatives, all available international forums. Our role as
leader of the Western nations and as the advocate of international democracy is
undermined when we act independent of our allies and especially with force. Most
importantly, the raid will have adverse consequences for American Middle East
policy and interests.'' He paused again. ''My guess,'' he said quietly, ''is
that the attack will be judged a failure.''

Hamilton Fish 3d is the son and grandson of long-term Republican Congressmen. He
was born during the Korean War and came of age with Vietnam. He was a freshman
at Harvard in the spring of 1970, when President Nixon ordered the Cambodia
incursion. Harvard, like colleges everywhere, exploded. He was transformed.

''I know what I know about politics from school,'' he said. But he was an
English major, never in the vanguard of campus activism, and took off after his
sophomore year ''to chew on a slice of life.''

''I was influenced by all the traditional elitist values,'' he said. ''Vietnam
changed everything. I didn't grow up believing what leaders say is true but that
they lie to you. That was as true of Johnson as it was of Nixon. And newspapers.
I lost automatic faith in institutions. It was very traumatic. But it made me
more self-reliant.''

Ultimately, his way of looking at the world led him to Marcel Ophuls and the
making of ''The Memory of Justice'' and, after getting to know Victor Navasky,
their decision to raise money and with the help of liberal partners buy The
Nation. The deal went through in 1977. He became publisher. Mr. Navasky became
the editor. And The Nation, which might have been expected to upgrade its dowdy
image, moderate its anti-establishment politics, lower its voice and concentrate
on the bottom line, has steadfastly refused to change.

Yet when it celebrated its 120th birthday this spring, its circulation had grown
from maybe 20,000 in 1977 to more than 70,000 in 1985, and it published a fat,
special edition jammed with establishment advertising. A.T.& T. was there with a
full page. So was the Calvert Group and its investment alternatives that do not
include South Africa, nuclear energy, weaponry or, as the ad says, ''anything
that detracts from, rather than adds to, the quality of our lives.'' But it was
General Motors that was clearly in a celebratory mood: ''What's good for The
Nation,'' its ad proclaimed, ''is good for the country, and vice versa.''

This pleased Mr. Fish. But the raid was still much on his mind. He viewed the
loss of the high-tech F-111 to the Russians as a major intelligence leak. And he
couldn't forget that two American pilots were dead. ''For what?'' he asked. ''We
honor their patriotism and bravery but we have to question the policy that sent
them there. Does any of it reduce the tragedy of Mr. Klinghoffer?''

The Nation is the country's oldest magazine. ''At 120, we are inherently part of
the establishment,'' Mr. Fish said. ''But our role is to be a critic of the
establishment.'' And so it is.

Among its editorial targets after the bombing of Tripoli and the ''12-minute
war'' were Edward Kennedy, Tip O'Neill and the Congressional Democrats for not
opposing and condemning the raid. Not bad for a little magazine that loses
perhaps $200,000 a year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 30, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. APPROVES GIFT OF CONTRA COPTER

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 861 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 29


The State Department has given approval for a private anti-Communist
organization to send a UH-1B Huey helicopter to help Nicaraguan rebels evacuate
injured and sick from the war zones, Reagan Administration officials said today.

Faced with an inability to secure funds from Congress quickly for helicopters
and other military equipment, the Administration last week decided to grant a
license so that the rebels, known as contras, will have the use of a large
helicopter for the first time, officials said.

The license was issued by the State Department last Friday to the United States
Council for World Freedom, headed by the retired Maj. Gen. John K. Singlaub,
which has Federal tax-exempt status, on the basis of a request submitted four
days earlier, the officials said. Marta Wintering, a spokesman for the group,
which is situated in Phoenix, confirmed that it had received permission and said
the helicopter was on its way to Honduras.

The rebels have been seeking helicopters for some time to transport troops and
to evacuate casualties. The Central Intelligence Agency had provided them with
two small helicopters about two years ago, an Administration official said, but
one was recently shot down.

Funds for Medical Supplies

General Singlaub's organization has been actively soliciting funds for some time
for medical supplies and other nonlethal material for the contras. Last year,
after receiving a $65,000 donation from one benefactor, the group announced
plans to purchase the Vietnam-era Huey which was built by Bell Helicopters, for
medical evacuation.

The helicopter, named Lady Ellen, after the contributor, Ellen Garwood, of
Austin, Tex., is the most dramatic example of the ability of private American
groups to help the contras, even while Congress continues to delay action on the
Administration's latest request for $100 million in new aid for the rebels, of
which $70 million would be in military support. The Administration plans to
supply military helicopters from that aid package, if it is ever approved by
Congress.

The Lady Ellen cost about $100,000 General Singlaub said last summer, and an
additional $35,000 was spent on renovation.

The State Department's Office of Munition Controls had to approve the license
because the UH-1B is a military helicopter, even though the stated purpose of
the mission is for medical evacuation.

'A Need for Air Transportation'

In his organization's application for a license, General Singlaub said, ''The
helicopter was purchased by the United States Council for World Freedom from
funds contributed by individual American citizens for the specific purpose of
providing medical support and assistance to the Nicaraguan population now in a
refugee status in Honduras.''

''The lack of roads and other facilities in the area produces an urgent need for
air transportation to move the sick and injured from the border areas to the
available hospitals,'' he said.

''At the present time, people are dying or losing limbs because of a lack of
transportation,'' he said. ''It is the intention of this organization to provide
this humanitarian assistance to the suffering Nicaraguan freedom fighters and
their families in Honduras until such time as the situation is alleviated.''

William B. Robinson, director for the office of Munitions Control, told General
Singlaub his application was approved for the use of the helicopter in
Honduaras, provided that his organization retained control of the helicopter,
and that it is used ''solely for medical evacuation of sick and injured from
otherwise inaccessible terrain in the country of sojourn.''

Licensed Spare Parts

General Singlaub was also told that the helicopter could not be armed and that
all spare parts had to be licensed as well.

Miss Wintering, the council's spokesman, said the pilots would be provided by
the organization. Normally, the Huey has a four-man crew, and can carry about
nine soldiers, or evacuees.

In justifying the granting of the license, a State Department official said,
''Permitting the export for the purpose of humanitarian assistance by a private
group is consistent with United States interests and policy and with the law.''

The official stressed the license did not permit the helicopter to be used in
Nicaragua, and cannot be armed.

Single Largest Contributor

A spokesman for the rebels in Washington, Bosco Matomoros, said today, however,
he hoped the helicopter would be used in territory seized by the contras in
Nicaragua, since that is where it would be most needed.

Mrs. Garwood, who is in her 80's, has been described by General Singlaub as the
single largest contributor to his organization. She said in an interview last
year that she gives the money to the rebels to carry on in the spirit of her
father, the late William L. Clayton, who was Under Secretary of State in the
Truman Administration, and was credited with having inspired the Marshall Plan
of aid for Europe.

''I could not let all the work that Dad did to keep the free world free from
Communism go under,'' she said. ''And we're about to go under unless we keep
those freedom fighters going.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 30, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

JAKARTA DETAINS, THEN EXPELS CORRESPONDENT OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 993 words


The Government of Indonesia yesterday detained and then expelled a correspondent
for The New York Times who was seeking authorization to report on President
Reagan's visit.

The correspondent, Barbara Crossette, who is based in Bangkok, Thailand, was
taken into custody by the Indonesian immigration police and ordered to board a
flight out of the country.

Miss Crossette had been given permission to enter Indonesia on a two-month
tourist visa and was told by American officials before her arrival there that
she would be given a journalist's visa, which Government regulations require of
working reporters.

The Indonesian authorities gave her no explanation for her deportation. She was
refused permission to speak with American or Indonesian officials after her
detention and was also prevented from returning to her hotel room to gather her
belongings and notebooks.

Miss Crossette, who had previously made several reporting trips to Indonesia,
arrived Monday night on the island of Bali, where Mr. Reagan is scheduled to
meet with foreign ministers of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
Earlier Monday, she had cleared Indonesian immigration in Jakarta, the capital.

''I was in the country legally and I broke no laws,'' Miss Crossette said by
telephone after returning to Bangkok. ''I was attempting to have my work
situation regularized, which I had been assured would present no problem.''

Miss Crossette's expulsion followed a recent order by Indonesia barring
Australian journalists from the country. That action came after an article
published in an Australian newspaper on April 10 charged that the family and
associates of President Suharto had accumulated a fortune of over $2 billion.

A. M. Rosenthal, executive editor of The Times, said in a statement: ''The
detention and expulsion of a New York Times correspondent in Indonesia today is
a clear violation not only of freedom of the press but of any accepted standard
of conduct. Coming at a time when the President of the United States is arriving
in that country, the action also shows disdain for American institutions.

''We are protesting this action to the Indonesian Government, and we hope that
the United States Government will express its point of view,'' he said.

Miss Crossette said she received a telephone call from the Indonesian Embassy in
Bangkok on April 9, advising that her request for a visa during the Reagan visit
had been approved. But when her passport was delivered to the embassy, she said,
officials there told her they had been ordered by Jakarta to rescind the visa.
After many attempts to get information from Indonesian officials, she said, she
was told Sunday by American officials that she would be allowed to return to
Indonesia.

In Denpasar, Bali, this morning, the Indonesian Foreign Affairs Minister,
Mochtar Kusumaatmadja, expressed regret at Miss Crossette's treatment. In a
briefing for reporters traveling with Mr. Reagan, Mr. Mochtar indicated that his
ministry had wanted to give Miss Crossette a visa, but had been overruled by the
Information Ministry.

ASIAN BLOC AT A GLANCE

History And Membership The Association of Southeast Asian Nations, established
by the Bangkok Declaration of Aug. 8, 1967, was formed to bolster the stability
of the region in the post-colonial era. Its six members are Indonesia, Malaysia,
the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Brunei, which joined in 1984. One of
the reasons the regional nations saw a need for the organization was the bitter
confrontation that took place in the mid-1960's between Indonesia and Malaysia
over the incorporation into Malaysia of the Borneo territories of Sabah and
Sarawak.

Goals and Activities

The declared objectives of Asean are to foster regional economic, social and
cultural progress in the interest of stable growth. To that end, Asean
instituted joint research and technological programs, closer cultural ties and
student and teacher exchanges.

In recent years, Asean has devoted much effort to trying to find a solution to
the fighting in Cambodia. The Asean nations have held out to Vietnam the promise
of economic cooperation if it withdraws its troops from Cambodia.

One notable recent development has been the re-emergence of the Philippines as
an active member of Asean under the new Government of President Corazon C.
Aquino. It was announced yesterday that the Philippines would be the host for a
meeting of Asean heads of government in 1987, the first such meeting in a
decade. The only outstanding territorial dispute is between the Philippines and
Malaysia and involves Sabah; the new Philippine Government has promised that the
Sabah dispute will be discussed at the meeting.

Asean has set up joint bodies with the European Community and with the General
Agreement and Tariffs and Trade in Geneva. Business organizations from the
various parties established a Japan-Asean Forum in 1977 to discuss matters of
mutual concern, and there have been growing links with Australia, New Zealand
and Canada as well as the United States, with which it has regular
consultations.

Organization

The highest authority of Asean rests in joint meetings by the heads of
Government of the member nations. There are ministerial conferences that bring
together their foreign ministers every year, in each country in turn. These
meetings often are attended by the economics ministers or other cabinet members.
There is a standing committee that is convened for consultation when necessary
between ministerial meetings, consisting of the foreign minister of the host
country and the ambassadors of the other five.

A permanent secretariat with a secretary general, serving two-year terms, was
created in Jakarta in 1976 to form a central coordinating body. In addition,
there are nine committees dealing with a wide range of subjects and moving in
rotation among the capitals. They are aided by a set of technical bodies and
expert groups.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 30, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Charles Bonnay Dies; French Photographer

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 275 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, April 29


Charles Bonnay, the French war photographer, died Monday of complications from
acute leukemia. He was 55 years old.

Mr. Bonnay began his career in 1953 by parachuting into Dien Bien Phu in Vietnam
to take pictures for the French Army. Over the next three decades he covered the
Algerian war, the war in the Congo, anti-Castro guerrillas and the 1967 war in
the Middle East.

He returned to Vietnam in 1963, and, according to his agent, Jocelyne Benzakin,
travelled to North Vietnam a year later to interview Ho Chi Minh.

Mr. Bonnay became well-known much earlier in his career when he tried to
parachute onto a ship that had been hijacked off of Brazil in 1961. He missed
the ship, but said he enjoyed trying to get a picture no one else had.

Born in Paris in 1930, Mr. Bonnay knew the meaning of war at a young age when,
after Germany invaded France, the Nazis interned him and his mother because
members of his family were active in the French Resistance.

Mr. Bonnay spent almost 10 years living in Tahiti after the end of the Vietnam
War. In 1984 he came to Central America, where he remained to specialize in
photographing Nicaraguan anti-Government guerrillas.

Last year he took a five-week trek with a guerrilla combat unit that marched and
fought deep inside Nicaragua, a grueling feat for a man of 54 years. During one
attack Mr. Bonnay said he was forced to hide alone in the woods for a day until
the rebels could smuggle him to safety. His pictures appeared in Time magazine,
The Sunday Times of London, Stern, Actuel and other leading publications.

Mr. Bonnay is survived by his mother, Jeanne Desmurs, who lives in Los Angeles.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 1, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Petitioners Ask Renewal Of U.S.-Vietnam Ties

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 121 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 30


Urging that the United States ''move beyond the pain of a war which cost more
than one million lives,'' about 150 prominent American religious and political
leaders, academicians and former antiwar activists have called on President
Reagan to pursue normal diplomatic relations with Vietnam.

The letter was presented to the White House before Mr. Reagan's meeting in Bali
with leaders of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

Signers included Julian Bond, State Senator from Georgia; Senator Tom Harkin,
Democrat of Iowa; George McGovern, the former Senator; Dr. Benjamin Spock, the
antiwar activist; the Rev. Jesse Jackson, chairman of the National Rainbow
Coalition, and the actors Edward Asner and Mike Farrell.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 1, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER: 'THE BOYS IN AUTUMN'

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 19, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 736 words


WITH the arrival of ''The Boys in Autumn,'' Bernard Sabath's new play at the
Circle in the Square, the 1985-86 Broadway season has reached its official
close. While this season never did produce any cutthroat competition for the
honor of best play, the worst play sweepstakes is being bitterly contested right
up to the final hour. ''The Boys in Autumn,'' a terminally innocuous speculation
about Huckleberry Finn and Tom Sawyer in middle age, almost makes one long for
''The Boys of Winter,'' a Vietnam war drama that had been the prize 1985-86
turkey until this point. Let's be grateful that the season has ended before
anyone could write ''The Boys of Spring'' or turn Roger Kahn's good book ''The
Boys of Summer'' into a flop musical.

What would Huck (George C. Scott) and Tom (John Cullum) be up to when they have
a surprise reunion in 1920's Hannibal? It would be cruel to divulge the
evening's bombshells, although I will end obvious speculation by reporting that,
pace Leslie Fiedler, the men have not opened a Missouri branch of ''La Cage aux
Folles.'' Mr. Sabath has instead given the men lurid secrets that reduce two of
the most beloved characters in our cultural heritage to extras in a Harold
Robbins novel.

Those who wish to learn those secrets are hereby forewarned that Tom's
confession doesn't begin until late in Act I, while Huck's must await late Act
II. The rest is padding. Mr. Sabath opens the evening with a tedious
cat-and-mouse game in which the two men must laboriously determine that they are
indeed the Huck and Tom who knew each other when. (They use different names
now.) Other stalling comes in the form of Mr. Cullum's demonstration of a
vaudeville routine long performed by Tom on the whistle-stop two-a-day circuit.
(''Get the hook!,'' shouts the annoyed Mr. Scott, and not a moment too soon.)
The men also get to complete one of those newfangled crossword puzzles, and, at
the start of Act II, Mr. Cullum tinkers at some considerable length with a
recalcitrant hand-cranked automobile.

Other Twain characters are accounted for along the way, with Becky Thatcher
proving, in absentia, a Freudian fall woman to rival Mrs. Bates in ''Psycho.''
The rambling exchanges are linked by lines like, ''Well, let's talk about
something else.'' The name-dropping and occasional quotations of actual Twain
passages aside, there's not a trace of the great man's voice or wit in Mr.
Sabath's dialogue. The Huck and Tom of the playwright's dreams have rolled off
contemporary Hollywood's male-menopause assembly line. They are soppy, boozy
buddies who mourn their lost youth while hoping that somehow they ''could help
each other'' get past adulthood's humbling blows. This being the roaring 20's
and all, Huck and Tom are as likely to find redemption by going into real-estate
speculation as by riding a raft, but the Mississippi still exerts its tidal
pull. As Mr. Scott says wistfully at the final curtain, the river ''goes on
forever'' - which makes it sound somewhat shorter than this play.

It's hard to know what attracted either star to ''The Boys in Autumn.'' They'd
find more challenge playing the Duke and the King in a bus-and-truck tour of
''Big River.'' Under the direction of Theodore Mann, Mr. Cullum pours on the
corn pone rather heavily, but Mr. Scott, with a raised eyebrow here and a froggy
belch there, finds a few laughs as the latently civilized Huck. How one wishes
that this actor could be channeling his festering energy into a part like Hickey
or James Tyrone.

As for the playwright, he warns us in a Playbill essay that he is also busy
speculating about the futures of other fictional characters - from Holden
Caulfield to Blanche DuBois. ''I feel I know what Biff and Happy Loman are doing
today,'' he writes, ''and what Eve Harrington is up to.'' Unlike Mr. Sabath, I
have no idea what those characters are up to, but if their creators have any
sense, they're busy renewing their copyrights. Huck and Tom Redux THE BOYS IN
AUTUMN, by Bernard Sabath; directed by Theodore Mann; scenery by Michael Miller;
lighting by Richard Nelson; costumes by Jennifer von Mayrhauser; incidental
music by Bob Israel with Paul Epstein; production stage manager, Michael F.
Ritchie. Presented by Circle in the Square Theater, Mr. Mann, artistic director;
Paul Libin, producing director. At 1633 Broadway, at 53d Street. Henry
FinneganGeorge C. Scott Thomas GrayJohn Cullum

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of John Cullum and George C. Scott (Martha Swope)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SPORTS OF THE TIMES;
'HORSE VAN TO HEAVEN'

BYLINE: By Dave Anderson

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 978 words

DATELINE: LOUISVILLE, Ky.


Shortly before dawn at Churchill Downs, a gray and yellow horse van moved slowly
through a light rain toward Barn 42 on the backstretch. Broad Brush, a 10-to-1
shot in tomorrow's 112th Kentucky Derby and the winner of the Wood Memorial two
weeks ago, was led into his stall after a 12-hour overnight ride from Baltimore.
As the last of 16 horses to arrive only hours before the entry box closed
yesterday, Broad Brush is the obvious hunch choice for those who believe that
the last shall be first.

''The horse shipped better than I did,'' his trainer, Richard Small, was saying
now, drowsy from having been at the wheel all the way. ''The horse slept, but I
didn't. I haven't slept since Tuesday night.''

In a battered brown hat that Indiana Jones might consider too beat-up to wear, a
tan jacket over a blue and white striped sport shirt, khaki pants and brown work
shoes, the tall, dark-haired 40-year-old bachelor with a shy smile appeared to
have stepped out of a late-night race-track movie. Its title should be ''Horse
Van to Heaven,'' starring the horse who loves to ride the Interstates and the
trainer in the battered brown hat.

''How long have you had that hat?'' somebody asked.

''Not that long,'' he said. ''It's just abused.''

He's now one of Maryland's most respected trainers. His father and an uncle
trained horses at Maryland, Delaware and New Jersey tracks. He has been driving
horse vans since he was a teen-ager. And when he was asked about his 14 months
in Vietnam as a Green Beret combat lieutenant, he mentioned racing.

''I went to the track in Saigon,'' he said. ''They had tanks and machine guns
all around the track. They had ponies running there, but the track was bigger
than Belmont Park - it was huge.'' Broad Brush is his first Derby horse. The
3-year-old bay colt by Ack Ack out of Hay Patcher has won seven of his nine
races, including the Jim Beam Stakes at Latonia on March 22 after another
overnight van ride from Baltimore.

''We've done this before and been successful,'' the trainer said. ''No reason to
change.''

And when Broad Brush won the Wood, the van left his Pimlico stable the previous
midnight.

''The horse just likes the van,'' the trainer said. ''The horse stands at
Pimlico all winter, but if the track at Pimlico was frozen, I'd put him in the
van and go over to Laurel or Bowie for his workout. It seemed like he enjoyed
it. Sometimes I took him out to the farm in the van. And sometimes when I just
have chores to do, I put him in the van and take him with me.''

On the trip here, the van went through Pennsylvania, West Virginia and Ohio.

''On the Interstates, you can go as fast as a car, you just get in behind the
trucks and go,'' Small said. ''But you can feel the horse back there. That's why
I don't let anybody else drive. On the smaller roads, you have to stop carefully
and start carefully. And you have to go around the turns gently.''

Around 2 o'clock in the morning, Small stopped for gas outside Columbus, Ohio.

''I stopped there on the way to Latonia and the horse won, so I decided to stop
there this time, the same Sunoco station'' he said, smiling. ''The same kid was
pumping gas. I asked him if he remembered me from last time and he said, 'Oh,
yeah, I remember.' But this time I told him I had a Derby horse in the van.''

Broad Brush hasn't been away from Maryland except for his trips to Latonia,
Aqueduct and now Churchill Downs.

''The horse has never had a trip to Chicago or Los Angeles where he's had to
fly,'' Small said. ''I'm just superstitious about the van. In this business,
thousands of things don't work, so if you find something that does work, you
stay with it.''

Escorting the van here was a

Toyota with, among others, the jockey Vince Bracciale and a Pimlico security
guard, Charles Turner.

''When that horse gets off the van, he knows it's close to action,'' Turner was
saying outside Broad Brush's stall. ''He's like a football player, he's a
competitor. He's happy when he gets off that van. He's ready to go.''

Owned by Robert Meyerhoff, the older brother of Spectacular Bid's owner, Broad
Brush won three of four races as a 2-year-old.

''One day at Keystone last year,'' Small recalled, ''an exercise girl named Pam
asked me if I thought I'd ever have a Derby horse. I looked at this horse and
told her, 'There's one right there.' I think that's the first time I thought
about it. And now he's here.''

Small attended only one other Kentucky Derby, in 1978 when Affirmed held off
Alydar in the stretch.

''I had Caesars Wish in the Kentucky Oaks,'' he said, referring to the race for
3-year-old fillies at Churchill Downs on the day before the Derby each year. ''I
stayed and watched the Derby, I'd already bought the tickets.''

Upon his arrival, Small tended to Broad Brush in his stall, walked him around
the shedrow, then watched him gallop.

''The horse galloped nicely,'' the trainer reported. ''After that trip, the
horse wasn't as rubber-legged as I was.'' Broad Brush wasn't as hungry either.
The horse had nibbled on hay during the van ride while his trainer existed on
sandwiches. The trainer had hoped to have breakfast at the Churchill Downs
buffet before the draw for post positions, but by the time he got there the
scrambled eggs were gone. He had sausages, bacon and a cherry danish. Then he
hurried into the Derby Museum, where Broad Brush drew the No. 9 position.

''That's fine,'' Small said. ''The extreme inside or the extreme outside
would've been a disadvantage. Most of the speed is toward the outside.''

Win or lose in the Kentucky Derby tomorrow, Small talked about leaving with
Broad Brush in the van for the return trip to Baltimore sometime before dawn on
Sunday morning.

''I might not even be here Saturday night,'' the trainer said. ''That's why I
have my own van. Whenever I get in it, that's when I leave.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Richard Small with Broad Brush (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 3, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Books of The Times;
Man and Nature

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 14, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 955 words


SELECTED POEMS. By Robert Bly. 213 pages. Harper & Row. Cloth, $18.95; Paper,
$8.95. More than two decades have passed since the limpid, haiku-like poems of
Robert Bly's first collection, ''Silence in the Snowy Fields'' (1963), appeared.
In the ensuing years, the poet has changed directions several times - eschewing
the realm of private emotions for noisy, public pronouncements on the Vietnam
War in ''The Light Around the Body'' (1967) and ''The Teeth Mother Naked At
Last'' (1970), and returning to a more pastoral mode in works like ''The Morning
Glory'' (1975) and ''This Body Is Made of Camphor and Gopherwood'' (1977). What
has remained constant in his work, as this new selection demonstrates, is Mr.
Bly's interest in man's relationship with nature, and his commitment to an idiom
built upon simplified diction and the free associative processes of the
unconscious mind.

Although Mr. Bly has done some reorganization in assembling this volume - the
Vietnam poems are grouped together, instead of appearing chronologically when
they were written, and other poems have been slightly or substantially rewritten
-the book nonetheless reads as a study in a poet's development. In fact, given
the solemn introductions that precede each section, the reader is led to suspect
that Mr. Bly actually wants ''Selected Poems'' to stand as a sort of artistic
autobiography: he tells us about the conditions under which certain poems were
composed; he describes his domestic circumstances and his state of mind (''I
lived in small dark rooms, and that loneliness made clear to me my interior
homelessness, my lack of respect for myself, and my interior starvation''), and
he attempts to describe his aims, his ambitions and his techniques.

While it's interesting to learn that Mr. Bly prefers to deal with intensely
visual subjects in the form of prose poems, that his verses about historical
figures were influenced by the work of Neruda, his introductions, for the most
part, seem superfluous - in some cases, even distracting. Not only do they
impose themselves between the reader and the work -thereby inhibiting any sort
of unmediated, visceral response - but they also set forth Mr. Bly's esthetics
in such sentimental, willfully naive terms that they tend to undermine the
actual work.

Indeed the vague, blissed-out 60's language used in some of these mini-essays
(''When we pass into a deep of the mind, we become awake to the intelligence of
hills and groves. At thirty-two I felt for the first time in adult life an
unattached part of my soul join a tree standing in the center of a field'') only
serves to point up similar weaknesses in the verse (''And, dancing, find in the
trees a savior,/ A home in dark grass,/ And nourishment in death'').

Death - along with such attendant emotions as depression and regret -seems to
suffuse nearly all these poems. Even the verses that ostensibly celebrate nature
and the poet's communion with other living things are gilded with a brooding
melancholy: it is usually autumn or winter in these poems; ice and snow cover
the ground, and night is on the way. In ''Night,'' a water beetle skittling
across a pond reminds the poet that we, too, could ''be swallowed/ Suddenly from
beneath.'' And in ''July Morning,'' even an innocent rabbit ''hopping along the
garden'' appears to be hopping to ''his death . . . ''

In the later, more personal poems, death hovers as a pale, uninvited angel
around the edges of the poet's solitude; and in the political ones, it grows
into something massive and inexorable - a universal fate willed by an America
bent on making war.

''The ministers lie, '' he writes in ''The Teeth Mother Naked at Last,'' ''the
professors lie, the television reporters lie, the priests lie./ What are these
lies? They mean that the country wants to die.''

''It is a desire to eat death,'' he goes on, ''to gobble it down,/ to rush on it
like a cobra with mouth open.''

There are moments in Mr. Bly's sequence of poems on America and the Vietnam War
where his language gathers itself into a powerful image - ''Massive engines lift
beautifully from the deck./ Wings appear over the trees, wings with eight
hundred rivets''; where his stream-of-consciousness technique results in
fiercely surreal montages. All too often, however, he lapses into blunt,
chest-beating rhetoric that assails American hypocrisy and racism in cliched,
sophomoric terms.

''Tonight they throw the firebombs,'' he writes in ''Johnson's Cabinet Watched
by Ants,'' ''tomorrow/ They read the Declaration of Independence; tomorrow they
are in church.'' Or, in another poem - ''We fear every person on earth with
black hair.'' Such lines neither move the reader, nor cause him to look at the
moral ambiguities of the situation in a new way. Instead, they simply attempt to
score ideological points by lobbing blanket statements into the air - statements
that are frequently so topical that they now feel time-bound and passe. What is
one to make, today, of these, once much-quoted lines:

Men like Rusk are not men only -They are bombs waiting to be loaded in a
darkened hangar. Rusk's assistants eat hurriedly, Talking of Teilhard de
Chardin?

It is the poems in which Mr. Bly finds a way to merge his dark vision of world
history with a more personal sense of mortality that reverberate most
insistently in the reader's mind. Many of the verses contained in ''The Man in
the Black Coat Turns'' (1981), for instance, seem grounded in private,
autobiographical details, and these details - a glimpse of the poet's father on
his wedding day, another of the poet's son, ''making books, stapled, with
messages to the world'' -lend the larger concerns of the poems the ballast of
felt emotion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Robert Bly (NYT)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 4, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

JAY TUROFF: A CLASSIC SUCCESS STORY LEADS TO DUAL PORTRAIT OF EX-TAXI CHIEF

BYLINE: By SELWYN RAAB

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 42, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2023 words


Law-enforcement officials have drawn from a yearlong investigation a portrait of
Jay L. Turoff as a political clubhouse loyalist catapulted into an important
city position by two Democratic Party leaders, Meade H. Esposito and Stanley M.
Friedman.

And soon after Mr. Turoff took over as chairman of the Taxi and Limousine
Commission in 1978, the officials say, he began associating with professional
gamblers and used his power as the head of the agency to illicitly enrich
himself and others.

Supporters of the 47-year-old Mr. Turoff, however, picture him as the
quintessential New York City success story - someone who rose from modest
circumstances in Brooklyn to become a prosperous businessman, who never gambled
and who sponsored Little League teams and gave thousands of dollars to the Boy
Scouts and his neighborhood synagogue.

They describe him as a civic leader who was drawn to politics to halt the decay
of his Coney Island neighborhood and because of his opposition to the Vietnam
War. And according to his friends and former political allies, he advanced to
high office without once seeking a political favor or deal.

These conflicting portraits of Mr. Turoff have emerged in the wake of
allegations that he accepted a bribe and committed other corrupt acts while he
was the principal administrator of the Taxi and Limousine Commission, the agency
whose main task is to regulate the city's 11,787 metered taxis.

No criminal accusations have been brought against Mr. Turoff, who resigned in
March after eight years as head of the agency. Last month, however, the former
chief executive of a Brooklyn credit union, in pleading guilty in Federal court
to multimillion-dollar frauds, said that he had paid $30,000 to Mr. Turoff for
favoritism in getting a taxi-meter contract. Federal prosecutors in Brooklyn say
Mr. Turoff is under investigation by a grand jury.

Mr. Turoff, through his lawyers, has denied any wrongdoing and declined to be
interviewed.

An account of his background, his political activities, and his role as taxi
chief was obtained through interviews with more than 30 city officials,
law-enforcement agents and friends. 11th-Hour Appointment By Mayor Beame Until
the last hours of the administration of Mayor Abraham D. Beame, Mr. Turoff was a
little-known Brooklyn Democratic Party stalwart. Then, on Dec. 30, 1977, Mr.
Beame's last working day as Mayor, he named Mr. Turoff to fill a four-year term
as chairman of the Taxi Commission.

The only public or party posts Mr. Turoff had previously held were president of
a Democratic club in Coney Island and a liaison to City Hall for Mr. Esposito,
who was the Democratic Party chairman in Brooklyn. The owner of two companies
that manufacture name plates, signs and novelties, he had no expertise in the
taxi industry or in transportation.

Mayor Koch, who took office on Jan. 1, 1978, could have asked for Mr. Turoff's
resignation, but did not. In 1982, Mr. Koch, praising Mr. Turoff's
accomplishments, reappointed him to a full seven-year term.

Mr. Beame, in a recent interview, said he was unable to recall his reasons for
naming Mr. Turoff or who had recommended him. Former aides to Mr. Beame, who
asked for anonymity, said Mr. Turoff was a protege of Mr. Esposito and got the
job through Mr. Esposito and the endorsement of Mr. Friedman, who as a deputy
mayor was in charge of patronage for Mr. Beame and cleared all major
appointments.

Marvin Greenberg, a businessman who has been an unpaid member of the Taxi
Commission for 11 years, said he suggested to Mr. Esposito in late 1977 that Mr.
Turoff get the chairman's post. Mr. Greenberg, a longtime friend of Mr. Turoff,
said it was his understanding that Mr. Esposito sent Mr. Turoff's name to City
Hall.

Mr. Esposito, who retired as county leader two years ago, said in an interview
that he had nothing to do with Mr. Turoff's selection.

Mr. Friedman, who within two years of leaving City Hall became the chief
lobbyist for the city's major taxi-fleet owners, the Metropolitan Taxicab Board
of Trade, did not return calls seeking comment on his role in Mr. Turoff's
original appointment.

In an unrelated case, Mr. Friedman, who is the Bronx Democratic Party chairman,
has been indicted by Federal and state grand juries in Manhattan on charges
arising from a contract with the city's Parking Violations Bureau. He has
pleaded not guilty. A 'Street-Wise Guy'

Working in a 'Jungle'

As a midnight appointee of the Beame administration, Mr. Turoff told Mr.
Greenberg and other associates that he felt pressed to quickly prove his
abilities to Mayor Koch.

Ronay Menschel, a former Deputy Mayor who handled transportation matters in the
late 1970's, said, ''It was known that Esposito was involved'' in Mr. Turoff's
appointment, but she said Mr. Turoff ''was not an untouchable.''

Officials in the Koch Administration said Mr. Turoff was retained mainly for two
reasons: his willingness to go along with administration plans for regulation
changes in the taxi industry, and his apparent ability to cope with taxi owners
who maintained potent political lobbies.

''He was a very street-wise guy, not a manager,'' said Herbert Ouida, an
executive from the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey who was recruited
by City Hall in 1979 to serve one year as Mr. Turoff's first deputy
commissioner.

He described the relationship between the agency's administrators and the taxi
industry as a ''jungle,'' with many taxi owners chafing at regulations. Because
he had turned down a request by one taxi owner, Mr. Ouida related, the owner
pulled out a pair of scissors and cut Mr. Ouida's tie in half.

''I had the feeling that the industry people expected they would have to pay or
do me a favor in return for granting a request,'' Mr. Ouida said. ''At first,
they hated me, but when they got a square deal they respected me and said,
'you're different.' ''

Soon after his arrival, Mr. Ouida said, Mr. Turoff took him to a meeting with
Mr. Esposito. ''I think Esposito wanted to size me up,'' he said, ''because I
was considered a fluke - someone the Mayor had sent to the commission to get
things changed.'' Starting a Business And Finding a Cause Born June 9, 1938, Mr.
Turoff is the only child of Aaron and Rose Turoff. During his childhood, Mr.
Turoff's parents operated a hardware store on Mermaid Avenue in Coney Island and
the family lived nearby in a one-bedroom apartment at 3001 West 29th Street.

As a boy, he worked after school and on weekends in the hardware store. In 1959,
he obtained an associate degree in merchandising from Brooklyn College and, in
1962, a bachelor's degree in business administration from Baruch College. At
Baruch, he ranked 228 in a class of 248.

In his late teens, friends said, Mr. Turoff obtained a contract with the Samuel
J. Lefrak Housing organization to provide name plates for mail boxes in Lefrak
apartment buildings. He started the name-plate business in the rear of the
family hardware store.

After college, he expanded the business into two companies, the Jay-Art
Nameplate and Novelty Company and the Tower Graphics Company, whose factory is
at 681 Coney Island Avenue in the Flatbush section.

Mr. Turoff's interest in politics was kindled in 1966, when he was 28 years old.
Samuel Horwitz, a friend who is now a City Councilman representing Coney Island
and Brighton Beach, was then opposing the Democratic Party's organization
candidate for the Coney Island district leadership. He and his supporters
campaigned on two principal issues: ending the war in Vietnam and stopping the
decay of Coney Island.

''At that time, Jay had little or no concern with politics,'' Mr. Horwitz
recalled. ''When I asked him for help, his eyes lit up. It was a challenge and a
cause he wanted to help.''

Mr. Horwitz won the leadership fight two years later. In the interim, he and Mr.
Turoff founded the Community Democratic Club, with Mr. Turoff as its first
president. ''Before that, neither of us had seen the inside of a political
club,'' Mr. Horwitz added.

As president of the club for about 10 years, Mr. Turoff met Mr. Esposito and
other Democratic politicans.

Friends of Mr. Turoff said he gradually evolved into a political buff. ''He
began to like being around politicians, listening to war stories, how things got
done, who was making deals with whom,'' said one person.

A member of the club, Marcey S. Feigenbaum, an aide to the Brooklyn Borough
President, Howard Golden, said Mr. Turoff's main political concern in the 1970's
was preventing the deterioration of Coney Island.

''He worked long hours without asking for anything for himself,'' Mr. Horwitz
said. ''I know he was offered chances to become district leader and city jobs,
but he always turned them down.'' Links to Casino Cited by Commission Shortly
after becoming the city's taxi chief, Mr. Turoff, his wife, Betty, their
daughter, Jill, now 19 years old, and their son, Marc, now 15, moved from an
apartment in Coney Island's Brightwater Towers to a three-bedroom home at 334
Kell Avenue in the Willowbrook, Staten Island.

According to testimony before the State Investigation Commission last month, in
late 1979 and early 1980, Mr. Turoff joined in the purchase of a taxi and
limousine service in Yonkers with two men, Charles Meyerson and Alan Sherman,
who are described by law-enforcement officials as professional gamblers. The
Investigation Commission contends that Mr. Turoff was a secret partner in the
Yonkers deal.

Mr. Meyerson, who is a host at the Golden Nugget casino in Atlantic City,
arranged room discounts, limousine service and free food and entertainment for
Mr. Turoff during 11 gambling trips spanning 21 days from 1982 to 1984, records
of the New Jersey Division of Gaming Enforcement show.

The Investigation Commission said Mr. Turoff, in private testimony before the
agency, tried to conceal his trips to the Golden Nugget and his ties to Mr.
Meyerson, who until 1980 owned a taxi-inspection station in Brooklyn licensed by
the Taxi Commission. According to the officials, he maintained he had made only
two or three trips to the casino and did not have close relationship with Mr.
Meyerson.

Mr. Horwitz dismissed suggestions that Mr. Turoff was a gambler. ''I vacationed
with him and saw him for years and he never even made a $2 bet,'' Mr. Horwitz
said.

According to Mr. Turoff's 1985 city financial disclosure form, he had no debts
and he and his mother were bequeathed an estate of more than $500,000 by his
father.

Investigators Looking At Taxi-Related Actions Federal prosecutors in Brooklyn
said they are examining Mr. Turoff's relationship with the owners of Electronic
CompuMeter, a taxi-meter company that was formed in 1983 by friends of Mr.
Turoff who are members of the Community Democratic Club. Edmund Lee, a former
executive at the defunct Hyfin Credit Union in Brooklyn, said he was a secret
partner in CompuMeter and paid a $30,000 bribe in behalf of the company to Mr.
Turoff.

Another aspect of Mr. Turoff's administration under investigation is the
awarding of 123 free taxi medallions to the Research Cab Corporation of Queens
for a diesel-taxi experiment. The principal owner of the company, Donald
Sherman, according to taxi-industry figures, befriended Mr. Turoff and
entertained him on his yacht.

The Investigation Commission's chairman, David G. Trager, at a hearing last
month, said Mr. Turoff masterminded the free-medallion proposal as a conspiracy
that enabled Mr. Sherman's companies to get about $20 million in business over
five years.

During last year's primary and election campaigns, Mr. Turoff met with fleet
owners to arrange free transportation for Mr. Koch's campaign workers and for
driving handicapped voters to the polls, aides to the Mayor said. The City
Department of Investigation is looking into that matter.

Mr. Greenberg, who has known Mr. Turoff since he was a boy, said Mr. Turoff
recently telephoned him from his factory in Flatbush. ''He said to me, 'Please,
don't forsake me,' '' Mr. Greenberg recalled. ''Over and over again he said,
'I'm an honest man, I never took a dime.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Jay L. Turoff testifying at hearing (NYT/Nea Boenzi)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 4, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LAKE GEORGE CONFRONTS A NOXIOUS WATER WEED

BYLINE: By HAROLD FABER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 51, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 805 words

DATELINE: LAKE GEORGE, N.Y.


A noxious weed has turned up in Lake George, posing a serious threat to the
pristine water at this major vacation resort, according to state and local
officials.

''It's an extremely aggressive plant that crowds out native species,'' said Dr.
Charles Boylen, head of the Fresh Water Institute of Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute in Troy, N.Y., who discovered the weed last fall in the course of
routine water-sampling. ''It grows to the surface in late spring and early
summer, spreading on the surface so thickly that you can't swim or paddle
through it,'' Dr. Boylen said.

''The weed is like steel wool,'' said Mary-Arthur Beebe, head of a local
committee set up to eradicate the plant, which is called Eurasian water milfoil.
''If we don't act now to clean up the lake, we're going to have a tremendous
deterioration of its quality in the future.''

'A Sense of Emergency'

But the weapon of choice against the plant, the new herbicide Sonar, is the
subject of concern among state officials and others. They are worried about
using any chemicals in the lake, which is a source of drinking water.

''We are convinced that there is a sense of emergency there, and we have
assigned our staff to move with great speed, but I am not going to be stampeded
into taking any precipitate action in approving the use of chemicals,'' said
Henry G. Williams, the State Commissioner of Environmental Conservation.

At this time of year, no problem is apparent on the clear waters of the lake,
which stretches 32 miles from the village of Lake George in the south to
Ticonderoga in the north.

But beneath the surface, at three locations in the southern end of the lake - at
the village of Lake George, at Dunham Bay and at Huddle Bay near Bolton Landing
- the milfoil has survived the winter and has started another season.

Elements of the milfoil have been found in other lakes, from Lake Champlain in
the East to Lake Washington on the Pacific Coast. It is spread by seeds carried
by birds, or by vegetative cuttings carried by boat propellers from one body of
water to another.

Rapid Deterioration Feared

The advancing milfoil is of special concern at Lake George because its waters
are classified for drinking as AA Special, the highest category in the state.

That concern led various organizations around the lake to form the panel to
coordinate a cleanup, headed by Mrs. Beebe, who is also executive director of
the Lake George Association.

If the milfoil is not stopped soon, Mrs. Beebe said, it will lead to a rapid
deterioration of water quality. That, she said, could pose a threat to health.
And if the lake became unsightly and foul-smelling, the tourist business could
be endangered.

''We have to act quickly,'' said Frank Leonbruno, Supervisor of the Town of
Bolton and chairman of the Warren County Lake George Affairs Committee.

Local and state officials as well as scientists and consultants agree that
action against the plant should be taken this month, before it begins to spread
during the new growing season. Their choice of attack is Sonar, a herbicide
developed especially to kill aquatic weeds.

On the advice of a scientific consultant, the local officials have decided
against harvesting the plant by chopping machines, which, they say, could spread
the weed by leaving behind cuttings that regenerate.

They also have decided not to use another chemical, 2-4-D, a herbicide that was
an ingredient of Agent Orange, a defoliant used in the Vietnam War.

Environmental Concerns

Sonar, whose active ingredient is fluridone, is manufactured by the Elanco
division of the Eli Lilly Company. It acts to inhibit a plant's ability to make
the food necessary for its growth.

''There are lots of advantages in using Sonar,'' said Russell James, president
of Ecoscience, the consulting company in Moscow, Pa., that has been hired by
Warren County. ''It's biodegradable, it has a very low toxicity for fish,
insects and ducks, and it's safe.''

But its use poses legal, environmental and time problems because of apprehension
about using any chemicals in drinking water.

Although Sonar was approved for general use a month ago by the Federal
Environmental Protection Agency, it has not been approved by New York State. In
addition, local officials need approval for the use of Sonar in Lake George from
the State Department of Environmental Conservation and the Adirondack Park
Agency.

After applications for permits have been made, the normal procedure calls for an
investigation by state scientists, notice to the public and hearings before a
decision by the state agencies, a process that generally takes months.

With only a few weeks before the optimum time for application of the chemical
expires, the Lake George Association has appealed to Governor Cuomo for
''immediate intervention.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of New York highlighting Lake George; Photo of Mary-Arthur Beebe
(NYT/Nancie Battaglia)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 4, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Margaret Jackson Weds R. C. Paul

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 81, Column 5; Society Desk

LENGTH: 189 words


Margaret Ann Jackson and Robert Carey Paul were married yesterday at the Carlyle
Hotel. The Rev. Philip A.C. Clarke, a Methodist minister, and Rabbi Charles
Lippman officiated. The couple's parents are Mrs. Sidney R. Jackson of New York,
and the late Dr. Jackson, and Mr. and Mrs. Robert H. Paul Jr. of Bethesda, Md.

The bride, who will retain her name, is a director of the Chase Manhattan
Capital Markets Corporation. A cum laude graduate of Brandeis University, she
received an M.S. degree from the University of Pennsylvania and a master's
degree from the Yale School of Organization and Management. Her mother, Thelma
Jackson, is a retired public school teacher. Her father was a dentist. The
bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.

Mr. Paul, a cum laude graduate of Dartmouth College with a law degree from
Georgetown University, is due in July to be a partner in the New York office of
the Philadelphia law firm of Dechert Price & Rhoads. His father is a retired
Foreign Service officer, having served in Greece, Korea and South Vietnam. His
mother, Betty Paul, is a vice president of the Bethesda Realty Company.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 4, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A REGION EDGES AWAY FROM DEMOCRACY

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 872 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, THAILAND


THE White House thought it discerned ''winds of freedom'' blowing in Southeast
Asia. Perhaps so, but as President Reagan landed in Bali last week to meet
leaders of the region, there were troubling signs of instability and repression.
Indonesia was caught up in near paranoia over the Western press. The Government
of Thailand, one of Washington's best friends, fell amid charges of large-scale
bribery. And in Malaysia, an elected state Government was fending off the
imposition of a ''consensus democracy'' that would force it to share power with
enemies trying to bring it down.

Jakarta's expulsion of this correspondent and two Australian journalists
assigned to report on the Reagan visit was only a highly publicized example of
the constraints on freedom of expression under which Indonesians live. Their
country is a leading practitioner of what is known in Southeast Asia as
consensus politics, a system that is neither a Communist-style one-party state
nor a winner-take-all democracy in which the opposition can play a watchdog role
until it gets itself elected. In consensus politics, a single umbrella-like
movement draws together all parties and interests, phasing out combative
opposition.

In Indonesia, an all-purpose grouping known as Golkar joins civilian and
military interests, and every public organization must pledge allegiance to a
national creed known as Pancasila, whose tenets enshrine consensus democracy,
belief in one (unnamed) god, social justice, national unity and humanitarianism.
Moslem political organizations have been forced to disavow their religious base.
Public interest groups have been accused of offending national unity.

For months, the authorities have been tightening restrictions on civil rights
and on community organizations and individuals critical of President Suharto.
The military-dominated Indonesian regime wants to be re-elected with a minimum
of fuss in 1987. Earlier this year there was a brief ''Jakarta spring,'' as a
correpondent for The Far Eastern Economic Review described it. Indonesia's
best-known poet of social protest, Rendra, who had been arrested at times to
silence him, was able to give readings to huge audiences. But spring seems to be
over. Rendra's readings have been canceled, and Lincoln Kaye, an American who
was the Economic Review's correspondent, has been expelled.

Election This Week

Meanwhile, in Malaysia's eastern state of Sabah, voters who bucked the national
consensus system last year and resoundingly chose a state government headed by
Kadazans, the state's largest ethnic group, are preparing for a new election
this week. The Kadazans are mostly Christian; Islam is the national religion.
The winning Sabah United Party under Joseph Pairin Kitingan, a Kadazan chief and
lawyer, has been denied entry to the Barisan Nasional, or National Front, the
multiracial facade created around the national Government, which has always been
run by Malay Moslems. The upset in Sabah shocked the Front, and Mr. Pairin got
scant help from Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad when local Moslem-led parties
harassed his government in the courts and on the streets. Instead, Dr. Mahathir
tried to force Mr. Pairin into a coalition with his enemies in return for peace
in the state and a place in the front. Mr. Pairin's party, buoyed by newly
discovered Kadazan pride and political power, said no and he called a new
election.

Elsewhere in the region, leaders of Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew's Peoples'
Action Party in Singapore have questioned the efficiency of a multiparty system.
Efforts have been made to hound a small but persistent opposition out of
existence. In tiny Brunei, ruled by a Sultan, an incipient political party found
its chances sharply curtailed by a royal order banning state employees - nearly
half the work force - from politics. And in the Philippines, President Corazon
C. Aquino is ruling by decree, at least for now.

In Thailand last week, Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanonda dissolved Parliament
after members of the Government coalition defected on an unimportant vote, amid
charges of thousands of dollars changing hands outside the assembly chamber. The
country's military, outmaneuvered in two coup attempts, has been contributing to
political pressure on the Prem Government.

Distaste for true opposition parties is widespread in the developing world. But
in Southeast Asia, political leaders say, the philosophy rests on a home-grown
cultural abhorrence of confrontation. It usually does not stem from a leftist
ideology influenced by Moscow or Peking, as in Nicaragua or Zimbabwe. Except for
Vietnam and its occupied neighbors, Laos and Cambodia, most Southeast Asian
nations are strongly anti-Communist friends of the West, with free-market
economies and Western-style political institutions.

However, a question is increasingly being asked: Does the name, or regional
roots, of the trend matter if the results are the same - the withering of
give-and-take politics and the diminution of freedom of expression? In Malaysia,
Dominic Puthucheary, a rights lawyer who has defended and advised Chief Minister
Pairin of Sabah, casts the issue starkly. ''If Pairin loses,'' he says, ''it's
the end of democracy.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 4, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD;
Contra Aid Slides Down the Agenda

BYLINE: By Milt Freudenheim, James F. Clarity and Richard Levine

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 235 words


The Reagan Administration has suffered another setback in its effort to win
Congressional approval of $100 million in aid for the rebels fighting the
Sandinsta Government in Nicaragua.

Republican leaders in the House had hoped to muster enough support by May 12 to
force the matter to a vote.

But it would have taken a minimum of 218 signatures, the barest House majority,
to get the aid legislation past the Democratic leadership and to the floor, and
last week the Republicans admitted they wouldn't have them in time.

So Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. said he would schedule a debate and vote on the
issue for the second week in June.

The Senate has passed an Administration bill for aid for the insurgents, or
contras, but the House voted one down, 222 to 210.

More likely to be approved in the House would be a bill providing nonmilitary
aid at once, but delaying military help until after an attempt at negotiating an
end to the Nicaraguan civil war, and requiring an additional vote before the
military aid could be released. Such a bill then would have to be reconciled
with the Senate version.

Meanwhile, the State Department approved the donation of a military helicopter
to the contras by a private, anti-Communist group, the United States Council for
World Freedom. The craft - a Vietnam era Huey made by Bell Helicopters -cost
$135,000 and is supposed to be used for medical evacuations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 4, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. and Vietnam Still Talk at Cross-Purposes

SECTION: Section 4; Page 24, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 415 words


To the Editor:

Your article reporting a new chill from Hanoi in relations with the U.S. (front
page, April 13) could just as well have spoken of a continued U.S. chill in
relations with Vietnam. Having recently returned from a visit to Vietnam with a
private U.S. humanitarian-aid delegation, and met with the two key Vietnamese
officials you quote, as well as others, I find there is more to the story than
reported.

Vietnamese officials believe the United States is continuing hostile policies
against their country, that what we failed to win by war, we are trying to make
up in other ways. They cite our refusal to grant diplomatic relations, our
opposition to their policies in Cambodia (which, rightly or wrongly, they
believe to be inhibiting Chinese efforts, through Pol Pot, at hegemony in
Southeast Asia) and our creating a 60,000-strong backlog of dissatisfied
Vietnamese promised entry to the U.S. but unable to be approved by both sides.
Unspoken but doubtless believed, as well, is a U.S. hand in fomenting reported
active resistance to the government in South Vietnam. And now the further
tension over reported sightings, which are not taken seriously by any outside
observers, of live Americans held against their will in North Vietnam. The
Vietnamese are a proud and defiant people, and there are at least two sides to
every story. Yet no visitor, however skeptical, can fail to be impressed by the
vast gulf in national perspectives. To them, Ho Chi Minh was George Washington
far more than a Communist, and no amount of insistence to the contrary could
budge them from believing in the rectitude of their successful liberation
struggle.

Why, we were asked, does the U.S. continue to oppose relations with Vietnam?
Why, contrary to our postwar policies toward Germany and Japan, does the U.S.
oppose assistance for Vietnam's development? Explanations relating to the
continuing trauma of our wartime memories and current disagreement over Cambodia
do not strike them as sufficiently persuasive. They say they would like to be
more helpful on servicemen missing in action, but do not feel their helpfulness
is being reciprocated.

Listening to the Vietnamese and then to our own policy makers in Washington, one
has the impression of a dialogue of the deaf. Until this changes on both sides,
both we and they will perpetuate the needless burden of our traumatic common
past, rather than forge a new cooperative future.JOHN G. SOMMER Brattleboro,
Vt., April 14, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 4, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT MEN;
MIDLIFE MACHO

BYLINE: By Christopher S. Wren; Christopher S. Wren is chief of the Ottawa
bureau of The New York Times

SECTION: Section 6; Page 86, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 969 words


WHEN MY 15-YEAR-OLD SON PULLED THE faded green beret out of a trunk stashed away
in our Vermont summer house, it was hard for him to reconcile this military
artifact with the graying, slightly paunchy father who had to grope before
breakfast for his spectacles.

Since he was a child, Chris had put up with my yarns about jumping out of
airplanes and other derring-do, which he eventually wrote off to parental
hyperbole until he confronted the evidence - a green beret and a bleached-out
uniform shirt with its Airborne tab and arrow-shaped shoulder patch. Chris has
pumped enough iron to deck me in a flash, but for the briefest moment he seemed
impressed, though my pectorals didn't bulge enough to put me up there with
Sylvester Stallone.

No, I explained, the Special Forces weren't really like that. We would have been
out of uniform if we had run around wearing sweatbands and no shirts, like
Rambo. Anyhow, I was never that clever at blowing things up or shooting things
down, for all the money the Army wasted in trying to turn me lethal.

I wanted my son to understand that I had, in fact, distinguished myself by
knowing how to spell better than anyone else in my airborne unit, which is why
eventually I was asked - was handpicked - to write up citations about other men
who did heroic feats. Sometimes these deeds were done so clandestinely that I
was constrained from divulging quite how the men earned their honors.

Yet, I knew how my son felt. I remember I could never imagine my own cheerfully
sedentary father in the cockpit of his trainer that had crashed, slamming the
aircraft engine nearly into his chest but sparing his life. His service as an
Army flier seemed just as improbable to me as my sojourn as a paratrooper was to
my son.

My father took some of the glamour out of his military career by confessing that
he had volunteered to fly because he thought it preferable to being killed in a
trench. In my case, I went airborne not because I liked to jump but because I
liked to be with people who liked to jump. I was as cocky after my first night
jump as I had been terrified before it, and wearing the silver wings and
trousers bloused into polished black boots made me feel tougher than I knew I
was, with my myopic vision safely concealed behind contact lenses.

Yet, what dazzled me in youthful years no longer does so. I have changed. A
woman now looks most attractive to me only after she turns 40, and I have
revised some notions about what matters in masculine style.

Machismo, celebrating as it does the marvelous difference between the sexes, is
still important for men, however they may try to disparage it. But the forms it
takes mellow with age. For me, machismo now means driving more slowly, as if to
prove that my libido is not attached to the accelerator. I do not think gold
neck chains macho at all; they make the wearer look like an off-duty exotic
dancer. But donning an apron to wash the dinner dishes seems highly macho, for
the dishwasher doesn't care what kind of image his apron projects. So does
having the guts to say ''Sorry'' if you bump into someone.

Hunting for sport does not strike me as macho, unless the animal is given the
opportunity to shoot back. Though I discharged sundry firearms in the service of
my country, and sometimes hit the target, I don't own a gun now. My trips to
Lebanon as a journalist confirmed suspicions that arms don't make a man. To the
contrary, they evoke a question posed at a Palestine Liberation Organization
news conference by a journalist friend who puckishly asked the spokesman if the
pistol worn by his leader compensated for some kind of sexual inadequacy.

Real machismo does not need to advertise, and those who make a fuss about it are
only telling me that they don't have much to flaunt. The most conspicuous
display of machismo that I witnessed in Special Forces came from a sergeant who
fell asleep leaning against my reserve parachute as we were circling over Fort
Bragg on a moonless night. He roused himself in time to hook up his static line
to the overhead cable and plunge out the door into the darkness ahead of me when
the signal light flashed green. When I next saw him on the drop zone, he had
dozed off again in the back of a truck sent to collect us.

From the perspective of middle age, the litmus test of machismo is what you
overcome, not merely accomplish - doing the hard things that need doing without
posturing. Fortunately, war never had a monopoly on heroes. Doug Scott, a
British mountaineer of my acquaintance, broke both his legs in a fall high on a
Himalayan peak called the Ogre. He crawled on his hands and knees down the
mountain for three days until he reached help. As his ropemate, Chris Bonington,
recounted it later, the most remarkable thing in their slow descent was that
Doug never murmured one word about the pain. Finally out of the hospital, he
went back to climbing in the Himalayas with metal pins in his legs.

I was born into a generation that believes real men wear undershirts. The heroes
of my childhood have changed only physically. I recently scrutinized their worn
faces in the photographs taken when they turned out to celebrate the 40th
anniversary of the end of World War II. They were young when they jumped into
hostile drop zones at Normandy or Arnhem, when they waded ashore under fire at
Guadalcanal or Iwo Jima.

A few wars later, they don't look that tough. They wear bifocals, hearing aids
and pacemakers. They may be grizzled or bald and hostage to arthritis,
arteriosclerosis or more dreadful diseases.

But when the courage was desperately needed, they delivered it, and afterward,
like the veterans who followed them into Korea and Vietnam, they got on with
less remarkable lives. My son, Chris, would call that cool. To me, that's macho.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 4, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PARTY BY THE POOL

BYLINE: By Marian Burros

SECTION: Section 6; Part 2, Page 16, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1887 words


Each time I have been entertained in a Vietnamese home it has been a typical
summer night in Washington - hot and humid. The hostess's choice of food has
always seemed especially felicitous. The marvelous variety of unusual dishes and
the lightness of the cuisine, with its finely tuned use of gentle seasonings,
have been particularly appropriate for hot weather. So it is no wonder that such
fare is especially appropriate for, and becoming increasingly popular at,
stylish pool parties across the country.

As I was to find out later, the food is not at all difficult to prepare. That
is, once you have mastered the use of a few ingredients that are unfamiliar to
most Westerners, such as rice paper and lemon grass. Rice paper is the edible
translucent paper used for making Vietnamese spring rolls, a specialty far more
delicate than Chinese egg rolls, to which they are often compared. Lemon grass,
sometimes called citronella root, imparts a distinctive lemony taste and
fragrance to the food.

Salads, vegetables, fish, sprightly sauces -all conspire to tempt the palate of
the diner who, given a choice on a summer's eve, might ordinarily opt for cold
roast chicken and jellied consomme. But not if shrimp salad with mint or
brochettes of beef scented and spiced with galangal, an unusually piquant form
of ginger, are offered as alternatives.

With the first exposure to the subtle refinements of the Vietnamese kitchen, the
uninitiated American quickly puts aside any preconceptions of the food as being
the same as Chinese. These cuisines do have many ingredients in common and both
are properly eaten with chopsticks, but the similarity ends there. Despite 1,000
years of Chinese rule, ending in the 10th century, the Vietnamese maintained
their identity not only in their own language and customs but in their own
culinary sophistication.

Other cultures have had more of an influence. There is an easily definable
French presence in the Vietnamese kitchen, and traces of Indian cooking also can
be found. The resulting cuisine is a rather sophisticated one that reflects the
richly varied history and geography of the country.

The food is almost always light. Uncooked vegetables and salads are an integral
part of Vietnamese meals, which makes them especially appropriate for
warm-weather entertaining. Shallots, Maggi seasoning, white potatoes and
asparagus commonly are used. There is much less emphasis on stir-frying and
thick sauces than is found in the Chinese kitchen, and lemon grass, unknown in
China, is a hallmark of Vietnamese cooking. lthough Vietnam is quite small,
about the size of New Mexico, its cooking is divided into regions. In the south,
with its hot, humid climate, the French influence is the most pronounced. Indian
curries are particularly strong there. Because sugar cane is grown in the
region, dishes in the south tend to be sweeter than those elsewhere.

In the central region, where Hue, the ancient capital, is located, the food is
rather decorative and very spicy. Hot chilies and shrimp sauce frequently are
used.

To the north, with its colder weather, there are fewer ingredients and the food
tends to be lighter and less heavily spiced. Black pepper is widely used, and
stir-fried dishes are common.

It is not only the ingredients but the names given to some Vietnamese dishes
that reflect the French influence, although the name is often as far as the
Western influence goes. From the French the Vietnamese learned to make exquisite
pates, but they often are seasoned with their famous sauce, nuoc mam, an
anchovy-based mixture that is as popular as soy sauce is in China. The
Vietnamese also have a chicken pate that is deep-fried.

Asparagus, which the Vietnamese call ''Western bamboo,'' is an essential
ingredient in crab soup, a dish enjoyed all over the country and equally popular
among Americans. Typical of the food of the country, it is both light and
extremely savory. he recipes for this summer repast are creations of Bach-Yen
Boun, chef at Indochine in New York City. Part Cambodian and part Vietnamese,
she learned to cook at home in Cambodia. Her sister runs a Vietnamese restaurant
they own in Paris called Au Coin des Gourmets. Despite its simplicity, Boun's
food is not picnic fare. It is, however, especially appropriate for summer
because it satisfies without leaving you stuffed.

These dishes - such as the Vietnamese spring rolls (called pates imperiaux in
France); shrimp with mint rolled in rice paper (or rouleau de printemps); beef
brochettes marinated in lemon grass paste, skewered with red peppers and onions;
even the small, greaseless spareribs - will provide a dinner your guests are
likely to remember for a long time. The cook will be happy because most of the
dishes can be prepared and cooked in advance. And even those that require
last-minute cooking can be prepared ahead almost completely.

Serve this food lukewarm or at room temperature, not steaming hot.

Shrimp Salad Lemon Grass Paste Shrimps With Mint Rolled in Rice Paper Dipping
Sauce Beef Brochettes Spare Ribs Sweet and Sour Chicken Steamed Sea Bass
Vietnamese Spring Rolls SHRIMP WITH MINT ROLLED IN RICE PAPER #14 medium-sized
shrimps, shelled and deveined, about 1/2 pound 1/4 pound rice sticks #7 large,
round rice-paper wrappers #1 small head iceberg lettuce #1 pound bean sprouts
#35 mint leaves, cut into small strips Dipping sauce (see recipe). 1.In a small
saucepan, bring three cups of water to a boil. Add the shrimps and cook for two
minutes, or until they become pink. Drain and let cool. Halve the shrimps
lengthwise and set aside. #2.In a large pot, bring four cups of water to a boil.
Remove the pot from the heat. Add the rice sticks and let stand for five
minutes, or until they are soft. Drain them, run under cold water and drain
again. Cut into three-inch strips. Set aside. #3.Dip the rice-paper wrappers in
cold water and lay them on a clean towel or between paper towels for about five
minutes to soften. Rice-paper wrappers should be handled carefully; they break
easily. #4.Separate the leaves of the lettuce, discarding the tough ones.
#5.Place a rice-paper wrapper on a work surface. On the lower half of the rice
paper, layer a lettuce leaf, some bean sprouts, rice sticks and four to five
mint leaves. Fold the sides of the rice paper to cover the filling. #6.About
four inches from the top of the rice paper, arrange a row of four shrimp halves,
placed vertically. Starting from the bottom, roll tightly to enclose the filling
and the shrimps. Repeat with the remaining ingredients. #7.Cover the rolls with
a damp cloth until ready to serve. To serve, slice them into four pieces, making
sure each contains a shrimp. Serve with the dipping sauce. Yield:Six to eight
servings. DIPPING SAUCE 1/2 cup nuoc mam (see note) #1 cup rice vinegar 1/2 cup
sugar 1/4 cup shredded carrots 1/4 cup chopped peanuts.

Combine the nuoc mam, rice vinegar, sugar and one cup of water. Stir and let
stand until the sugar is dissolved. This sauce can be kept for several days in
the refrigerator. When ready to serve, add the carrots and peanuts.

Yield:Two and three-quarter cups.

Note:Nuoc mam is a fish sauce available in most Oriental specialty stores. BEEF
BROCHETTES Y cup lemon grass paste (see recipe) #1 tablespoon nuoc mam (see
note) #2 teaspoons sugar Salt to taste #1 tablespoon vegetable oil #3 medium
onions, about 1 pound #2 pounds sirloin steak, cut into thin strips (about 72
pieces) #3 red peppers, seeded and cut into 1-inch cubes Lettuce, cucumber, bean
sprouts and mint for garnish. 1.In a small bowl, combine the lemon grass paste,
nuoc mam, sugar, salt and oil. Mix well. #2.Cut one onion into julienne strips.
Cut the remaining onions into one-inch cubes. #3.Place the strips of beef on a
work surface and rub the marinade over them. Place a strip of onion across each
strip of beef and roll it to enclose the onion. #4.Prepare 12 skewers,
alternating each meat roll with a cube of onion and red pepper; there should be
six rolls per skewer. Let stand at room temperature for two hours. #5.Preheat
the broiler or barbecue grill. #6.Grill the brochettes for about one minute on
each side. Serve with a garnish of lettuce, cucumber, bean sprouts and mint.
Yield:Six to eight servings.  Note:Nuoc mam is a fish sauce available in most
Oriental specialty stores. LEMON GRASS PASTE #6 stalks fresh lemon grass, peeled
(see note) #1 2-inch piece galangal, peeled (see note) #6 shallots #6 cloves
garlic 3/4 teaspoon saffron.

Place all the ingredients in the container of a food processor or blender. Blend
to a paste. This will keep for several days in the refrigerator. Yield:One cup.
Note:Lemon grass is available in Oriental specialty stores. Galangal is a root
from the ginger family. It can be purchased frozen in some Oriental specialty
stores. STEAMED SEA BASS #1 whole sea bass, about 2 1/2 pounds, cleaned and with
the gills removed but head and tail intact Y cup ginger root, cut into julienne
strips 1/2 cup chopped chives #6 tablespoons oyster sauce #2 tablespoons
vegetable oil #1 tablespoon sugar. 1.Place the fish on a heat-proof plate on the
rack of a steamer over simmering water and cook, covered, for 30 to 40 minutes,
or until the fish is no longer pink at the bone. Five minutes before the fish is
done, sprinkle with the ginger root and chives. #2.In a small saucepan, combine
the oyster sauce, oil, sugar and two tablespoons of water. Bring to a boil over
medium heat and cook for two minutes, or until the sugar dissolves. Keep warm.
#3.To serve, lay the fish on a serving platter with the chives and ginger, and
pour the warm oyster sauce over it.

Yield: About six servings. VIETNAMESE SPRING ROLLS 3/4 cup bean threads, broken
into small pieces #1 pound ground pork #1 medium onion, minced 1/4 carrot,
shredded 1/4 pound bean sprouts #2 teaspoons sugar #1 teaspoon salt 1/2 teaspoon
freshly ground pepper #2 egg yolks #1 package rice-paper triangles Vegetable oil
for frying Lettuce and mint leaves for garnish Dipping sauce (see recipe).
1.Soak the bean threads in water for a few minutes to soften, and drain. #2.In a
large bowl, combine the bean threads, pork, onion, carrot, bean sprouts, sugar,
salt, pepper and one egg yolk, and mix well. #3.For each roll, use two layers of
triangles. Dip them in cold water and lay them on a clean towel or between paper
towels for about five minutes to soften. Rice-paper triangles should be handled
carefully; they break easily. #4.Mix the remaining egg yolk with one teaspoon of
water. Across the base of the triangle, place one tablespoon of the filling.
Fold in the side points to cover the filling. Roll the rice paper tightly,
starting from the bottom. Secure the point with beaten egg yolk. Repeat with the
remaining ingredients. #5.In a wok over medium-high heat, add enough oil to fry
the spring rolls. When the oil is hot but not smoking, about 325 degrees, add
the spring rolls and fry them for five to six minutes, turning them, or until
they are golden brown. Drain on paper towels. This can be done a few hours
before serving. When ready to serve, reheat the oil and fry the spring rolls
until they are crispy again. Serve with a garnish of lettuce and mint leaves, to
be wrapped around the spring rolls, and dipping sauce.

Yield:Fifty rolls.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: SPECIAL SECTION

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 4, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HANGING TOGETHER

BYLINE: By Stephen Krasner; Stephen Krasner is a professor of political science
at Stanfor University.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18, Column 5; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 742 words


THE UNITED STATES AND THE REGIONAL ORGANIZATION OF ASIA AND THE PACIFIC,
1965-1985 By W. W. Rostow. Maps. 265 pp. Austin: University of Texas Press. $30.

IN April 1965 Lyndon Johnson made a speech at Johns Hopkins University extolling
the virtues of Asian regionalism. W. W. Rostow - his national security adviser
from 1966 to 1969 and now a professor of political economy at the University of
Texas - uses this initiative as a touchstone for analyzing United States policy
in Asia over the last two decades. He begins with an ingenious defense of
America's involvement in Vietnam where, he argues, American commitments and
American blood bought much needed time. ''In the late winter and spring of 1965
there were not,'' Mr. Rostow says, ''many among the Communist as well as
non-Communist leaders of the region who did not believe in the domino theory.''

By 1975, when North Vietnam took over the South, many East Asian countries had
experienced a decade of explosive economic growth and ASEAN (the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations), the most successful regional organization, had been
firmly established. This ''suffused the region with a degree of inner
confidence.'' Moreover, he maintains, had Congress not sabotaged American
military guarantees to the South Vietnamese between 1973 and 1975, the
agreements that extricated the United States from Indochina might have been
honored.

The regional organization of Asia has, for Mr. Rostow, basically political not
economic purposes. He notes that regional integration with regard to trade or
other economic activities has not been particularly impressive. The most
forceful economic rationale for regional organization is the need for additional
investment, especially in raw materials and agriculture. Why such investment
should be mounted through a regional organization, rather than bilaterally, is
never made clear.

But Mr. Rostow has more important matters in mind than economic development in
his endorsement of regional organiza-tion, for he sees such arrangements as a
way to promote international stability and American interests. The outlandish
power the United States exercised at the conclusion of World War II is
declining. The Russians remain patient and persistent in their attempts to
cement a great arc of domination stretching from Djibouti to Vladivostok. The
American public is prone to isolationist impulses.

In Mr. Rostow's view, regional organizations can contribute to a solution for
these problems for both Asia and America. They give the smaller states of the
area greater leverage in their dealings with both the United States and Japan.
They can assure their independence and neutrality and, in doing so, guarantee
the freedom of the China Sea and the Pacific. Regionalism can also prevent a
single power from dominating Indochina and Thailand, a development that would
threaten the ''vital interests of India, Japan, the United States, Indonesia,
and Australia.''

This is all very heady stuff, geopolitical conceptualizing of the highest order.
But the pieces of this story are familiar. The Russians are implacable and
expansionist. The United States remains the only power capable of preventing the
Russians from consolidating control over the whole southern rim of the Eurasian
land mass. Local nationalism and the fissures within the world Communist
movement are overshadowed by the bipolar conflict. America's vital interests
still, for Mr. Rostow, remain tied to Indochina and other parts of the Asian
mainland because these areas touch the Pacific, and control of the Pacific is
vital for the United States and its allies. THERE is none of George F. Kennan's
measured judgment of what is critical and what is not. A watery skein links Los
Angeles and Bangkok, Thailand. There is little assessment of the potential for
conflict between the United States and its present allies over either economic
matters in the short term or political and strategic factors in the long term.
Despite Vietnam, minimal attention is paid to the domestic requirements for an
effective foreign policy in a democratic state.

The author recognizes that American capabilities are declining, but he cannot
bring himself to the conclusion that America's ability to control events is
eroding as well. Other countries have interests, the United States has
responsibilities. It is not necessary to listen very hard to hear the dominoes
still falling in Walt Rostow's mind.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 4, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Politics of the Press

SECTION: Section 7; Page 53, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 334 words


To the Editor:

In his review of my book ''Inventing Reality: The Politics of the Mass Media''
(April 6), Michael Pollan says that I paint the press ''in such broad, Marxist
strokes'' that I cannot ''adequately account for episodes of courage and
independence, as during Vietnam and Watergate.''

In fact, I dealt with the press's treatment of Vietnam and Watergate in some
detail and found it wanting in ''courage and independence.'' But I do note,
contrary to the impression left by Mr. Pollan, that while the press is committed
to serving the interests of the few, it must also market a product called the
news that is palpable and credible to the many. In a section of my book entitled
''The Limits of Power,'' I observe: 1. Dissident themes can occasionally peek
through, because ideological control is usually informal and implicit and
therefore does not always work with perfect effect. 2. Editors will sometimes
run a story because they fail to see its troublesome implications and unintended
consequences. 3. Differences among elite interests are now and then played out
in the media, lending the appearance - and substance - of diversity. 4. Owners
and publishers have been known to grant their news organizations some modicum of
independence to minimize the appearance and actual degree of overt coercion. And
journalists will sometimes try (successfully) to operate as if they were
independent agents. To quote from my book: ''The idea of a free press is more a
myth than a reality, but myths can have an effect on things and can serve as a
resource of power.''

Finally, I note that the press is not immune to the pressures of democratic
forces at home and abroad and must give some attention to their impact, as with
the civil rights movement, the peace movement, and struggles in South Korea,
South Africa and the Philippines.

Readers will find the above nuanced analysis in the pages of ''Inventing
Reality,'' even if some critics are inclined to miss it. MICHAEL PARENTI
Brooklyn

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SUMMIT IN TOKYO;
JAPAN'S RADICALS SKILLED AT HAVOC

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 500 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, May 4


The Japanese radicals who fired a salvo of rockets toward the site of the
economic summit meeting today are skilled at creating havoc with little
bloodshed.

The police say they believe the various far-left groups who advocate violence to
overthrow capitalism have about 30,000 members, small by Japanese standards.

Most of them split off in stages from the Communist Party and other groups that
they regard as too willing to embrace peaceful politics in pursuit of a
socialist society.

The largest of the groups is called Chukakuha, or Middle Core Faction, which is
thought to have about 3,000 members and a violent underground wing of about 200.
The police say they think this was the group that fired five rockets that sailed
over the site of the seven-nation economic summit meeting just before President
Reagan arrived for a welcoming ceremony.

'More Like Fireworks'

The rockets, although ingeniously assembled, are nowhere near as lethal as
guerrilla weapons used elsewhere in the world. The Japanese rockets usually
consist of spray-can tubes filled with gasoline, mounted on sticks and propelled
by gunpowder.

''In some ways they are more like fireworks at a carnival,'' one Japanese
Government official said. ''They could do damage but are mainly meant to look
spectacular.''

In January, Chukakuha vowed to ''blow apart'' the meeting of leaders from
Britain, Canada, France, Italy, Japan, the United States and West Germany at an
assembly that they regard as a festival of capitalism.

Last November, Chukakuha halted much of Japan's railroad network with
coordinated attacks on communications systems. Some Chukakuha members also
staged a firebomb attack on a Tokyo commuter station. They trotted into action
wearing neat business suits under steel helmets and masks.

In the late 1960's, Chukakuha held several violent demonstrations against the
extension of the United States-Japan Security Treaty, the Vietnam War and
Japan's university system.

The Battle of Narita

After that, most of the mass struggles fizzled out. Chukakuha and other leftists
then devoted most of their energies to staging environmental protests against
the new international airport at Narita and subsequent plans to extend it. It
was at Narita that Chukakuha first tested its homemade rockets.

In September 1984, the group took responsibility for a flame-thrower attack on
the Tokyo headquarters of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party. Two people were
wounded, and the damage was estimated at $3.5 million.

In January 1985, Chukakuha bombed the United States Consulate at Kobe in
southern Japan and set fire to a police research institute in Tokyo.

Although the organization has not been blamed for any recent deaths, in its
early days it was believed to have killed about 46 people. Some of them were
police offers slain in demonstrations, but most were rival leftists beaten to
death in clashes.

The police say they believe that Chukakuha has no connection with foreign
terrorist groups.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

A DOSE OF RADIOACTIVITY TAKEN QUIETLY BY FINNS

BYLINE: By STEVE LOHR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 742 words

DATELINE: HELSINKI, Finland, May 4


When the radioactive cloud from the Soviet Union's crippled nuclear reactor
swept across Scandinavia last week, the criticism from most governments in the
region was sharp and swift. Denmark called Moscow's delay in admitting the
accident ''totally unacceptable,'' and Sweden warned that Moscow's failure to
disclose details of the accident could set back future relations between the two
countries.

But Finland, which along with Sweden absorbed the highest doses of radiation in
the Nordic region, was silent. The official explanation is that such reticence
is a matter of diplomatic style.

''In situations like this, we are not the first to criticize,'' said Jouni
Lilja, a Foreign Ministry spokesman. ''We try to take a constructive approach.''

The desire to maintain a diplomatic silence is particularly strong when the
Soviet Union is involved. For Finland, national survival and economic prosperity
depend on living in harmony with its giant Communist neighbor.

A Deeply Ingrained Policy

Finland's official silence over the Soviet accident is but the most recent
evidence of its national policy of studiously avoiding any words or acts that
might antagonize Moscow. When the Russians went into Afghanistan in 1979 or
occupied Czechoslovakia in 1968, there were no protests from Helsinki. And
Soviet dissidents are encouraged to use other borders as escape routes.

Some Western commentators have attacked Finland for tailoring its foreign policy
to Russian sensitivities and the term ''Finlandization'' denotes a submission to
domination by a powerful neighbor. Finns reply that their policy is the
pragmatic accommodation of a small, neutral nation - a postwar arrangement
reached after difficult and often bloody relations between Finland and the
Soviet Union.

Diplomatic silence, they argue, is a small price to pay for remaining a
capitalist, democratic and independent nation. Finland plays down its foreign
policy differences with the Soviet Union but maintains ''the ideological gulf''
that divides the two countries, according to Max Jakobson, Helsinki's former
chief representative at the United Nations.

From Conquest to Friendship

Finland historical relationship with its neighbor to the east is long and
stormy. In 1809, Finland was conquered by Alexander I and remained an autonomous
duchy of the Russian Empire until the 1917 Bolshevik revolution. Then Lenin
granted Finland its independence. But a year later he changed his mind,
sponsoring a civil war in which Soviet-backed ''reds'' were eventually defeated
by ''whites'' aided by the German Army.

In World War II, Finland twice fought the Soviet Union in territorial disputes,
first in the Winter War of 1939-40 and then in the Continuation War of 1941-44.
Afterward, Finland was forced to pay the Soviet Union about $570 million in war
reparations. And in 1948 the two nations signed their Agreement of Friendship,
Cooperation and Mutual Assistance, under which Finland promised to never allow a
foreign nation to use Finnish territory for aggression against the Soviet Union.

For Finland, the economic benefits of harmony have been considerable. Under a
series of five-year trade agreements, Finland has a guaranteed market in the
Soviet Union. It sells ships, industrial and consumer goods to the Russians
while purchasing mostly Soviet oil and natural gas. The pacts stipulate that the
two-way trade must balance.

Finns Value Trade Links

Accordingly, the Soviet Union is Finland's largest trading partner. The Russians
buy about one-fifth of Finland's exports, giving the Finnish economy a ''red
cushion'' that has helped it to grow at a steady annual rate of 3 percent for
the past decade.

Finns bridle at the suggestion that their country has ''sold out'' to Moscow in
any respect. In the foreign policy arena, they say Finland does not seek to
create controversy, but it is also generally even-handed - an assessment shared
by foreign diplomats here.

For example, after the American attack on Libya, Helsinki issued a statement
criticizing the use of force to settle international disputes but also deploring
terrorism. During the Vietnam War, there were no Finnish Government officials
taking part in anti-American demonstrations, as there were in some other
Scandinavian nations.

''Whether the diplomatic winds come from the West or the East, we tend to hold
our breath,'' said Jakko Iloniemi, former Ambassador to the United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

LOCAL PRESSURE BRINGING MORE LENDING IN INNER CITIES

BYLINE: By JOHN HERBERS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 11, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1394 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 4


St. Louis has long been troubled by poverty and decaying housing. Yet a few
weeks ago, Boatman's National Bank, Missouri's largest, signed an agreement with
neighborhood groups in that city to invest $50 million a year in home loans to
residents with low incomes.

The agreement negotiated by the Association of Community Organizations for
Reform Now, and other agreements like it, have become commonplace in cities
around the country. Some social scientists are saying that the investment they
have produced has done more than all of the billions of dollars in Federal
assistance to arrest decay in old urban areas, neighborhoods long considered too
risky for private loans.

According to its advocates, such lending, which they call reinvestment, has
generally benefitted working-class Americans, allowing them to retain a foothold
in inner cities increasingly populated by high-income managers and professionals
on the one hand and chronically poor unemployed members of minority groups on
the other.

Coalition for Investment

The neighborhood strategy for obtaining private investments has been employed in
39 states and at least 117 cities, according to the Hubert H. Humphrey Institute
of Minneapolis, which recently conducted a study of the reinvestment movement.

The movement is being celebrated here this weekend by a coalition of leaders of
neighborhood groups most responsible for bringing it about. The coalition,
National People's Action, was formed in 1972 in Chicago, and has survived and
grown under the administrations of four Presidents.

It lobbied in 1974 and l975 for Congressional passage of two laws intended to
end the practice in which banks and other lending institutions refused to make
loans by ''red-lining,'' or delineating, neighborhoods where crime and decay are
pronounced.

The Community Reinvestment Act, one of the two laws aimed at countering the
practice, requires banks to make loans in areas where their depositors live. The
other, the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act, requires banks to disclose precisely
where they make home loans.

Coalition Adopts New Tactic

In the 1970's, neighborhood groups' pressure on Federal regulators resulted in
loans from institutions in central cities to people who lived there. But banking
deregulation has led to mergers and closings that reduced the number of lending
sources in the central cities.

The neighborhood groups then changed tactics. Using the two Federal laws, they
threatened to take legal action against mergers and acquisitions unless the
lenders would formally agree to investments in their neighborhoods. In Chicago,
for example, Gale Cincotta, head of National People's Action, and
representatives of other neighborhood groups, persuaded three large Chicago
banks to commit themselves to making $173 million in low-interest loans for both
housing and industrial development in poor neighborhoods. In return, the groups
agreed not to challenge the banks' merger plans.

As a result of such pressure, investment in urban neighborhoods has increased
rather than decreased under deregulation.

''People keep saying that community organizing is dead, that you can't win
anything for poor people in the age of Reagan,'' Mrs. Cincotta said in an
interview before the annual meeting opened Saturday. ''We are proving that is
not so.''

The coalition is also involved in a broad array of other issues. This year, for
example, it is beginning a campaign against what it calls waste in military
spending. It contends that such waste is robbing communities of Federal
assistance under domestic programs.

Rejecting Conventional Beliefs

Leaders of the movement and scholars who have studied it say it is what
community activism is all about.

''Neighborhood reinvestment began with a rejection of the universally accepted
beliefs about neighborhood life cycles, risk and value,'' said Calvin Bradford,
a senior fellow at the Humphrey Institute, in a paper summarizing the
institute's findings. He said such beliefs had ''guided professional real estate
practice and theory as well as Government program design since the 1930's.''

The conventional belief, he said, was that private investment could not make a
profit in old neighborhoods and indeed that lenders might lose money they
invested in neighborhoods undergoing racial and economic change. The
conventional belief, he added, also held that only an infusion of Federal
subsidies and mortgage insurance could lead to renewal.

But residents of such areas, believing that such Government aid led only to more
decay and abandonment, ''refused to accept the assumption that these
neighborhoods were economically obsolete,'' Mr. Bradford said. ''They had put
money in their local banks and savings and loans, and they insisted that these
leaders put it back into their communities.''

Investments in Major Cities

Mrs. Cincotta, recalling the first meeting of coalition leaders from major
cities in 1972, said some people feared the movement would be derailed by
ethnic, income and age differences among participants, who had seldom cooperated
in the past.

One of the 117 cities where the neighborhood strategy has been used in the last
15 years, according to the Humphrey Institute study, is New York, where there is
a vast complex of neighborhood groups. Lenders such as Citicorp, the Anchor
Savings Bank and the Chemical Bank have invested in large areas of Brooklyn and
the Bronx as a result of the groups' actions.

In Hartford, the Connecticut National Bank agreed to grant low-interest home
mortgages and small-business loans in low-income areas after it was challenged
by neighborhood groups. In Newark, major lenders set up a mortgage pool for
low-income areas after neighborhood groups publicized evidence of red-lining.

Some of the new agreements go beyond residential and commercial real estate
loans. In the recent St. Louis agreement, for example, Boatman's promised to
cash welfare and other Government checks at no cost and agreed to provide
low-cost basic checking account services for the poor.

Other Efforts for Neighborhoods

Bankers say the loans have not resulted in the losses some had feared, in part
because the neighborhood groups were engaged in a number of efforts to improve
property and halt decay.

Last September, Richard Hartnack, a senior vice president of the First National
Bank of Chicago, told a conference on urban economic development in Cleveland
that the negotiations that led to his bank's agreeing to invest $120 million in
Chicago neighborhoods had begun with a call from Mrs. Cincotta requesting a
meeting. Getting such a call, he said, was like ''running a nice, quiet prisoner
of war camp in North Vietnam and having Rambo drop in.''

National People's Action has a reputation for disruptive tactics. It once shut
down Washington offices of the Department of Housing and Urban Development for a
day with raucus demonstrations against department practices. But Mr. Hartnack
said his bank had misunderstood the needs of the central city and wanted to find
an investment program it could support.

Conservative and Liberal Ideas

Mr. Bradford of the Humphrey Institute said the reinvestment movement could not
be easily classified philosophically. ''It is a movement which is conservative
in its revolt against the government grants economy and in its advocacy of
private market economies as a key to redevelopment,'' he said. ''It is liberal
in its basic view that while the private economy must serve people's needs, it
needs to be regulated and aided in order to insure that the economy does not
discriminate and harm people in its operations.''

One of the movement's immediate goals here is to secure renewal of the Home
Mortgage Disclosure Act, considered essential to reinvestment. Enacted in 1975,
it was renewed for another five years in 1980 and has been renewed temporarily
since then. But long-term renewal efforts have been locked in Congressional
committees because some members consider it to be inconsistent with the Reagan
Administration's drive for deregulation.

But the act has such strong popular support that no one is speaking publicly
against it. ''It definitely will be renewed,'' said Gerald R. McMurray, staff
director of the Housing Subcommittee of House Banking Committee, said. ''The
only question is for how long.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK;
THE CASE OF THE CHANGELING SPY

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1255 words


WILL anyone ever again be able to write a good old-fashioned spy thriller of a
quality associated with Eric Ambler or John Buchan? The question is prompted by
''A Perfect Spy,'' John Le Carre's new novel. Here Mr. Le Carre, that master of
international hugger-mugger, has, like a champion who decides there is no
challenge in doing again what he has already done superlatively, gives but a
passing show of spy stuff and concentrates on character, the shaping of superspy
Magnus Pym, largely by his rapscallion of a father.

With his first big success, ''The Spy Who Came In From the Cold,'' Mr. Le Carre
gave notice that his spies would be different in at least two ways from those
who came before. For one thing, they would be masters of their craft and the
delectable jargon that went with it, unlike the well-meaning amateurs who tended
to be the heroes of an earlier generation of thrillers. More important, these
pros would find themselves in ambiguous circumstances that filled them with
doubts over the cause in which they were enlisted. It was not that they were not
patriotic; they just found it difficult to know what form patriotism should or
could take in a world where good and bad were all mixed up.

With the appearance of Mr. Le Carre's prototypical superspy, George Smiley, the
cover of all the other spies was blown. The unquestioning assurance of what was
good and who was bad, the unadulterated final pages in which the villains were
foiled and the empire saved, became relics of a time when we knew our enemy and
he was not us.

Although I prefer Smiley to Pym, who has a tendency to make rather much of
himself, I can understand that Mr. Le Carre might feel he has exhausted a strain
personified by a spiritually exhausted agent.

He has given so much pleasure that it would be ungrateful not to wish him well
in whatever direction he chooses to move now. But having spoiled us for ordinary
spy stories, doesn't he have a responsibility to satisfy the appetite that he
has whetted for existential thrillers?

One sure thing about writing a book on the New York intellectuals -whenever it
appears, they will be engaged in a public slanging match about something. So it
is with Alexander Bloom's ''Prodigal Sons: The New York Intellectuals & Their
World,'' an account of the progress or retreat of this company over the past
half-century. For all that time, as Mr. Bloom diligently reports, they have been
doing battle with each other.

They fought over Communism, anti-Communism and anti-anti-Communism, over World
War II and Vietnam, the New Left and neoconservatism and much else, generally in
highly personal terms, and although the band is far more dispersed now than in
the years when everybody could be found in the pages and the cramped offices of
Partisan Review, the battles go on, in small but closely watched publications.

The past dies hard in these circles. One enduring dispute is over whether the
United States, in the person of Franklin D. Roosevelt, sold out Eastern Europe
at the Yalta conference toward the end of World War II. Last November,
Commentary magazine, a voice of the element of New York intellectualdom that has
either moved to the right or found itself there as other intellectuals have
moved to the left, carried three articles that, in one way or another, put the
blame on Roosevelt. Lionel Abel (who has written his own book about New York
intellectual life, ''The Intellectual Follies'') called Roosevelt ''personally
responsible'' for the decisions that ''gave the Soviet Union control of Eastern
Europe.'' Dr. Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, America's former Ambassador to the United
Nations, criticized Roosevelt for not resisting the allocation of seats there to
the Ukraine and Byelorussia, two satrapies of the Soviet Union. And Prof. Robert
Nisbet wrote of Roosevelt's ''complacent ignorance'' and ''credulity toward
Stalin.''

In an article entitled ''Neoconservative History,'' which ran in The New York
Review of Books in January, Theodore Draper dismissed all three assessments. He
maintained that it was the Soviet breach of its promises at Yalta, not the
credulity of Roosevelt, that resulted in the Soviet takeover of Eastern Europe,
that the deal regarding United Nations seats was made before the end of the war,
when the West was still counting on Soviet assistance in the battle against
Japan, and that there is no evidence that Roosevelt was disposed to trust
Stalin.

Anyone acquainted with the give-and-get of the intellectual set could have
predicted that would not end the matter. Such arguments, in increasingly nasty
form, are bound to wind up in letters-to-the-editor columns, and the responses
of Mr. Abel and Mr. Nisbet and Mr. Draper's response to them can be found in the
April 24 New York Review. The language, in accord with tradition, is hot and
personal. Mr. Abel writes that Roosevelt ''was the accomplice of Stalin - as is
Mr. Draper by defending him - in the enslavement of Eastern Europe.'' And Mr.
Draper calls Mr. Abel's letter ''a throwback to McCarthyism.''

As can be seen, the issues that engage our intellectuals are not paltry. A
particularly sensitive dispute began in January when The Nation, which occupies
the left flank of this small cadre, ran some critical remarks by Gore Vidal
about what he called ''the American Empire.''

That brought a response from the right flank, in the persons of Norman
Podhoretz, the editor of Commentary, writing in The New York Post, and his wife,
Midge Decter, writing in Contentions, a newsletter put out by the Committee for
the Free World, which she runs. They defended American history and American
power and criticized the tendency of some American intellectuals to slander
their own country. Mr. Vidal's response to their response, which showed up in
the March 22 issue of The Nation and has set off alarm bells, countercharged
that Mr. Podhoretz and Miss Decter were ''Israeli fifth columnists'' whose
primary loyalty was to Israel, not the United States.

That is not an original line of attack on Jewish supporters of Israel, as The
New Republic (occupying the intellectual center, more or less) was quick to
point out, adding, however, that it was ''unusual to find an example of brazen
racist hate in a respectable national publication.'' The letters columns of two
issues of The Nation contained heated criticisms of Mr. Vidal and his tart
put-downs. In his reply to critics, Victor Navasky, the editor of The Nation,
disclosed that Mr. Vidal had been employing irony, and complained: ''When a
gentile criticizes Israel or raises fundamental questions about its connection
to American Jewry, he or she is said to be anti-Semitic; when a Jew does it he
or she is said to be self-hating.'' Commentary has invited supporters of The
Nation to comment on the matter. Stay tuned.

A couple of weeks ago, the Book-of-the-Month Club threw a 60th-birthday party
for itself at the New York Public Library. It was a good party, filled with
literary personages and old friends, but what gave the event its special quality
was the setting. Many of the guests had spent weeks and months in the reading
room, which had been transformed for the evening into an elegant dining room.

For this guest, the memory of working there, absorbed in a project of one's own,
with the bustle of Fifth Avenue and 42d Street a world away, added a flavor to
the dinner that had nothing to do with the catering. It almost made up for the
fact that the results of such labors never became the Book of the Month.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

LATEST PERFORMANCES SPU CRENNA'S CAREER

BYLINE: By STEPHEN FARBER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1073 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, May 4


Richard Crenna has been a recognizable television personality since he played
the adenoidal high-school jock, Walter Denton, on ''Our Miss Brooks'' - and he
hasn't stopped working in the 30 years since that show went off the air. But in
the past few years, the career of the 59-year-old actor has taken what he called
''a turn for the better.'' In the past he sometimes was dismissed as a bland,
stolid, cardboard hero. But his performances in recent films such as ''Body
Heat,'' ''First Blood,'' ''Rambo: First Blood Part II'' and ''The Flamingo Kid''
confirmed his versatility, and last fall he won an Emmy for the ABC movie ''The
Rape of Richard Beck.'' Last month, he was highly praised for his performance in
a CBS courtroom drama, ''A Case of Deadly Force.''

''People no longer look at me and say, 'That's a part for Dick Crenna,' '' the
actor observed. ''They don't know who Dick Crenna is anymore. And it's wonderful
for me at this stage in my career to have people discovering me.''

On May 18 and 19, Mr. Crenna has another starring role, in ''On Wings of
Eagles,'' a five-hour NBC mini-series based on Ken Follett's best-selling
account of the daring rescue of two Americans from an Iranian prison. Mr. Crenna
portrays H. Ross Perot, the Texas billionaire and founder of Electronic Data
Systems, who hired a retired Army colonel (played by Burt Lancaster) to save two
of his businessmen during the takeover of Iran by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.

A Complex Story

Commenting on the production and on Mr. Crenna's impersonation of him, Mr. Perot
said, ''There are a few details in the show that aren't accurate, and probably
the ultimate fiction is the casting of Richard Crenna as me. His acting was
right on the money, but he's much better looking than I am and speaks much
better than I do. A lot of guys at E.D.S. have given me a hard time over the
casting. They tell me Mickey Rooney would have been more appropriate casting.''

Mr. Crenna had read Mr. Follett's book more than a year before being approached
to do the mini-series, and he had even inquired about the possibility of
purchasing it for feature-film production. ''But you cannot get all of this
story into two hours,'' Mr. Crenna said. ''There are too many subplots, too many
characters, too many plot machinations. That's one of the great advantages of a
mini-series. You can do justice to a complex story.''

Mr. Crenna did not meet Mr. Perot until midway through filming, when the
businessman visited the location in Mexico City where the Iranian prison break
was being re-created. But the actor tried to be faithful to Mr. Follett's
sympathetic portrait of the Texas tycoon. ''Perot is kind of a super-patriot,''
Mr. Crenna said. ''He has tremendous respect for his country, and he tried
everything possible to free his men within the law. But once he failed at that,
he was not going to give them up. Perot in fact went back to Teheran, knowing
full well that he might be arrested. He wanted to see the men face to face. He
actually went into the prison to visit them. With his power and money and
prestige, he could very easily have sat back and let other people handle it all.
But he put himself on the line.''

Views 'Rambo' as Cartoon

Questioned whether there might be a connection between ''On Wings of Eagles''
and ''Rambo,'' in which Mr. Crenna played the Army colonel who enlisted
Sylvester Stallone to rescue American prisoners of war from Vietnam, Mr. Crenna
laughed. ''No, Rambo would have rescued the men much more easily,'' he said.
''He would have simply gone into Iran and blown everyone away. There wouldn't
have been any negotiation. The story certainly wouldn't take five hours to tell.
But I suppose this mini-series is a milder form of Ramboism.''

Scoffing at some of the political condemnations of ''Rambo,'' Mr. Crenna said he
viewed the hit movie as ''a giant cartoon,'' and he personally relished its
phenomenal success. ''You do a lot of things that you think are very good,'' he
noted, ''and nobody sees them. When I was in New York after 'Rambo' came out,
guys were yelling at me from buildings. I don't know why, but they were all
calling me Richie: 'Hey Richie, what do you say? How was it working with
Stallone?' It was a phenomenon not at all familiar to me. I've not been in that
kind of film before. I can't wait for 'Rambo III' and 'V' and 'VIII.' ''

If Mr. Crenna was in the past sometimes underrated as an actor, that may be
because he had to shake his image from television series like ''Our Miss
Brooks'' and ''The Real McCoys.'' Nevertheless, he has no regrets about toiling
in those series. ''Those were great years to be growing up in the business,'' he
said. ''Those shows allowed me to pass through very awkward stages of my career
hiding behind a character. I really wasn't ready to be a leading man, and I
would have found it impossible to enter that arena.''

Eventually he graduated to more substantial roles - in feature films such as
''The Sand Pebbles'' and ''Wait Until Dark,'' and in television films like
''Double Solitaire,'' ''The War Between the Tates,'' ''Thief'' and ''A Girl
Named Sooner.'' But he admitted to feeling frustrated when some of the those
films were ''dismissed by the industry.''

Career Turning Points

He identifies the two recent turning points in his career as ''Body Heat,'' a
film noir in which he played the arrogant murder victim, and ''The Flamingo
Kid,'' a comedy in which he portrayed a charming but dishonest card shark.
''When they saw me in 'Flamingo Kid,' '' Mr. Crenna said, ''people for the first
time said, 'He's acting. He's not like that at all.' Then they started looking
back and remembering Walter Denton and Luke McCoy and 'The Sand Pebbles.' That
gave them pause to reflect on the body of my career. And quite honestly I think
that was part of the reason that I got an Emmy.''

Now he is convinced that his opportunities are greater than ever before. ''I
want to continue to find out what I can do,'' Mr. Crenna said. ''I think if I'm
ever given an opportunity to do one of the classics, there will be an awful lot
of people who will be surprised. If there was ever a fellow in this business
with no reason to complain, it's me. To have survived as long as I have is in
itself a tribute. But to go beyond that and be offered more interesting roles in
the last few years than I've ever been offered before is even more gratifying.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Richard Crenna (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

FOR THE CLASS OF '86, RELIEF AND ANXIETY

BYLINE: By GLENN COLLINS

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 1379 words


''The symptoms of senioritis are both physical and intellectual,'' said Jean
Kwok, an 18-year-old senior at Hunter College High School in Manhattan.
''Physically - well, you experience a certain sluggishness, often alternating
with spontaneous bursts of joy at your own lack of responsibility.
Intellectually - oh, how to describe it? It's as if your brain degenerates to an
undifferentiated mass of tissue.''

These days, the age-old signs of senior slump are racing the primordial symptoms
of spring fever to capture the hearts and minds of the 50,000 high-school
seniors in New York City's public and private schools.

But interviews with students, educators, counselors and mental-health
professionals suggest that for many of those in the class of 1986, this is more
than just a time ''when you feel high school should be finished, already,'' as
Miss Kwok put it. For some college-bound seniors who were interviewed, it is a
time of continuing tension and uncertainty, as they sift indecisively through
the college acceptances they've already received, make comparisons with their
friends and worry about the ''wait-list'' at the school of their dreams.

''There are lots of pressures on these seniors,'' said Murray Kahn, assistant
principal for administration at Stuyvesant High School in Manhattan. ''One
current worry involves where the money will come from, especially for
middle-class kids. The sources of aid are drying up.''

To be sure, many seniors feel a slackening of college-related academic pressures
that peaked in their junior year. ''For the first time, I'm able to enjoy being
a senior,'' said 17-year-old Steven Shabry at Midwood High School in Brooklyn.
''I believe in having the second term in senior year more than make up for any
letdown you might feel.''

But feelings of relief seem tinged with regret and a touch of anxiety among
college-bound members of the class of '86. ''I know I'll miss my closest friends
and the home-cooked 17-year-old senior at the Fieldston School in the Bronx.
''I'm really excited about next year, but also very nervous about it.''

The Normal Nervousness

Nervousness is hardly a novel affliction for those of their age. ''There is
nothing particularly new about high-school seniors feeling anxiety,'' said
Kenneth H. Barton, the principal at Fieldston.

''It can be an awful time,'' said Ellen Stern, assistant principal at Fieldston,
''and I certainly wouldn't want to live through it again for anything.''

But some administrators and counselors think that the class of 1986 faces
stresses unlike those confronting seniors of previous generations. ''Each year
it gets more competitive, and this has always been a competitive school,'' said
Herbert Cooperman, college counselor at Midwood.

''The whole school scene is disturbing and getting worse,'' said Mr. Barton at
Fieldston. ''Now the competition starts in nursery school.'' He said of his
students: ''They're awfully young to be worrying about where they'll be when
they're 25 or 26, but they are.''

Mr. Barton said: ''In the early 70's our kids went to so many interesting places
- to the theater, the arts, the media. Now they're looking to more traditional
occupations, because they're safer and have substantial salaries.''

'Proliferation of Knowledge'

Even some of the highest of high achievers in the class of 1986 also report they
feel the stress of ''the unbelievable proliferation of knowledge,'' said Eric
Altschuler, a 17-year-old Stuyvesant senior.

''The world is more complex now,'' said Mr. Altschuler, whose own
accomplishments are similarly diverse: playing offensive tackle on the varsity
football team, cello in the orchestra, and captaining the Latin team. He will be
class salutatorian and was granted early placement at Harvard.

''In physics, for example,'' he said, ''our generation is off and running just
to try to get up to the things we don't know yet.''

Competitive pressures are of concern not only to educators like Mr. Barton, but
also to those who treat the casualties of stress. ''We could open up an entire
hospital just to treat kids after the S.A.T. scores come out,'' said Dr. Avron
M. Kreichman, head of child and adolescent psychiatry at Beth Israel Medical
Center in Manhattan.

''We tend to think of adolescence as a creative and experimental time, but
increasingly it's becoming a time of rigidly determined conformism,'' said Dr.
Kreichman, who has treated seniors from Stuyvesant and other schools nearby.

Among high-achieving seniors, ''many haven't been permitted to be playful in a
healthy kind of way since they were small children,'' he said.

Many of these students, Dr. Kreichman says, have received ''a classic mixed
message from society and parents: 'We want you to express yourself and be
creative and independent, and if you don't do exactly what we say we'll flunk
you.' ''

He said, ''We're presenting these kids with two choices: they can totally opt
out of the system, or they can buy in, in a cynical way, and do things
expediently.''

Not all the stress is external, however: ''A lot of the pressure comes from
within,'' said Ramona Harrell, an 18-year-old senior at Midwood. ''There is a
strong feeling of wanting to do well, to achieve.''

This class of seniors may, as a group, be better prepared to cope with the
pressures they face than some previous generations. ''It seems to me that
they've been exposed to much more at a younger age than we were, more exposed to
life,'' said Mr. Barton of Fieldston.

''I think this is the most sophisticated senior class we've ever graduated,''
said Leonard I. Harrison, principal of Midwood High School. ''In many ways they
are mature, hard working and disciplined.''

But since overshadowing events like the Depression, World War II and the Vietnam
War haven't shaped this class, unlike some previous generations of seniors, Mr.
Kahn said, ''In a way it's hard to characterize these seniors as a group.'' He
added: ''Each one is involved and interested in what's going on in the world,
but they're not acting as one mass.''

The seniors' own internal drive, as well as external pressures, school and
family stresses can combine with the traditional identity problems of
adolescence to cause problems that range from transitory to serious. ''We've
seen it all,'' said Ron Cancemi, who advises 200 Stuyvesant students a year as
the school's Spark counselor, part of the School Prevention of Addiction Through
Rehabilitation and Knowledge program of the State Division of Substance Abuse.

''Poor academic performance is often just a symptom of other problems these kids
are facing,'' said Mr. Cancemi. During a decade counseling at Stuyvesant, he
said, those problems have included child abuse, parental divorce problems, drug
use and unwanted pregnancy.

He and Stuyvesant's two Board of Education counselors refer seriously troubled
students to a variety of social agencies, drug programs and other resources
outside the school, including Beth Israel Medical Center.

Incidence of Suicide

Dr. Kreichmann said he and his staff have treated students suffering from
physical distresses like nausea and anorexia nervosa, as well as feelings of
hopelessness and depression, alcohol and drug-abuse problems and attempted
suicide. ''The incidence of suicide is increasing among adolescents,'' he said,
''and we take warning signs very, very seriously.''

Currently, the professionals who cope with potential problems in the city's 112
public high schools include 704 guidance counselors, 79 school psychologists and
83 social workers, a ratio of about 318 students per professional. The
availability of counselors and psychologists at the city's private schools is a
patchwork of arrangements varying from school to school.

But even where counseling is available, it may not always be accepted. ''Oh,
sure, there's a guidance office, but nobody wants to go there,'' said Ziyan
Levenson, an 18-year-old Fieldston senior. ''When you need help, you seek it
from your friends or your parents.''

''But to go to your friends is to go to the very people you're competing with,''
said his classmate, Mr. Greer.

''You feel,'' said another Fieldston senior, 18-year-old Doug Esberg, ''that
ultimately you have to rely on yourself.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 7, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
Because of an editing error, an article on the Style page on Monday about the
feelings of high school seniors misidentified a Fieldston student. He is Miyan
Levenson, not Ziyan Levenson.

GRAPHIC: photos of Eric Altschuler, Jean Kwok, Steven Shabry, Ramona Harrell and
Doug Esberg (NYT/Susan Gerguson, Marilynn K. Yee and Alan Zale)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 6, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

LIBYA RAID REFUELS DEBATE ON CARRIERS' ROLE

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1294 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 5


The United States raid against Libya has reinvigorated the debate over the role
and cost of aircraft carriers.

Proponents of the aircraft carrier cite the controversy in Western Europe over
the American attack on Libya as Exhibit A in their argument for more carriers.

''When you use a carrier you can operate unilaterally,'' said Norman Friedman, a
naval expert. ''The attitude of our allies shows that this capability is very
valuable.''

Pentagon officials note that, given the debate in Britain over the raid, it is
highly unlikely that the United States would ask permission to launch F-111
bombers stationed there in a future mission against Libya or other targets the
United States Government decides are ''terrorist associated.''

But some skeptics maintain that aircraft carriers used in the raid did not pack
a lot of punch.

In the raid against Libya, only 20 A-6 planes stationed on two carriers in the
Mediterranean were available to attack Libyan targets with precision strikes at
night, the type of tactics that the Navy says were important to minimize the
risk of American and civilian Libyan casualties. Thus, F-111 bombers were flown
from Britain to insure that five sets of targets could be struck at the same
time.

''The strength of the carrier is that it allows you to use military power
flexibly at your own discretion, but there is a negative side,'' said Barry M.
Blechman, an author on military issues. Carriers, he said, ''represent a
relatively small amount of military power.''

Split in the Pentagon

The debate over the value of carriers has persisted since President Reagan took
office and has sometimes pitted top Defense Department officials against Navy
Secretary John F. Lehman.

Critics have argued that carriers would be vulnerable targets if they were used
to mount attacks againt the Soviet Union in a conflict. They have also
maintained that the striking power of carriers is limited because many of the
planes they carry must be used to defend the carriers against possible air or
sea attack.

Proponents have maintained, in response, that aircraft carriers are flexible
instruments for projecting United States power, since the mix of planes can be
adjusted for different types of missions.

Sam Nunn of Georgia, the ranking Democrat on the Senate Armed Services
Committee, said that while carriers had an important role, some Navy proponents
had exaggerated their striking power against targets on land. ''The lesson is
that land-based Air Force assets, in coordination with the Navy, is a necessary
ingredient these days,'' Mr. Nunn said in an interview.

Under the Reagan Administration the Navy has pushed hard for increasing the
number of carrier battle groups and has maintained a larger share of the
military budget than the Army and Air Force.

Navy plans call for increasing the number of deployable carrier battle groups to
15, from 12. The total cost of an aircraft carrier battle group, including
aircraft but not including personnel, is about $17 billion, according to Navy
testimony to Congress.

The true cost of deploying a carrier battle group is greater, though, because,
as one rough rule of thumb holds, the Navy must have three aircraft carriers to
keep one deployed at all times.

But Navy proponents argue that while Air Force bases may be cheaper than
aircraft carriers, bases do not always remain under American control. This was
dramatized in the planning for the raid on Libya when military planners
considered attacking what had been the American-controlled Wheelus Air Base in
Libya.

Fighting the Russians

In making the case for buying more carriers, the Navy's top leaders have
stressed the value of aircraft carriers in conflicts with the Soviet Union. The
officials have placed less emphasis on the value of carriers in bringing an
American presence to other regions.

''Every dollar has to be justified by what it can do to defeat the Soviet
maritime threat in time of war - that is it, and it only,'' Secretary Lehman
said in an interview in 1981.

Some Navy officials said privately that wartime scenarios against the Soviet
Union have been used because they felt Congress has been loath to sanction
military force since the end of the Vietnam War.

But the popularity among Americans of the Libyan raid and the Grenada
intervention could change this.

In any event, Navy forces have historically been used as an instrument of
foreign policy. In the 215 cases in which United States military power was used
for political ends from 1946 to 1975, naval units were involved in 177,
according to a study by the Brookings Institution.

Question of Effectiveness

The recent raid against Libya, however, has raised the issue of the
effectiveness of carrier airpower.

The raid was carried out within various limits. Military planners decided to
conduct the mission at night to minimize possible casualties because the Libyan
Air Force does not train to operate at night.

Thus, planners decided to use aircraft with complex electronic systems that
allow them to fly at night at low levels and to attempt precision bombing
strikes: A-6 planes.

The two aircraft carriers used in the raid, the Coral Sea and the America,
carried a total of two squadrons of A-6 planes, or 24 planes. Of these planes,
four were to be used as refueling tankers for other planes and six did not
participate.

In the mission, 14 A-6 planes set out for two sets of targets in the eastern
part of Libya. Of these, two did not carry out the mission.

Additional A-6's could have been flown out to the carriers, as has been done in
the past. But some Navy officials make the point that this would have risked
alerting the Libyans. The operation was also seen as a useful demonstration of
cooperation between the Navy and Air Force, which flew F-111's against three
targets.

Other Navy planes attacked Libyan radar, provided air cover or otherwise helped
the execution of the Air Force mission, Navy officials said.

Dispute Over Utility

Navy officials said more Navy planes could have been used to attack Libya had
planners opted for daylight operations or successive raids on Libyan targets
instead of a simultaneous nighttime attack on five targets.

Critics said that if tactics such as attacking at night were needed in the case
of the Libyan raid to reduce casualties, the Navy would be more vulnerable in
attacking adversaries more formidable than Libya.

Reviewing the operation, Secretary Lehman said the raid showed the virtue of
cooperation between the Navy and Air Force. He derided the idea that new
aircraft carriers should be smaller and less expensive, saying the place for
such carriers ''is in the Libyan and Soviet navy.''

Mr. Friedman, the naval expert, argued for a Navy buildup. ''It's quite clear
that with the carriers we have, we are hard pressed to put up two in the
Mediterranean,'' he said. ''If you have a world with constant peacetime
tensions, you need a large number of carriers.''

Mr. Blechman, however, noted that in spending large sums on building carriers,
the United States had forgone other possible alternatives to projecting United
States power outside the Western world, such as additional B-1 bombers and more
special forces troops and equipment.

Robert W. Komer, an Under Secretary of Defense in the Carter Administration,
said the operation did not demonstrate the Navy's prinicipal argument for more
carriers: that they could be used for the more demanding mission of bottling up
the Soviet fleet in its home waters and destroying Soviet naval bases.

''In Libya, you are attacking a fourth-class target,'' he said. ''It was not
much of a test. Aircraft carriers are splendid for little wars; they are just
not very good against Russia.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 6, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

The Real Sickness in Kabul

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 363 words


Though he may fare better than his executed predecessors, Babrak Karmal has
quit, for reasons of health, as leader of the Soviet-imposed regime of
Afghanistan. In a change that on its face promises only more bloodshed, he has
been replaced by Najibullah, the former director of the Afghan secret police.

The Soviet army has occupied Afghanistan and battled a valiant resistance for
five and a half years. Yet it seems no nearer to forming a viable and compliant
Communist regime. Mr. Karmal was plucked from exile in Czechoslovakia in 1979
with orders to end a bloody feud between two Marxist factions, and he has failed
miserably. Even by this century's standards, the occupation has been notable for
its violence. A devastated land remains unpacified, the party remains divided
and the puppets in Kabul remain universally despised.

Some observers contend that Mikhail Gorbachev would withdraw the 120,000 Red
Army troops if the United States and China withdraw all aid to the rebels and
acquiesced in a Kabul Communist regime. A United Nations mediator has labored
for years to fix a timetable for Soviet withdrawal, coupled with a closing of
the rebel supply line through Pakistan. But the Russians ask for an unreasonable
respite of a year or two before they pull out.

As time passes, so does hope for agreement. Having failed to move quickly to end
his Vietnam, Mr. Gorbachev is fast acquiring responsibility for it. Since
Afghanistan, at terrible cost, has been all but formally annexed, why should he
risk condemnation for ''losing'' it? President Zia, Pakistan's strongman, is
being challenged by the young Benazir Bhutto, who sounds less hostile to the
Kabul regime, and this may embolden him to play for more time still.

The Soviet hope of quickly raising a loyal Afghan army was dashed long ago. Mr.
Karmal failed under heavy Soviet pressure to coax non-Communist Afghans to join
his regime. Perhaps the effort truly wore him out; perhaps his younger successor
promises to crack heads more efficiently. Yet the prospects remain grim. The
world can help the Russians save some face, but only if they put honor ahead of
pride and tolerance ahead of conquest.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 6, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Forcing New Zealand to Choose

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 362 words


If New Zealand outlaws visits by nuclear armed or powered ships, there would be
three good reasons for dissolving its alliance with the United States. The
reasons are Japan, West Germany and Britain, whose leaders also face enormous
pressure to ban America's nuclear weapons.

True, it would be a painful rift. The U.S. Navy has only a marginal interest in
visiting New Zealand. Its three million people are eager to preserve the 1951
Anzus treaty with Australia and America. New Zealand is an exemplary democracy
whose soldiers served beside Americans in Korea and Vietnam. Its nuclear allergy
seems to be bipartisan and owes much to France's nearby nuclear tests.

Still, the campaign against nuclear vessels has been relentlessly pursued by a
Labor Party with cousins in other allied nations. Unlike the Australian Labor
Party, Prime Minister Lange has made good on his crowd-pleasing pledge in 1984.
Last year, he barred a destroyer because the United States refused to break its
worldwide policy of not disclosing naval weaponry. He was unmoved by
cancellations of joint maneuvers and consultations and plans in August to enact
a law empowering him to deny port to nuclear ships.

Whether or not that violates the Anzus pact, which makes no reference to nuclear
visits, is a legal question. It plainly breaches established practice. The
United States warns that New Zealand would thus exclude itself from Anzus and
invite a new American arrangement with Australia alone.

Law or no law, the United States will still include New Zealand in its vital
defense zones. So will Australia. But New Zealanders are not alone in wanting to
nestle under America's nuclear umbrella while indulging an antinuclear morality.

The Japanese Government has long been under pressure to close its waters to
nuclear ships. European peace movements and Socialist parties regularly agitate
against deployment of nuclear weapons. If New Zealand secedes from a nuclear
alliance without paying even a psychological price, that would only weaken the
resistance of other governments. If America's point continues to be made, firmly
but politely, it may sink in before the unwise August vote.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 6, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SCOUTING;
Ali's Lawsuit

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 201 words


Muhammad Ali was in court yesterday in Washington for a round in his $50 million
lawsuit against the United States Government and the World Boxing Association.
The suit stems from his being stripped of his heavyweight crown in 1967.
Appearing before Federal District Judge John G. Penn, Ali's lawyers argued
against the Federal Government's position that the suit should be dismissed
because the statute of limitations had expired. After the hearing, Ali signed
autographs for spectators in the courtroom. The suit, filed in December 1984,
charges that the Department of Justice, the Selective Service System and
Government officials had intentionally acted in ''an unconstitutional manner''
by refusing Ali conscientious-objector status during the Vietnam War. Ali was
stripped of his crown by the W.B.A. and convicted of refusing military service
in 1967. He was barred from fighting for three years, and the conviction was
eventually overturned by the Supreme Court. Ali's suit, which seeks to collect
$40 million for income lost as a result of the actions and $10 million in
punitive damages, says the W.B.A.'s refusal to reinstate his title amounts to
''ratification'' of the Government's action.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Muhammad Ali (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 6, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NOTES ON FASHION

BYLINE: By Michael Gross

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 1; Style Desk

LENGTH: 812 words


LAST week's early New York fashion collections for fall, mostly shown by younger
and less-well-established designers, confirm trends seen in Europe earlier this
spring: Hourglass and circle-shaped long skirts, column dresses, peplum jackets,
oversized overcoats, extra-wide pants, softer shoulders, a continuing reliance
on all-black outfits, longer hair or falls for women, body-skimming instead of
body-hugging shapes and boldly zippered everythings.

But there is no tyranny about these ubiquitious styles. For every long skirt,
there is a mini to match it. And for every black dress there is one in teal,
brown, rust or purple - four ''in'' colors for fall that, when they are wrong
(and that is often the case), are very wrong indeed.

ONE trend that seemed silly in

Paris has now taken on more serious overtones. European designers, particularly
Jean-Paul Gaultier and Thierry Mugler, seemed infatuated with Russian ethnic
influences and, more particularly, with militaristic Soviet symbolism. Dubbed
''Soviet Chic'' by some and, more hopefully, ''Detente Dressing'' by others,
this movement has now crossed the Atlantic.

Friday night, the Palladium held a satirical May Day party, with red invitations
written in Russian, bearing an image of Lenin hovering over Soviet troops and
tanks. And tomorrow, the Saint, another discotheque, will be the site of a
Parachute fashion show, featuring designs by Harry Parnass and Nicola Pelly.
Parachute first showed Russian-inspired fashions last year. Now, the invitation
says, the designers have ''expanded their theme to create a new East-West
hybrid: Kremlin guard meets Joe Cool.''

In a seemingly related development, military-inspired designs popped up in many
New York collections last week. An olive-drab G.I. Joe jacket with gold eagle
buttons was a highlight of the collection shown informally by Danny Noble. Marc
Jacobs and Matsuda both mixed martial detailing with otherwise playful fashion
themes. And Patricia Clyne's line was filled with what she called ''cat suits''
in zippered, body-hugging black jersey, evoking ''The Avengers'' television
series as well as images of hooded terrorists stalking the runway.

The last time fashion had a military twist, protesters against the Vietnam War
often donned surplus fatigues. What this new look portends is anyone's guess.
MORTON MYLES first gained renown in a similarly nervous time. In the Cold War
days of the early 1960's, Jacqueline Kennedy wore designs he created for Abe
Schrader. Mr. Myles's fall collection, Morton Myles for the Warrens, offers
glamorous clothes at low sportswear prices; most will retail for under $350.

They include Art Deco chiffons, Fortuny-influenced satin dresses and a number of
designs that display Russian influences. But his inspiration, Mr. Myles said,
was prerevolutionary.

''I don't like the Soviet business,'' Mr. Myles said. ''I resent terrorist
clothes. But we're distanced from Cossacks. And distance lends enchantment when
it comes to fashion inspiration.'' ''NO men back there!'' one of the normally
anonymous backstage helpers warned after Mr. Myles's show. The sentry was none
other than Sydney Biddle Barrows, perhaps better known as the ''Mayflower
Madam.'' After the show, Miss Barrows revealed a less-obvious qualification for
working as a backstage traffic manager for models.

''I started out at A.&S.,'' she said. ''Then I worked at the May Company.
Fashion is the only other business I've been in'' - she paused and continued -
''besides the last one.'' MARTHA PHILLIPS, namesake of the Martha dress salons,
was wearing a medal and a big smile at a party in her Park Avenue flagship store
Wednesday. The medal, Cavaliere in the Order of Merit of the Republic of Italy,
was bestowed upon her recently by the Italian Government for her active support
of that nation's designers. She was smiling because she had just scored a coup:
Francois Lesage, the Parisian embroiderer, had chosen Martha as the exclusive
United States outlet for his ''Touch of France'' jewelry and accessories. In its
first two days, the line brought in $70,000 in sales at the store.

Mr. Lesage said that his designs were inspired by his 120-year-old company's $4
million collection of fine beading and embroidery, including pieces made for
such couture houses as Worth, Schiaparelli, Poiret, Dior and Saint Laurent.

The collection ranges from $395 for a pair of earrings to $3,400 for an evening
bag. But only the prices are serious. A gold-beaded, mink-tailed muff-on-a-rope
in ruby velvet has a surprise silk purse inside. Decorative red leather hands
wearing jewels reach across one bag and form the motif of a matching belt. Each
item in the limited-edition collection is numbered.

''If we make two dozen, we have enough,'' Mr. Lesage said. ''I don't want a
collection like Italian potage, with too many vegetables.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 6, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Peabody Awards Announced

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 231 words

DATELINE: ATHENS, Ga., May 5


''An Early Frost,'' an NBC television movie about a victim of AIDS, and Johnny
Carson, host of the ''Tonight'' show, were among the 27 winners of the 1985
George Foster Peabody Awards announced today.

Also honored for distinguished broadcast programming were Bob Geldof, the
organizer of the ''Live Aid'' concert, and ''Do You Remember Love?,'' a CBS
movie about a college professor and poet who has Alzheimer's disease.

The Peabody Awards, administered by the University of Georgia School of
Journalism and Mass Communications, will be presented Wednesday in New York.

The Peabody judges said Mr. Carson's ''Tonight'' show for nearly 25 years has
''entertained and amused American television viewers as no other program has.''

''An Early Frost'' was ''an honest and tender drama,'' the judges said.

Mr. Geldof was cited for ''his personal commitment to helping alleviate hunger
throughout the world.''

In other awards, CBS News won for ''The Number Man - Bach at 300,'' about Johann
Sebastian Bach, and ''Whose America Is It,'' on conflicts created by
immigration.

Public television's ''MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour'' won for an examination of life
in South Africa titled ''Apartheid's People.'' Another public-television news
program, ''Frontline,'' was honored for the four-part series ''Crisis in Central
America.''

NBC News won a Peabody for ''Vietnam Ten Years After.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 7, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ROBB RECOMMENDS 'TOUGH DIPLOMACY'

BYLINE: By PHIL GAILEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 547 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 6


Former Gov. Charles S. Robb of Virginia, who has assumed a major leadership role
in Democratic Party's centrist wing, asserted tonight that the United States
must couple military assistance to Nicaraguan rebels with ''tough, persistent
diplomacy'' to bring about a political solution to the conflict.

Mr. Robb, in remarks prepared for delivery before a meeting of the Coalition for
a Democratic Majority, said it was a mistake for Democrats simply to oppose any
effort to provide military assistance to the Nicaraguan rebels.

But Mr. Robb, in his first foreign policy speech since leaving the Governor's
office in January, also charged that President Reagan was pursuing the wrong
policy in Nicaragua by viewing the struggle ''as primarily a military one rather
than a political movement with a military dimemsion.''

Aserting 'America's Ideals'

Mr. Robb, the chairman of the Democratic Leadership Council, an independent
group of elected officials, has begun to assert his views on a range of policy
issues in recent weeks. Tonight, Mr. Robb and Representative Claude Pepper of
Florida jointly received the Henry M. Jackson Friend of Freedom Award from the
coalition, which says it represents the liberal domestic views and tough foreign
stance of the late Senator Henry M. Jackson of Washington.

Democrats remain deeply divided on foreign policy questions, particularly the
Nicaragua issue, and Mr. Robb said tonight that the party's ''political
rehabilitation won't be complete until Democrats unite behind a new foreign
policy that vigorously asserts America's ideals and defends our interests
abroad.''

The former Governor, a Vietnam veteran who is a son-in-law of Lyndon B. Johnson,
told his audience: ''We've got to face two realities. First, the Sandinistas
will continue their attempts to subvert their democratic neighbors because
that's what they believe in. They are dedicated Marxists and we shouldn't have
any illusions about their intentions in Central America. Second, a consolidated
communist regime in Managua, allied solidly with the Soviet Union, will pose a
long-term threat to America's strategic interests.''

'Bad Policy and Bad Politics'

Mr. Robb said Democrats should press the Administration to make sure that the
military aid to Nicaraguan rebels carried with it ''strict standards regarding
human rights'' and was channeled through ''the civilian, democratic leaders of
the resistance.''

Mr. Robb warned that the ''new strain of neo-isolationism'' among many Democrats
will be ''both bad policy and bad politics'' for his party. ''Bad policy because
neo-isolationism in the United States emboldens our adversaries and enervates
our allies,'' he said. ''Bad politics because the public won't stand behind a
party that won't stand up for American values and interests abroad.''

He said ''We need to apply all our strengths, not just military aid but also
economic assistance or pressure, the backing of powerful allies and tough,
persistent diplomacy, to win victories for democracy.''

Mr. Robb said Democrats were right to reject Mr. Reagan's foreign policy, which
he said was ''built principally on armaments and superpower arrogance'' and
''offers no clear moral alternative to the cynical power-politics of the Soviet
Union.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 7, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Why America and Europe Clashed

BYLINE: By Richard Burt; Richard Burt is the United States' Ambassador to West
Germany.

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 710 words

DATELINE: BONN


The emotional debate over the raid against Libya, with Europeans accusing the
United States of ''Rambomania,'' and Americans describing their friends here as
''Eurowimps,'' has shed very little light on why American and European public
opinion diverged so sharply.

Was it, as many claim, inadequate consultation, a differing evaluation of the
evidence or simply European indifference to terrorism? In fact, consultations
were intense. Our allies had seen the evidence of Libya's complicity and found
it compelling. And far from being complacent over terrorism, European
governments devote immense resources to fighting it.

The explanation lies beyond this incident, indeed beyond the entire issue of
terrorism. The Western alliance has succeeded in its principal task of defending
Europe against invasion or coercion by the Soviet Union. Over the past 20 years,
however, nearly every crisis in the third world has produced major
trans-Atlantic strains: the Vietnam War, the 1973 Middle East conflict, the
Iranian hostage crisis, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and now Libya.

In each case, the dominant American impulse was to do something about a
situation that Washington was not prepared to accept. In contrast, the
Europeans' dominant impulse was to insulate European interests from the
consequences of events that they felt powerless to influence directly.

The key to these divergent responses is the differing perceptions of the United
States and its allies about their respective capacities to exercise power. For
the average American, the lesson of 20th century history has been that our
country can wield substantial influence at great distances. Throughout the same
period, European nations have seen their power steadily diminish and their
overseas role dwindle. Peace on their own continent has had to be twice
restored, and for 40 years sustained, with the vital assistance of the United
States.

If Americans take their nation's capacity to project power at great distances
for granted, Europeans almost certainly tend to underestimate their potential
influence. Nevertheless, it is reasonable for the average West German,
Frenchman, Spaniard or Italian to feel less able than the average American to
meet more distant security challenges, such as state-sponsored terrorism. The
disparity in power between the United States and any single European nation will
thus continue to cause divergent responses to external threats. It will also
continue to feed resentments on both sides of the Atlantic, with Americans
asserting that Europeans are too docile and parochial and Europeans arguing that
the United States is too eager to act unilaterally.

The pattern is familiar and perhaps even tolerable. But the strains and
resentments may be cumulative and seem to be occurring with increasing
frequency. It is possible, then, that at some point the Western alliance will be
undermined in a fundamental and irreversible way. The answer seems clear: a more
united and influential Western Europe. Only through greater unity can the
Europeans create a greater but also well-founded sense of self-confidence. A
strong and confident Europe would be able to meet, with the United States,
common security challenges. A united Europe, of course, might not always agree
with the United States, but at least Europe's basic impulse to action, when
facing external challenges, would be more like the American impulse, because its
capabilities would be more like those of the United States.

Over the past two weeks, even as several thousand Europeans marched through the
streets to protest America's campaign against terrorism, European governments
moved to close the most recent trans-Atlantic rift, to restore their credibility
and to take tougher measures against Libya. It is important that the United
States recognize and give further encouragement to these common European
efforts. European unity is a distant goal, and the path leading there will be
long and frustrating, for us and for the Europeans. But a more united Europe
will not only be a more capable partner, it will also reduce the necessity for
American unilateralism. Indeed, in the long run, a stronger and more united
Europe may be indispensable to the preservation of the alliance.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 8, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Books: Another Round

BYLINE: By Richard F. Shepard

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 823 words


TABLE MONEY By Jimmy Breslin. 435 pages. Ticknor & Fields. $17.95. IT is easier
to write a book about New York than it is to write a good novel about New
Yorkers.

New York would not, of course, be New York without its special breed of
citizens, but New Yorkers are such a diverse lot that it takes a native, or a
longtime resident, to sniff out the differences and explain the variations of
location, lineage and leanings, as Jimmy Breslin does with his new novel about
Irish Queens, ''Table Money.''

These fine differences add up to substantially more than the tourist perception
that all New Yorkers are one, that they rush and push and speak with their
mouths closed in such a way that they are clearly defined from the rest of the
world. Not so. The fine tunings are there and it takes a sensitive writer to
bring them in loud and clear.

There is, for example, the Jewish Brooklyn of Malamud, Doctorow or Kate Simon.
The Harlem reflected in Langston Hughes is seen in a different mirror as the one
viewed by Claude Brown. Mr. Breslin's Irish Queens is more feisty than the
Queens summoned up more gently by Mary Gordon. His Queens is one of Irish and
Germans whose families are earlier settlers, antedating the influx of blacks,
Jews, Asians, Puerto Ricans and other Hispanic people, that have all but swept
away the old-timers in the last 20 years. In this superbly described Breslin
Queens the men tend to drink and throw the money left over on the table for the
wife to spend on the house, which is kept painfully and antiseptically spotless.

Mr. Breslin is a newspaper columnist, a recent winner of the Pulitzer Prize, and
a man who may know more bars in his Queens than the Census Bureau. He knows many
other things, too. He knows how the borough works, how the pride of the people
reacts aggressively against condescending Manhattan snobberies, how the stresses
of modern life are affecting young people in the strictly old church community
of which he writes. His style is scathing on almost every subject but through it
comes an affection and understanding for the people whose lives he has
undertaken to limn in print. It is a novel that moves and is often moving. If
there is any fault, it is that he has too much to say, as though this might be
his last chance to get all views aired. But this is more a cavil than a
castigation for a book that so fully introduces readers, even New Yorkers, to a
world that they may not have known.

We are in Glendale, a section near the Brooklyn border but more isolated
culturally from the black neighbors across the city line than any international
boundary could enforce. Owney Morrison, the book's hero, is back at work in 1970
as a sandhog, his family trade, after returning from Vietnam where he won the
Medal of Honor. He also developed bad dreams and is a man given to sudden
impulse, usually with good cause but in a violent way. He marries Dolores, a
neighborhood girl who is determined to break the mold in which women were shaped
in Glendale. She loves her husband and their young daughter but she is
determined to put herself through medical school and become a doctor.

The people of Glendale have strong thoughts on what is right and what is wrong:
there is a strong work ethic, religious belief, hatred of blacks and resentment
of sorts about Jews. As often as not, prejudices show more strongly in their
words than they do in their practices because many, particularly the sandhogs,
have blacks as equals in the tunnel trade. If there is one curse hanging over
the community, it is not blacks or homosexuals or abortion. It is drink and this
is Owney's affliction, one that he thinks he can lick by himself, but his wife
knows he can't and leaves him.

This is the essential plot of ''Table Money,'' but Mr. Breslin has things going
for him on the side, too - a yarn of corruption in the union, of gangster
terrorism, of a college romance. The writing is vintage Breslin, which means it
is boisterous and knowledgeable of how people speak. It is full of what Jewish
Queens might call ''shtiks,'' little bits of special business that put a high
polish on an act. Among these are the antics of the obese, pajama-clad lawyer
who spends his time drinking, the description of a brawl at a wedding, the
paramedic who lives in a Long Island City loft and has a million-dollar view of
shining Manhattan and notes that, in contrast, ''they pay ten thousand dollars
to look at me.''

This is a story with interesting, journalistic detail about the work of sandhogs
on water tunnels built beneath the Bronx and upper Manhattan, about the many
neighborhoods of Queens, about the way people look and act in their native
habitats, Queens and elsewhere.

For the moment, Queens, this part of Queens as yet unheard from in the world of
New York letters, has found its bard, and you don't have to live within
turnstile radius of the place to appreciate the tune he is calling.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Jimmy Breslin (Jill Krementz)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 8, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Walter Goodman

SECTION: Section C; Page 23, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1085 words


INTERVENTION: How America Became Involved in Vietnam. By George McT.

Kahin. 550 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $24.95.

THE course by which the

United States lurched its way deeper and deeper into Vietnam, much reported on
and argued over during the last 20 years, has found a persuasive chronicler.
George McT. Kahin, who teaches international studies at Cornell University,
draws on a mass of policy papers, some only recently made available, and on
interviews that began with John Foster Dulles in 1950 and concluded with George
W. Ball and McGeorge Bundy in 1984 and 1985. Out of all this he has produced an
illuminating work about a darkening series of decisions.

The reader can discern the citizen's passion through the historian's prose. Mr.
Kahin believes that America's ever-escalating intervention in a country where it
had few economic or strategic interests was the consequence of a series of
escalating miscalculations. He places the responsibility for sticking with
''erroneous'' assumptions and perceptions on those whom David Halberstam labeled
''the best and the brightest'' - Robert S. McNamara, Dean Rusk, McGeorge Bundy,
William P. Bundy, Walt W. Rostow, Henry Cabot Lodge and the Joint Chiefs of
Staff - but Mr. Kahin is careful to do justice to nuance and shading as he lays
out in detail which Presidential adviser took which position at which crisis and
to what degree and why.

For years, the situation in the field kept deteriorating despite or owing to
their prior decisions. In his harshest assessment of the advisers President
Johnson inherited from President Kennedy, Mr. Kahin observes that their own
reputations were so closely bound up with the military role that the United
States had assumed in Vietnam that, even as the South Vietnamese Government came
apart, they found it difficult to shift to a political strategy and try to make
a deal.

''Even if more attuned to American interests,'' he writes, ''such a move would
have exposed their own previous counsel and very possibly been costly to their
tenure in the administration.'' The war's critics, particularly Mr. Ball, Clark
Clifford and Senator Mike Mansfield, are seen to have had a clearer view of the
cost and futility of America's Vietnam involvement.

In one of the book's surprises, President Johnson emerges as a leader who had to
be pressured into the military buildup that finally drove him from the White
House. Mr. Kahin describes in detail how in 1965 the President held out for five
weeks against almost all his senior advisers before approving a big increase in
American forces, a commitment that locked the United States into a major ground
war.

Mr. Kahin makes the case that from the start the intervention in Vietnam was
based on political wrongheadedness. America's initial concern over what happened
in distant French Indochina was a spinoff of its fears that postwar France might
go Communist if it suffered humiliation in Asia. At first the assistance was
modest, and Mr. Kahin maintains that, when the French were forced out of their
former colony after the 1954 Geneva agreement, the United States could have cut
its losses and withdrawn.

Instead, he writes, the Eisenhower Administration ''moved assertively into a
much more fundamental phase of intervention, and in doing so staked American
honor and prestige on a policy that, once undertaken, was difficult to
reverse.'' President Kennedy, entering office as tough on Communism, carried on
in the path of his predecessor.

Administration planners took as their models the successful campaigns against
Communists in Greece, the Philippines and Malaya, all, in Mr. Kahin's view, very
different situations. Lacking in South Vietnam, he emphasizes, was a regime with
a popular base that could resist an indigenous insurgency. Mr. Kahin, who sees
the actions of the North Vietnamese mainly as responses to America's actions,
dismisses the contention that the trouble in Vietnam was caused by ''aggression
from the north.'' The problem, in his view, was a vacuum in the south.

Central to America's policy in Vietnam, Mr. Kahin holds, was the ''effort to
control the threat of nationalism and create an artificial, externally sustained
state that lacked any substantial indigenous foundation.'' The American
military, the diplomats, the Central Intelligence Agency imposed ''leaders'' on
South Vietnam and then scuttled them, the criterion being the extent to which
they would do Washington's bidding. Any sign of accommodation with the Vietcong
was seen as weakness, if not betrayal.

By the end, he concludes, the war was not between North and South Vietnam, but
between the United States and the Vietnamese.

Mr. Kahin is especially critical of Washington for not lending support to the
militant Buddhists in the South who, he asserts, offered a middle ground between
the Saigon Government and the Vietcong. That may be wishful retroactive thinking
on his part, but in the event, America, lacking faith in any political
settlement, turned to napalm, ''strategic hamlets'' and other tactics that
caused havoc in the country that was ostensibly being saved. As each effort
failed, the investment of men and firepower increased.

In defending to the nation the bombing of North Vietnam and the dispatch of
hundreds of thousands of American ground troops, President Johnson and his
supporters resorted often to the concept of ''honor'' -once in, withdrawal would
be dishonorable. The reader of ''Intervention'' is likely to come away feeling
that ''honor'' is the last refuge of a failed policy maker.

Drawing lessons from a disaster such as Vietnam is irresistible. Opponents of
the Reagan Administration's truculence toward Nicaragua cannot fail to find in
''Intervention'' a cautionary experience. Such comparisons can be tricky; they
invite misleading simplifications. Yet there they are.

Three lessons in particular run strongly through Mr. Kahin's work. First,
lacking a truly popular government or movement to support, American intervention
is bound to be costly, both to the United States and, more drastically, to the
country on which it exercises its power. Second, once an Administration makes a
commitment, it becomes politically difficult to back off, even though all the
signs are dire. Third, as a result, the official explanations to the nation of
an ill-advised interventionist policy are not likely to be candid, and when
failure can no longer be hidden, the policy's coffin will be covered with the
flag of ''honor.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of George McT. Kahin (Margaret Fabrizio)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 9, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ARMS AS AID: RISING DOUBT

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 885 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 8


The overwhelming Congressional votes this week against President Reagan's
proposed arms deal with Saudi Arabia reflect rising doubts among legislators
about the Administration's plans to use American-supplied weapons as a primary
instrument of foreign policy.

To Congressional supporters of the Administration, this is a deeply disturbing
trend that could undermine President Reagan's ability to conduct foreign affairs
from the Middle East to Central America.

''Micromanagement of foreign policy has reached a nadir in this Congress,'' said
Representative Henry J. Hyde of Illinois, a senior Republican on the Foreign
Affairs Committee. ''And it makes it very difficult in a dangerous world where
there is increasingly less margin for error.''

But Congressional critics of the Administration say they are simply carrying out
their constitutional responsibilities to control the Federal purse and influence
Administration policies. Representative Dave McCurdy, an Oklahoma Democrat on
the House Select Committee on Intelligence, expressed a view of the
Administration's policy that is common among the critics: ''You don't buy
allies.''

Consultation Sought

Moreover, even supporters of Mr. Reagan say the Administration has caused many
of its own problems by failing to adequately consult Congress on foreign policy
matters. Mark Helmke, a spokesman for Senator Richard G. Lugar, chairman of the
Foreign Relations Committee, said: ''Lugar keeps stressing that there has to be
a partnership on foreign policy. As soon as the Administration goes it alone,
they are much more likely to lose.''

As Mr. Helmke noted, the Administration had a foreign policy triumph in the
Philippines, where it helped to replace Ferdinand E. Marcos as President with
Corazon C. Aquino. But the Administration moved to support Mrs. Aquino only
after the White House listened to advice from many lawmakers that he drop Mr.
Marcos.

In the Saudi case, the Administration continues to defy large majorities in both
chambers who voted to block Mr. Reagan's plan to sell advanced missiles worth
$354 million to Riyadh. Mr. Reagan vowed to veto the resolution of disapproval
and Donald T. Regan, the White House chief of staff, predicted today that the
veto would be sustained, at least in the Senate.

A 'Continuous Struggle'

But the President faces a very difficult task. In both chambers, the margin
against his plan was far more than the two-thirds vote needed to override his
veto.

Representative Dick Cheney of Wyoming, a member of the Republican leadership,
observed that Congress and the White House have been engaged in a ''continuous
struggle'' over foreign policy matters since the end of the Vietnam War. That
struggle has heated up in recent months.

Congress has twice thwarted President Reagan's plan to send $100 million in
military aid to the Nicaraguan rebels, and a bill heading for the House floor
would effectively bar secret aid to insurgents in Angola.

Today, a House subcommittee voted to subpoena the bank records of brokers and
suppliers who handled $27 million in nonmilitary aid for the Nicaraguan rebels
last year. The House intelligence committee voted to continue to bar the Central
Intelligence Agency from an operational role in the Nicaraguan battle. And four
Senate Democrats urged President Reagan to more closely consult with Congress
under the War Powers Resolution in light of the recent attack on Libyan targets.


An Element of Policy

To the Administration and its supporters, the use of military aid and arms deals
constitutes an essential element of foreign policy. This week, they have argued
that the main reason for completing the Saudi sale was political rather than
military, that selling arms was a sign of friendship and a way of cementing
relationships with moderate Governments in the Middle East.

Moreover, Mr. Cheney said, selling arms to a country creates a ''continuing
relationship'' that involves training troops, replenishing stockpiles, and
supplying spare parts. According to this reasoning, Washington has extra
leverage over any country that is dependent on American weapons.

But that argument failed partly because many members of Congress did not accept
the Administration's contention that American arms had made Saudi Arabia a
useful and reliable ally. Many said the Saudis had undermined the Middle East
peace process by denouncing Egypt and financing the Palestine Liberation
Organization.

President Reagan eroded his own case by calling attention to the issue of
terrorism and by ordering American planes to attack Libya. The resulting mood,
particularly in light of the Saudis' support for Libya, worked strongly against
the President on the question of aid to Riyadh.

A third factor, in Mr. Cheney's view, was ''crass, crude politics.'' Even though
Israel and the lobbying groups that support its policies stayed out of the fight
over arms for the Saudis, many lawmakers said they still did not want to risk
the wrath of Israel's supporters in the next election.

Supporters of the President also say that the Administration, distracted by the
Tokyo summit meeting, did a particularly poor job of promoting the arms deal.
The result, Representative Hyde said, is that the Administration is now lamed by
a wound it helped inflict on itself.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 11, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOR VIETNAM VETERANS, FLORIDA WOOD IS 'HOME'

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1162 words

DATELINE: POMPANO BEACH, Fla., May 7


It is midmorning under a sweltering sun and a dozen Vietnam veterans living in
the bush are working on their second case of beer.

Tattooed, bearded and thin, the men in the camp are the nucleus of a group of
more than 60, most of them veterans of the Vietnam War, others simply drifters,
who have sporadically made their home in a dense patch of tropical trees here
for the past five years. They call it ''the jungle.''

Some of the veterans give no details about their past or of their roles and
ranks in Vietnam, or even their real names. But Vietnam haunts their lives. They
say they even have an enemy: the Broward County Sheriff's Office, whose officers
occasionally clear the men and their ramshackle huts from the woods. Officers
say the woodsmen sometimes resort to shoplifting from businesses nearby.

The woodsmen have also drawn the anger of people who live near the woods.
Residents of the nearby Highlands neighborhood say the men sometimes take
garments from their clotheslines and that the fringes of the 10-acre woods are
stewn with garbage.

Fires at Two Shacks

Last weekend, two of the woodsmen's shacks burned. Sheriff's deputies say it was
a brush fire. The woodsmen say it was arson.

Ernie Cohen, 41 years old, a three-year veteran of Vietnam, said that he found
his campsite a smoldering pile of ashes. ''Everything was burned up,'' he said.
''I lost two bags of clothes, a transistor radio with headphones, food, the
family Bible. That was the only thing I was really concerned about -my family
Bible.''

On Monday night, according to the woodsmen, a group of local vigilantes wielding
shotguns ran through the woods, although no shots were fired. ''Easy pickings,''
a woodsman said he heard one of the intruders say.

George Crolius, public information officer for the Broward County Sheriff's
Office, said: ''There are some of those local hicks in the area and some of them
do have firearms, and there's no telling what they might do. That's why we're
eager to get the campers out of there and clean the place up.''

On Tuesday, the Broward County Commission voted to find shelter for the men and
provide them with medical assistance. Officials say they plan to have all the
men out of the woods within six months and to raze the campsites, which they say
present a fire hazard.

'I Realize We're a Nuisance'

The men, many of whom admit they abuse alcohol and have emotional problems,
acknowledge they need help. ''Who wants to stay here forever,'' asked James
Yohey, 52, a Korean War veteran who has lived in the woods for more than two
years. ''I realize we're a nuisance, an eyesore.''

The men emphasize that their main reason for living in the woods is the
camaraderie and trust between them.

''These are my brothers,'' said Mr. Cohen, ''and I'm not leaving without them.''

The woodsmen say that local veterans' groups have offered them weapons but that
they turned them down. Since the weekend, however, the men have set up a watch
to guard against intruders.

''We're not out here playing Rambo in the woods,'' said one, who identified
himself as T.C. ''People here just gave up on society. Vietnam vets are square
pegs in round holes. Just can't fit back in.''

T. C., 34, who has a beard that reaches his chest and wears a floppy leather
hat, offers a beer to a visitor. He does not want to talk about Vietnam.

''That's not the issue,'' he said. ''The issue is being able to eat every day.''

In the past year, law-enforcement officers say, five of the men from the camps
have walked onto the railroad tracks that parallel the jungle's western edge and
''kissed the train,'' camp parlance for committing suicide. The most recent
death occurred April 26. The victim, a Navy veteran, had not served in Vietnam.
The campers are still wearing tattered black armbands. Other Campsites in U.S.
Similarly reclusive veterans have been found living in remote areas of the
Pacific Northwest and Hawaii, although the Veterans' Administration says it has
no information on how many.

Here, in an unincorporated area of Broward County a few miles north of Fort
Lauderdale, the men admit strangers to their camp but insist on escorting them
in and out.

Huts are made of plywood, with pieces of clear plastic for windows and furniture
salvaged from dumps. A hose attached to a fire hydrant, placed there in case of
brush fires, serves as a shower. There is a low-slung hut called the Honeymoon
Suite for men who have female visitors.

A pit 15 feet deep, called a ''Charlie Hole'' after the pits used by the
Vietcong guerrillas in Vietnam, is filling up with discarded beer cans.
Eventually, the men have decided, the cans will be cashed in and the money given
to the annual muscular dystrophy drive.

At midday, a marijuana joint is passed around. On an improvised wood-burning
grill in a sandy clearing, two pots are steaming. One has a concoction of beans,
tomatoes, bologna and noodles; the other has more beans and canned vegetables.
The food is a gift from a nearby chapter of the Disabled Veterans of America in
response to a story about the woodsmen in a local newspaper.

Some Get Temporary Work

As their primary source of cash, the men get temporary jobs at construction
sites or with trucking or storage concerns. But work is not always available. A
veteran who calls himself Jack O'Diamonds sold his blood until his right arm
became infected. ''I got that from living in the jungle,'' he said.

A privately owned employment agency, Labor Force, across the Florida East Coast
Railway tracks, is one source of jobs. When the woodsmen do decide to work, said
Alvin Robinson, manager of the agency: ''They're great workers. The customers
come back and say, 'The guys don't look too good, but they work like a son of a
gun.' ''

Robert E. White, the director of the Fort Lauderdale Veterans Center, said he
had been trying to help the men obtain benefits and medical attention. ''They
say they like to be there in the camp with each other, but deep down inside they
don't feel that way,'' Mr. White said. ''They're there because there's some
issue they haven't faced.''

'Helping Each Other'

Most of the men acknowledge this. ''When one of us snaps, we take each other off
the tracks,'' says Ricky Shaw, 37, a former Vietnam infantryman from Bruceville,
Ind. ''That's why we're together, helping each other. But I'm sure tired of
collecting souvenirs from dead people.''

Mr. Shaw, who has lived in the woods for two years, lifted his shirt to display
shrapnel scars on his chest, abdomen and back, and then said:

''But there are deeper, imbedded scars, and they're hard to heal. They sent us
over there when we were so young and stupid we didn't know how to clean our
guns. You're lying in your bunker and your buddy next to you looks up the wrong
way and his head is half blown off, and you're trying to put it back together.
Well, a lot of the pieces in us scattered and we can't put them back together.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Florida; Photo of Ernie Cohen in wreckage of his campsite; Photo
of Ron Dague, Dean Robertson and Jack O'Diamonds at their campsite (NYT/Nick
Madigan)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 11, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE STORY OF A TOWN

BYLINE: By Joyce Maynard; Joyce Maynard writes a syndicated column, ''Domestic
Affairs.'' Her most recent book is ''Camp-Out,'' a children's book written with
her husband, Steve Bethel.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 20, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5924 words


OUR FAMILY CHRISTMAS CARD THIS YEAR showed the five of us - my husband, Steve
Bethel; our children, Audrey, Charlie and Willy, and me - lined up on our couch,
beside the tree we had just cut down. Three good-looking and healthy children;
two parents, married to each other. Snowdrifts outside, and a big black dog -
just out of camera range - licking our feet. There is even an American flag that
my sons like to use for parades, propped in the background. Our arms are around
each other, and we are (except for Charlie, who sucks his thumb) laughing.

Well, that was December. In January came the news: The Department of Energy had
named 12 sites as finalists for a dump for highly radioactive nuclear waste -
one of the largest single public-works projects in the history of our country.
Three of the sites are in Minnesota, one in Wisconsin, two in North Carolina,
one in Georgia, two in Virginia, two in Maine. And one of the 12 locations is a
78-square-mile area that includes the small town of Hillsboro, New Hampshire,
where we have been living for close to 10 years now and where, we imagined, we
would be living always. Steve and I moved here nine years ago. We had been
living in New York City. I was a reporter for The New York Times; he was an
artist, with a loft in SoHo. When we got together, we headed for my home state
of New Hampshire - an old dream.

''I feel a sudden desire to buy land,'' I had written in 1972, as an 18-year-old
Yale freshman, in The New York Times Magazine.

''Just a small plot of earth so that whatever they do to the country I'll have a
place where I can go - a kind of fallout shelter.'' We put every cent we had
into a 200-year-old farmhouse five miles outside of Hillsboro. It seemed the
safest and best place we could imagine to raise children.

We live at the end of a dirt road, with no neighbors in sight.

Few cars venture out this far from town. Steve works in a studio he built in our
back field. In winter, after a snowstorm, we are just about the last ones plowed
out, which is fine with us. In summer, we swim every afternoon in the swimming
hole at Gleason Falls, a half-mile down the road. All three of our children were
born in our house, on our bed.

Out here, the only night lighting comes from the sky, and the only sounds come
from the woods. Steve and I used to turn to each other and reflect that not even
a millionaire could be more privileged, right at that moment, than we were.

Our house sits in the middle of the proposed nuclear dump. If the New Hampshire
site is selected, the Government will buy up 20,000 acres of land here - homes,
farms, businesses. The final decision won't be made until 1998, when my
2-year-old will be entering high school. So all of us here could face years of
waiting, worrying whether we have a future in our town, and whether the
Government will bury radioactive waste under the land we hoped to leave to our
children.

The specter of technological failure hangs over us, like the radioactive clouds
spreading from the Ukraine. Of course, we understand the Soviet reactor that
caught fire two weeks ago differs markedly from a nuclear dump and even from the
Seabrook nuclear reactor, here in New Hampshire. Still, the accident has left my
neighbors and me with a new sense of our lives' uncertainty, and even peril.

Even before the accident, we were feeling the effects of the preliminary
decision to consider our town for a nuclear dump. Dozens of real-estate deals
fell through. Building plans were postponed. We are a town held hostage - not by
foreign terrorists, but by our own Government. Not just economically, but
emotionally, too, many of us are devastated - plunged into a period of terrible
fear and uncertainty, our lives disrupted, as we frantically pursue
alternatives, challenge the Government's site-selection process and await the
outcome.

TEVE REMEMBERS THE EVENING - JAN. 16 - he first learned about the dump. He was
reading to our son Charlie, with the news on. A map of our area flashed on the
television screen, and the anchorman mentioned ''a repository project,'' which
would not be built until sometime after the year 2000.

There wasn't much public comment, those first few days after the announcement.
The chairman of our town's Board of Selectmen even said, ''I don't mind if they
put it here, just so long as they put it in safely.''

As for me, I didn't like the idea, but it has been my way, since I've had
children, to let other people do my protesting for me. I vote. I sign the odd
petition. I spoke up once at a school budget meeting in favor of starting a town
kindergarten. But what I always told activist friends, when they would urge me
to join them at antinuclear rallies or peace encampments, was, ''I have to tend
to my own backyard.''

Once my own backyard was threatened, though, I figured I'd better get my facts
straight. I called up the Crystalline Repository Project Office in Argonne,
Ill., run by the Department of Energy, and spoke with Scott Hinschberger, a
geologist with the dump project.

''High-level nuclear waste'' is the highly radioactive byproduct generated by
the production of commercial nuclear power and the manufacture of nuclear
weapons. Hinschberger told me that currently there is no permanent repository
for this waste in the United States. It's all sitting in pools of water inside
the reactor buildings at commercial nuclear power plants, at military sites and
at D.O.E. storage facilities. And because those pools have been filling up fast,
in 1982 Congress passed Public Law 97-425, the Nuclear Waste Policy Act. That
law calls for the construction of the nation's first high-level nuclear waste
repository, most likely in Texas, Nevada or Washington State, by 1998, and the
selection of a second site, probably from among the 12 in the Middle West and
the East. Plans for these repositories have already been developed by the
Department of Energy (illustration, page 23).

Because burial is the method of disposal currently favored by the D.O.E. (box,
below), the act lays out a procedure for site selection based principally on
geological considerations. Nuclear waste has a half-life of up to 24,000 years,
but the canisters containing it will break down after several hundred years.
Storing the canisters in solid rock - salt, tuff, basalt or granite - should
minimize radioactive leakage. ''The rock,'' explained Hinschberger, ''becomes
the container.'' We in Hillsboro, he added, are sitting on one of the most
substantial pieces of granite east of the Mississippi River.

Geology would not be the only factor in selecting a dump site, Hinschberger
continued; the D.O.E. would also examine hydrology, population density,
seismicity, and the existence of endangered species and Federally protected
lands. Human emotions would not be a consideration, however. ''Everybody loves
their home,'' Hinschberger told me. ''Nobody wants a repository.''

Every state with a proposed site on the list would be given 90 days to prepare a
formal response to the D.O.E. plan, responses that would be delivered at
hearings in April. Sometime within a year, we would learn whether our site is
still on the list. If it is, the D.O.E. will bring in teams of geologists to
drill bore-holes for additional testing. In 1991, the field will be narrowed to
five candidates, then to three.

In 1998, after $3 billion worth of further drilling and testing, the President
(on the advice of the D.O.E.) will nominate his or her choice for a waste dump.
The governor of the state in which the chosen site exists, as well as Indian
tribes whose lands are affected, will both have the right to veto the
President's choice. But a simple majority of both houses of Congress can
overrule a governor's or a tribe's veto.

What happens then? I asked Hinschberger. ''We would acquire 11,000 to 20,000
acres,'' he answered. The Government would exercise its right of eminent domain
and purchase houses and land within the site's borders. Some houses would be
destroyed; some residents of the area might be able to lease their homes back
from the Government, but actual ownership will be impossible.

And what if I didn't want to sell my house? I asked. Long pause. ''The Army
Corps of Engineers would handle that.''

After the Government takes possession of the 39-square-mile site, con-struction
workers will widen the test shaft, build a 200-mile network of underground
tunnels and leave a mountain of displaced rock that could be bigger than the
largest of the Egyptian pyramids. Then they'll begin trucking in the nation's
nuclear waste, which they will bury until all the tunnels are filled up. At that
point, in the words of a D.O.E. official, they will ''backfill, seal, leave
archeological markers, and walk away.''

What, I asked, will these archeological markers look like? ''We've got people
working on that,'' responded Hinschberger. ''Maybe a stick figure walking,
followed by a stick figure digging, followed by a stick figure drinking water.
Followed by a stick figure dying. Something along those lines.''

Around that point, I got off the phone, put my head down on my desk, and cried.

IN EARLY FEBRUARY, Gov. John H. Sununu comes to town to brief us on his
opposition to the D.O.E. plan. Close to 1,000 citizens fill the high-school gym
to hear him.

The evening begins with an angry diatribe from a woman in the crowd. She wants
to know (it is a question many are asking) how the Republican Governor can
effectively oppose a nuclear waste dump at the same time he champions the
nuclear power plant at Seabrook, now scheduled to go on-line this fall.

''The two are unrelated,'' Sununu replies. ''People who link them damage the
credibility of our factual response to the Department of Energy.'' He tells us
that we should ''address ourselves to the specific criteria'' proposed by the
D.O.E. ''Emotional outbursts'' will get us nowhere, he says.

His visit sets the tone for the first several weeks of the state's approach to
the dump-site proposal. While next door in Maine citizens and elected officials
create a furor over the selection of proposed sites there, New Hampshire remains
subdued. A sober Citizens' Task Force is established to gather technical data
for the future D.O.E. hearings. The feeling among a number of community leaders
is, ''We don't want yelling and screaming here.''

Days go by. There is still little mention of the dump site in the papers. I call
people in Concord to enlist their support; for many, it is the first word
they've had of the proposed plan. I place calls, almost daily, to the Governor's
Office of State Planning, expressing concern about the lack of public awareness.
''It is the policy of this office,'' says an assistant there, ''that it would
not be in the best interests of the people of New Hampshire to disseminate
specific information at this time, out of concern that it could create a
panic.''

I get the name of the place in Washington State - Hanford - that's one of three
leading candidates for the nation's first nuclear dump site, due to be formally
announced in the early 1990's. I figure I'll place a call there, to see how
they've handled the trauma of possible selection.

The operator tells me there are no listings for Hanford; I must mean Richland.
So I dial the city manager's office in Richland and explain to a secretary what
I'm after. ''I wanted to know how the citizens of Hanford feel about all of
this,'' I conclude.

''Citizens?'' the woman says. ''There are no citizens of Hanford anymore. There
used to be a town there, but the Government bought them out. I think they still
hold a reunion every summer though.''

FOR THE FIRST FEW weeks after learning about the dump, Steve and I do what
everyone else is doing in our attempt to get our town off the D.O.E.'s list.
Hearing that the existence of deep mines and quarries on our site might
disqualify us, we call up well-drillers, looking for deep wells. I read up on
granite. I even look into the cost of dynamiting a mine shaft.

But finally, it seems to me the reason not to put a dump in our town doesn't
have anything to do with rocks or mines. Gradually, many of us conclude that any
hope we have is more likely to rest with the politicians than with the
geologists.

Governor Sununu continues to express confidence in the D.O.E.'s technology. The
members of our Congressional delegation send us mailings that urge us to provide
the agency with well information and population data they tell us will get New
Hampshire off the list. It seems everybody is playing by the D.O.E.'s rules.

Bruce Anderson, a local businessman, calls a meeting, spreading the word by
telephone that an organization is forming to challenge the dump by political
means. We call ourselves The People of New Hampshire Against the Nuclear Dump.
Its steering committee consists of Bruce, a minister, a piano teacher and
mother, a sheetrocker, a musician, a travel agent, a builder and me.

The day of the meeting -around lunchtime - I call the owner of the Stonebridge
Inn, just down the road from us, hoping to bring her out. ''I guess you don't
know,'' she says. ''The Challenger just exploded.''

Hillsboro is only 20 miles from Concord, where teacher-astronaut Christa
McAuliffe lived, and, because of that, the gloom caused by the Challenger
explosion is almost palpable.

Charlie, our 4-year-old, talks incessantly now about death and explosions. What
if the stove explodes? What if the television set blows up? If he counts
backward, the way they did during the launch, will he get killed, too?

In his head, the Challenger disaster is jumbled up with the fact that suddenly
his mother is on the phone all day and going out to meetings a lot at night. He
confuses the nuclear dump and our town dump, where we take our garbage every
Saturday. For the first time in his life, he wakes up with nightmares. ''I
dreamed Dad tried to stop the dump, and he exploded,'' weeps my son. ''I dreamed
somebody stepped on our house, and smashed it to pieces.''

Of course, we hold him tight, and comfort him. But as the weeks pass and we
contemplate the dump, thoughts of the Challenger continue to haunt us. As I sit
in briefings, hearing about the D.O.E.'s technology, I think about the space
shuttle's O rings. And when the D.O.E. officials tell us they have a deadline to
meet, that there has to be a dump chosen by 1998, I think: NASA had a deadline
to meet, too. THE DEPARTMENT OF Energy stresses that its repository project's
success depends, in large part, upon community trust. So the D.O.E. holds public
briefings around the state. More than 1,000 people turn out in Henniker for the
Feb. 11 meeting on the New Hampshire site.

There's something poignant, almost heartbreaking, in a scene I see repeated at
these briefings. Local people, in their chamois shirts and blue jeans, standing
before the panel of D.O.E. experts asking simple, straightforward questions the
D.O.E. is at a loss to answer.

Will this nuclear waste be solid or liquid? Unclear. What's to keep terrorists
from hijacking one of the 10 trucks a week of bomb-grade plutonium and uranium?
Unclear. How would the D.O.E. approach an armed citizens' rebellion? ''We have
no studies on that yet.''

It becomes increasingly apparent to me, watching the spectacle of the D.O.E.
briefings, that with our single state geologist and the funds raised from the
sale of T-shirts, we are unlikely to beat the Government experts on the
technical aspects of their $30 billion program.

Still, the common sense of my neighbors amazes me. A trucker, talking about New
Hampshire road conditions, warns of the danger of winter driving on our roads. A
housewife, noting the D.O.E.'s plan to seal up hot waste in rock that always
contains some moisture, wants to find out what becomes of the steam. ''I know,''
she says, ''what happens to a pressure cooker you leave on the back of the
stove, if you forget it.'' A construction worker asks what's to become of the
tons of rock displaced by the excavation of the tunnels. He has used his
calculator, and it would take four million pickup trucks to cart it all away.

A young boy in a baseball cap - he looks about 10 -steps up to the microphone,
in Conway, N.H., and asks: ''What if it leaks? There'd be no more me.'' Hunter
Weiler, a D.O.E. siting specialist, answers: ''That wouldn't happen for
thousands and thousands of years.'' ''Oh,'' says the boy. ''Don't you care about
the future?''

THERE IS NO ESCAP-ing the fact that, however the Soviet nuclear power plant
disaster at Chernobyl affects the future of nuclear power in the United States,
and whatever course we choose regarding nuclear weapons, there are more than
20,000 metric tons of nuclear waste sitting right now in those increasingly
crowded pools at the reactors and at temporary storage facilities. ''What,''
asks Scott Hinschberger, ''do you propose to do with the existing waste?''

It is one measure of the absurdity of our situation here that ordinary citizens
have been put in the position of coming up with answers to that question. But I
have done a good deal of research on the subject, and what has become clear to
me is that no truly safe solution to nuclear waste disposal has yet been found.

We all recognize that something must be done with this waste. Shooting it into
orbit (a notion once entertained by the D.O.E.) seems, in the wake of the
Challenger disaster, unthinkable. Burying it beneath the ocean floor appears
similarly fraught with potentially catastrophic environmental hazards.

Many experts recommend the creation of more temporary, above-ground storage -
monitored and retrievable (not buried and sealed) and isolated from the
environment and people - until a better permanent disposal technology is
developed. Instead of transporting huge quantities of bomb-grade uranium and
plutonium on the nation's highways, rail lines or waterways, the D.O.E. could
keep it at the reactor sites. That makes sense to me.

But the D.O.E. has allotted only a small percentage of its budget to the study
of any method other than land burial. We have been presented with the
possibility of a permanent nuclear dump site, just as we were presented with the
reality of a nuclear power plant nearby in Seabrook, as a fait accompli.
''Nobody ever asked me if I wanted nuclear power,'' says JoAnn Marziano, a
Hillsboro hairdresser and mother, ''Now they're thinking about taking my house,
and once again nobody's asking me how I feel about it.'' Never in the entire
12-year dump selection process do we get to cast a single vote on the question.

So when Hunter Weiler of the D.O.E. says (as he did at the Conway briefing) that
sometimes ''personal sacrifices must be made'' for the greater good of society,
we in Hillsboro grow very angry. Is the risk of losing one's home to the
Government for a nuclear waste dump part of the price we pay for citizenship in
this country? We are not threatened, here, with the prospect of giving up our
homes for a dam or a national park or some other example of a ''public good.''
We are being asked to sacrifice our homes and our way of life to get private
industry off the hook, to dispose of wastes that - 10 years ago, when ground was
broken for the Seabrook power plant - we were told would be ''a nonproblem.''

And even as we battle this dump in New Hampshire, our state is now within months
of seeing that long-delayed Seabrook power plant coming on-line. ''You mean,''
asked Dolge Donovan-Smith, age 6, when told of this fact, ''they're still making
more of this stuff?''

Of course, we all understand. A nuclear waste repository cannot be equated with
a nuclear power plant, and the reactor at Chernobyl is not the same as an
American reactor. Here in the United States, when accidents occur, we hear about
them. But to my neighbors and me, the central lesson of Chernobyl is that
accidents can occur. And this was not the first nuclear accident the Russians
have tried to keep secret. Some 30 villages surrounding Kyshtym, a city in the
Ural Mountains, no longer appear on Soviet maps. The Central Intelligence Agency
and American scientists confirm that a nuclear disaster occurred there, too, in
1957 or 1958. Only the source of that catastrophe was not a nuclear reactor; it
was a nuclear dump.

Chernobyl has had another effect on us, here in New Hampshire. ''Even though we
know this country takes more precautions,'' Bruce Anderson says, ''it's affected
the credibility of the Government. It adds to the enormous skepticism about
technocrats and bureaucrats.''

But those of us who maintain that the Government's plan for a waste dump here
has been developed undemocratically must remember: the Nuclear Waste Policy Act,
which established the dump selection process and put the D.O.E. technocrats and
bureaucrats in charge, was passed by a substantial majority of Senators and
Representatives (my own among them). The Atomic Energy Act of 1954, which laid
the groundwork for the present Federal policy on nuclear power, was likewise
duly voted on by the Congress. If it is our Government which seems now, in the
eyes of many here, to be betraying us, we must acknowledge, too, our own lack of
vigilance. We are the voters who steer the Government's course . . . or who - as
I did, for too long - left the steering to others.

Sadly, our ordeal seems only to leave many who once trusted and believed in our
Government and the democratic process feeling alienated and disenfranchised.
Now, the comment I hear more often than any other is, ''They've probably decided
already, down in Washington. There's nothing we can do about it.'' THERE WAS A
TIME, WELL BE-fore the nuclear waste question came up, when Steve and I talked
about leaving our home here. I listened enviously to friends whose children took
dancing lessons, learned foreign languages, went to the theater. Here in
Hillsboro, our chief cultural diversions are Thursday night band concerts on the
front porch of the library in summer, and occasional visits to a local
mechanic's Mack Truck museum, situated on a vacant lot.

But when we got down to it, we backed away from the notion. Parting with our
house would have been painful. But also, we came to recognize that what we have
here is more than a piece of property. We love our community. We belong to a
church. Steve is a veteran center fielder for the Homestead Builders softball
team. I know nearly every child playing in the sand at the town beach, and most
of their mothers, too. When my friend Patty gave birth to Anna last fall, I held
the baby the day after her birth and thought, ''I'll probably go to this child's
wedding, someday.''

So, more and more these last few years, we have been sinking in our roots. Steve
bought a tractor last summer and began clearing a couple of acres for a pond. We
divided up our land along the brook, planning to give one piece to each of our
children. Often, when something on the news makes me fearful for the world
they'll inherit as adults, it is the thought of that land that calms me. Audrey,
who is 8 now, speaks about ''when I bring my kids here someday.'' Sometimes
she'll lose a ring or a Barbie-doll shoe, and after a moment's sorrow, comfort
herself with the thought, ''Oh, well. Someday my little girl will find it.''

There is a man in this town named Joe Sweeney. Everybody here knows Joe.
Severely impaired with cerebral palsy, he has a job cleaning the local pizza
parlor. He hitchhikes four miles into town every morning, no matter what the
season, and back home again at the end of the day. It's hard to understand him
when he speaks, but people always greet him, wave, give him rides.

He is 57 years old. He has lived in Hillsboro all his life. His family's home,
like ours, is right in the middle of the proposed dump site. Every time I see
Joe, he asks the same thing: What will he do if they put the dump here?
Sometimes I can only make out a single word he's saying. It comes out of his
mouth as a kind of low moan: Home.

THERE IS NOT YET IN EX-istence, anywhere on this globe, a nuclear dump like the
one the D.O.E. proposes. We are an experiment. We're fighting the unknown.

But, for the moment anyway, our enemy has become the Department of Energy. We
talk about the D.O.E. all the time now, more than the weather, more than the
Celtics, more than our own children. The men and women who work for the D.O.E.
are the closest thing we have to villains.

Scott Hinschberger, the D.O.E. geologist with whom I spoke when I was first
researching the dump, is a pleasant-looking man around my age. Now, after a few
of these briefings, he has gotten to know some of us by name, and he greets us,
when we see him in Concord, like old friends. Never mind that the last time I
spoke with him, I was shaking my fist in his face. He had just admitted that
''there are no guarantees'' that plutonium would not contaminate our water
systems. I was shouting at him, ''Don't you have children?!''

In fact, I learn, he does. Three of them, almost exactly the ages of mine. He
describes a battle going on in his community to keep the school board from
cutting back the number of hours of kindergarten classes. ''I get up at hearings
and give it to them, just like you give it to me,'' he says.

''How does it make you feel to listen to all these people tell you in exactly
what way you've ruined each of their lives?'' Barbara Daley, a Hillsboro mother,
asks him.

''I'm just a normal guy,'' Scott says. ''I'm just doing my job, carrying out the
law.''

We ask him about the impact of earthquakes and climatic changes on a nuclear
repository, and he acknowledges, ''We can't be certain what will happen to the
earth in the next 10,000 years.'' As for the more immediate risks posed by his
program - to the social, emotional and economic well-being of the residents in
our towns - Scott concedes it is ''one of the quirks of the site selection
process that those factors aren't taken into account at this point.''

I ask him if he ever fears for his safety, coming into proposed dump sites like
ours. Already, talk has started around here of forming a militia.

''One time, coming onto Menominee Indian land in Wisconsin, things looked a
little tense,'' Scott says. ''And at the hearing over in Henniker, a guy jumped
onstage, and there was a moment there when I thought I saw something sticking
out of his pocket that could've been a weapon, and I jumped back.

''I think all of us on the repository project recognize that at some point
there's bound to be an incident.''

PETER FOSS, THE UNITED Church of Christ minister here in town, says that one
good thing about the dump siting is how it has pulled together people of all
political persuasions.

''Up until now, we've seen a lot of energy and will to fight,'' says Peter.
''But I'm very concerned about what will happen to spiritual life here if we're
still on the list next fall. I think we'll see more domestic violence, more
alcoholism. And something else I'm starting to see already: distrust in our
leaders, and a lack of faith in our Government and our country.''

On Good Friday, the church bells ring to mark a day of prayer. ''Let us pray for
our enemies,'' says Peter, on Easter Sunday morning, adding (though he doesn't
need to) ''the D.O.E.''

Herman and Verna Whipple's house sits on a knoll in the upper village of
Hillsboro, overlooking Mt. Monadnock. Verna, whose father used to supply most of
Hillsboro with its potatoes, dug from these fields, was born just a few houses
down this road. ''We were raised,'' says Herman, ''to respect the land.''

The Whipples are over 60 now. Like many people here, they have grown children
still living nearby; their granddaughter, Maria, comes over nearly every
weekend, to see Herman's livestock and play in the fields. ''I hate to think
what my folks would have said, if they'd lived to see this,'' says Verna,
rocking more and more furiously in her chair as she speaks.

''I never opposed nuclear power,'' says Herman. ''I was never on the opposite
side of the Government. But this is too much. Just too much.''

So he has spent the last couple of months drawing a map, for the Citizens' Task
Force, of all the wetlands in the dump area - every marsh, every bog, every farm
pond. He and Verna prepared a turkey dinner for 25 neighbors in mid-March and
sold tickets, with proceeds going to The People of New Hampshire against the
Nuclear Dump. After the meal, they distributed addresses of newspapers around
the state, and everyone wrote letters. Not a day goes by, Verna says, that she
and Herman don't wake up thinking about the dump.

''We've been here almost all our lives,'' says Herman. ''We'd never get a fair
price for our home. We couldn't start over again. It's a hell of a wearing
thing.''

''A wicked, wicked waste,'' echoes Verna.

Every once in a while, despite the fear and despair, I am able to find a little
humor in our situation. As we near the end of the frenzied 90-day response
period, The People of New Hampshire Against the Nuclear Dump meet with the local
Citizens' Task Force to plan our hearings before the D.O.E. Leigh Bosse, a
conservative local lawyer, suggests that everyone place a daisy in front of the
D.O.E. representatives as we come forward to testify. Al Giordano, a young,
liberal-activist type, recommends that we carry flags instead. Everyone laughs
at the unexpected alliances and turnabouts that have been formed here, thanks to
the presence of the Department of Energy.

LAST YEAR AT THIS TIME, I was directing a play I'd written for the Hillsboro
elementary school, about a little town that gets taken over by a swarm of black
flies. The black flies were played by 20 first graders, dressed in black
T-shirts and tights, wearing wings and antennae with Styrofoam balls on the
ends. The citizens of the imaginary town, played by the older children, were up
in arms. How to get rid of the black flies? The mayor was in a pickle; unless he
came up with a solution, a rich and greedy villain with a sprayer full of deadly
pesticide would take over and destroy every living creature for miles around.

I'd written the play to fit the actors and the Hillsboro audience. Black flies
do invade our town, for two weeks every spring, and we are always trying to come
up with ways to ward them off. Also, I have always loved those classic tales -
the sort Frank Capra told in his movies, better than anyone - of small towns
pulling together, and of ordinary citizens, threatened by bureaucrats with lots
of money and power, who triumph in the end. That's what happened in our play
too.

Stopping by the elementary school the other day to pick up Audrey, I heard a
child call out to me from the swings, ''When do we start on the next play?'' The
answer was, we aren't doing one. We're all characters this season: Herman
Whipple, passing his hat at a political meeting, and Verna, home writing
letters. Joe Sweeney, hitchhiking to Concord to give testimony at the D.O.E.
hearing there. The Rev. Rob Christenson, testifying at five minutes before
midnight, after sitting through 12 hours of hearings in two separate locations,
quoting from the Psalms and concluding, ''We are an afflicted people here
tonight.'' Me, carrying a flag (not a daisy) as I walk up to the microphone to
present my testimony. My husband Steve, laying a 200-year-old hand-hewn beam
from our house and a broken maul handle before the D.O.E. panel, as ''hard
evidence'' of his labor on our land. Steve Fowle, a Vietnam veteran, telling the
experts, ''To us, you represent foreign invaders, and if we have to we'll treat
you accordingly.'' Barbara Daley, with her 7-month-old son in her arms, saying
''I wake up thinking about you and I'm still thinking about you when I go to bed
at night. You have taken away my joy in the first year of my son's life. That
year is almost over, and we can't ever have this time back again.''

There are - it should be noted -some good things that are supposed to emerge
from this dump siting process, for those who remain in Hillsboro and the
surrounding towns. If we're selected as the final dump site, some 8,000 people
will come to our little town, to build the four-lane high-way and the rail
system and, of course, the facility itself, which will operate for about 35
years. We'll get a new school, surely. New churches. Maybe a mall. Our state
will receive considerable compensation for taking the nation's nuclear waste.
Some people will certainly make a lot of money. We may even get rid of the black
flies.

When the Department of Energy made its announcement in January, I was just
finishing a book about my children, family life and the business that has been
my chief occupation these past nine years: making a home. After I heard about
the dump, I read over what I'd written, about permanence, community, neighbors,
love of our home and land, and it all looked like a bad joke. I put my book in a
drawer.

Now what I do is talk, compose fliers, write letters. It is the sense of
democracy profoundly violated that moves me - more, even, than the thought of
losing my property. If it were simply our investment at stake, I think we might
have sold out, taken our losses and moved on. As some of us have started
reminding ourselves, we'd still have our families.

But there's this other matter we can't escape by moving on: the lesson we'd be
conveying to our children, about how things work in our country. We have taught
our children to believe that our country is a safe place, and that we, their
parents, can protect them. If we left now, I think they'd grow up with the
feeling that uncertainty and injustice lurk everywhere, and that ultimately, we
have no control over our lives. (The stove might explode at any moment, after
all. Today your home is chosen for a nuclear waste dump. What happens tomorrow?)
So we're staying. This summer, we will dig our pond and plant Scotch pines we
can start harvesting in four or five Christmases. As a friend of mine pointed
out the other day, they still plant grapevines on Mount Etna.

Some things have changed here, though. I am no longer always home, to tuck my
children into bed and sing, ''I've Been Working on the Railroad'' to 2-year-old
Willy. Now I go to meetings. I spend whole days on the phone, while Willy winds
himself up in the cord and Charlie asks, ''Aren't you ever going to stop talking
about nuclear?''

I keep a copy of the Nuclear Waste Policy Act on the night table. I stand on a
flatbed truck at a protest convoy singing ''America the Beautiful.'' Whether or
not my town gets off the D.O.E.'s list, I know that the life I used to live - at
the end of this dirt road, tending my garden and my garden only - is gone
forever.

AFTER THE LONGEST, bleakest of my 32 New Hampshire winters, it is finally
spring. The snow has melted. We can see, now, the soil we have been fighting to
hold on to, and the rock upon which our future would seem to depend. The tulips
I planted last October have survived the squirrels; the robins are back. Today
Steve took the plastic cover off his tractor, and it started on the first try.
We took the children down the road to see our neighbor's new baby lamb.

Sometimes, these past three months, I have felt hopeless, overwhelmed, by the
scale of what we're up against here. But today, I feel hopeful. Rounding the
bend of our driveway, to the point where our house first comes into view, Audrey
says, ''This place doesn't look like a dump, does it?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Hillsboro and residents (David H. Wells/J.B. Pictures);
Diagram of proposed nuclear waste dump site (Source: United States Department of
Energy)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 11, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

NOTED WITH PLEASURE

SECTION: Section 7; Page 47, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 961 words


Infinitesimal Adventures When Nancy Mairs was crippled by multiple sclerosis,
she refused to abandon her sense of adventure, scaling it down instead to what
she could manage. Here, in ''Plaintext'' (University of Arizona), she shares a
few small adventures with her cat Burton, some tropical fish and a blind snake.

I can no longer walk very far from the armchair in which I read. I'll never make
it to Tibet. Maybe not even to Albuquerque. Some days I don't even make it to
the back yard. And yet I'm unwilling to forgo the adventurous life: the
difficulty of it, even the pain, the suspense and fear, and the sudden brief
lift of spirit that graces - unexpectedly, inexplicably - the pilgrimage. If I
am to have it too, then I must change the terms by which it is lived. And so I
do. I refine adventure, make it smaller and smaller, until it fits into this
little toad that struggles through the jungle of clover under my bare feet. And
now, whether I am feeding fish flakes to my bettas or crawling across the dining
room helping Burton look for his blind snake, lying wide-eyed in the dark
battling yet another bout of depression, cooking a chicken, gathering flowers
from the garden at the Farm, meeting a friend for lunch at The Blue Willow, I am
always having the adventures that are mine to have. Ephemeral Affirmations Like
Clifford Brown, the trumpeter he writes about here, Julio Cortazar was a master
of the riff. This elegy is one of many short solos or improvisations that make
up ''Around the Day in Eighty Worlds'' (Knopf).

That difficult custom of being dead. Like Bird, like Bud, he didn't stand the
ghost of a chance, but before dying he spoke his most obscure name, he had long
held the thread of a secret discourse, damp with the modesty that quivers on the
Greek stelae where a thoughtful young man gazes at the white night of the
marble. Clifford's music . . . captures something that usually escapes in jazz,
that nearly always escapes from what we write or paint or love. Suddenly, near
the middle of the piece we sense that the unerringly groping trumpet, searching
for the only way to sail beyond the limit, is less a soliloquy than a contact.
It is the description of an ephemeral and difficult affirmation, of a precarious
relinquishment: before and after, normality. When I want to know what the shaman
feels in the highest tree on the path, face to face with a night apart from
time, I listen once more to the testament of Clifford Brown, a wing-beat that
rends the continuum, that invents an island of the absolute within disorder. And
afterwards, once again the custom wherein he and so many others are dead. Have a
Piece of Poetry As Jerrold Seigel shows us in ''Bohemian Paris'' (Elisabeth
Sifton/Viking), poets used to play a more palpable part in everyday life.

Selling verses house to house was not uncommon in mid-century Paris. In the
summer of 1849, a woman writer - femme de lettres, in the court reporter's
language - was accused of mendicancy for hawking her own writings from door to
door. Her dress and manner were respectable, even elegant, and she was let off.
Some who were not may have been simply begging under the cover of literature,
like a certain Gilles, who asked people for money to get his songs published.
But others clearly belonged to a popular culture that developed outside of
official channels, like the poet who in the summer of 1850 described himself as
going about ''from village to village, to offer verses, songs, compliments, for
festivals, engagements, baptisms, marriages, burials and other occasions.'' He
also provided poetic copy for businesses of all kinds, including cake
decorators. Bullets, as in a Movie Tim O'Brien, who wrote a novel about war, has
captured here the sense of incredulousness and theatricality he had while being
shot at in Vietnam. This is from ''The Writer as Celebrity'' (Evans), by Maralyn
Lois Polak.

Over and over, getting shot at, I'd think, My God, it's exactly as it is in the
movies, ducking, that ricochet sound, bullets twanging, my God, they are real.
The feeling of having a camera going over your shoulder, watching you, so you
want to behave well and act right and don't cry while being shot at, don't run,
you want to keep a good face and tell jokes when people are being killed,
because it doesn't seem real, it's like you were in a movie, a very deadly
movie, a real movie. It had a movie feel to it. You want to be as good as Bogie,
as good as Gable. I don't know how that sounds. I Love You, Fleda Vetch! ''The
Lyttleton Hart-Davis Letters,'' Volume Three (Academy Chicago), edited by Rupert
Hart-Davis, continued one of the better 20th-century British correspondences.
Here Mr. Hart-Davis proposes an ingenious theory to explain Henry James's choice
of names for his characters.

At intervals throughout the notebooks James jotted down lists of proper names,
taken it seems mostly from the front page of The Times, on which he afterwards
drew for his characters. One list, for instance, begins: ''Chattle - Voyt - Podd
- Tant - Murrum - Glibbery,'' and continues in that style for five lines. What
emerges is that when James came to select from these lists he tended more and
more to choose a particular kind of name - gritty, aseptic, impersonal - Stant,
Verver, Theale, Croy, Strether, Densher, Stransom. Was he determined to avoid
the overtones which hung about his contemporaries; in Hardy the
romantic-pastoral (Yeobright, Oak, Winterborne, Everdene); in Meredith the
flamboyant-aristocratic (Patterne, Feverel, Wentworth, Beauchamp)? Was he
deliberately seeking names which might be as near algebraic symbols as possible
and yet remain names? Certainly few heroines have been saddled with such
rebarbative syllables as Fleda Vetch.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 1, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, the publisher of ''Around the Day in Eighty
Worlds'' by Julio Cortazar was listed incorrectly in ''Noted With Pleasure'' May
11. The publisher is North Point Press.

GRAPHIC: Drawings

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 11, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TORCHED BY GOD AND MAN

BYLINE: By Nicholas Proffitt; Nicholas Proffitt, a former Newsweek bureau chief
in Vietnam, is the author of the novels ''Gardens of Stone'' and the forthcoming
''Embassy House.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1038 words


LIVING DOGS AND DEAD LIONS By R. Lanny Hunter and Victor L. Hunter. 260 pp. New
York: Viking. $16.95.

THE reconstruction of the Vietnam veteran, a phenomenon dating from around the
time the memorial wall was unveiled in Washington, has taken various forms, from
the silly to the sublime. If Hollywood's ''Rambo'' exemplifies the former, then
this thoughtful and quietly moving first novel is an example of the latter.

''Living Dogs and Dead Lions'' (an inelegant title even if it does come from the
Book of Ecclesiastes, mother lode of good titles) is the story of the
reconstruction of two veterans caught in the lingering miasma of the war -
Joshua Scott, a Special Forces combat veteran, and Claudia Bishop, a veteran of
a different sort, the widow of Joshua's best battlefield buddy, Tom.

Twelve years after a siege against their isolated border camp, the fight in
which Tom Bishop died, Joshua is suffering from survivor's guilt and delayed
stress. For him, the war remains ''a crack in time. . . . There was nothing
before it. And there would be nothing after it.'' Still ''tied to images of
death,'' he leads a hobo's life of hit-and-run jobs and glancing relationships,
unable to make a commitment to anything or anyone. He lives with the war, a
victim of vivid flashbacks and sudden anxiety attacks, of ''a diffuse, vague,
unfocused fear.'' He is, in short, a disturbed Vietnam veteran. Disturbed, not
deranged. ''I'm not a crazy son of a bitch. Just a hostile son of a bitch,'' he
says, careful to note the difference in a time (late 1979) when the prevailing
notion in popular entertainment is of a dope-crazed veteran, the 'Nam Freak of
the Week, wreaking havoc upon an unappreciative American public.

Joshua is fighting forest fires, doing the latest in a string of pickup jobs,
when a humiliating incident convinces him of the need to confront his past and
bury his ghosts. He decides to visit Claudia Bishop, whom he has never met, in
the hope that she might help him end his war and get on with his life. He
travels light, his baggage being little more than his own emotional needs and a
horrible secret concerning the circumstances of Tom Bishop's death.

He finds Claudia running the family farm in Kansas, living with Todd, her
teen-age son. He also finds her to be unexpectedly hostile. Claudia has had her
own problems in coming to terms with Tom's death; she had fought bitterly
against his decision to go to Vietnam. In their guilt and regret, she and Joshua
have much in common; but unlike him, she is reluctant to rake up the coals of
once damped fires. The wound of her husband's death has scarred over, and she
has no desire to pick at scabs. These two refugees of the heart ram together,
ricochet off each other, regroup and eventually rebound. With the help of a
sympathetic priest and a less benign push from a brutal outsider, they slowly
come to grips with their loss and their lives.

For anyone who has always believed that fiction is not a team sport, that
collaboration cannot produce art, ''Living Dogs and Dead Lions'' may prove to be
as unnerving as it is satisfying. The Hunter brothers, R. Lanny and Victor L.,
handle their characters and their story with compassion and wisdom. There are
scenes that excite, like the rousing finale, and scenes that move, as when the
town's Vietnam veterans throw themselves an impromptu parade during a harvest
celebration. And the novel's two scorched-earth settings - the dry, tremulously
expectant farmland of western Kansas and an outpost in Vietnam - are done to a
perfect turn, one torched by God, the other by man.

Whether they are painting a still life of small-town America, the harvesting of
a wheat crop or the night terrors of the battlefield, the sibling authors are in
full command of their material. That is not so surprising given their
backgrounds: R. Lanny Hunter served in Vietnam with the Special Forces, while
Victor L. Hunter is a theologian who opposed American involvement there.
Together, they stitch a seamless story. The Vietnam scenes, woven into the
narrative in short flashbacks, are absolutely authentic, and the ideas expressed
in the book are no less convincing.

Not that the novel is entirely free of rookie errors. How, for instance, can a
man from a small town in Virginia not know what clog dancing is? And wouldn't
Todd, who keeps a shrine to his war hero father in his bedroom, have read all
there is on Vietnam? Then why do the authors have him knowing next to nothing
about the war? Presumably because they needed someone to ask Joshua what the war
was like, so that he could tell us: ''Which war. . . . The early war in the
sixties, the late war in the seventies. The delta war, the highland war, the
city war, the coastline war, the river war, the highway war, the naval war, the
air war. . . . Jungles, mountains, rice paddies. Army base camp with thirty
thousand men, jungle outpost with twelve. West Point 'ring knocker,' regular
army, two-year draftee. Infantry grunt, Marine rifleman, Special Forces trooper.
Point man for the LURPS, ARVN adviser, requisition officer for air conditioners
in Saigon. Chopper pilot with his eye on the yellow smoke, Phantom pilot with
his afterburner kicked in, B-52 pilot with his briefcase. Professional, serious
citizen soldier, incompetent, hero, coward, killer, crazy, adrenaline freak,
druggie. Short-timer with the dreadlies who crosses every single day off the
calendar in his helmet liner, war junkie who extends his tour. What was the war
like in Vietnam?'' MOST of the war novels written during and since the conflict
have had a sense of urgency about them, an almost desperate need to tell us how
it was. And as fine as many of them were, we probably do not need more combat
fiction for the moment; we now know, or think we know, what the war was like.
What we are about to learn in the coming cycle of Vietnam literature, if this
solid novel is any indication, is what the peace has been like, how it seems to
the reconstructed veteran who has had a decade or more to mull things over. And
if it is true, as some maintain, that the consensus on Vietnam is yet to be
forged, then let it be the veterans who guide us to a verdict, and not
Hollywood.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 11, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TRUDEAU'S CARTOON LEGACY IS LIVING ON AT YALE

BYLINE: By MICHAEL FREITAG

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 29, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 490 words


SINCE the beginning of his freshman year at Yale, Sabin Streeter said, he has
put the drawing of a daily comic strip ahead of his course work and social life.

It is all part of what the 19-year-old sophomore said was a determined effort to
follow in the footsteps of his idol, Garry Trudeau, who draws ''Doonesbury ''
and is a Yale alumnus.

Mr. Streeter, from Chappaqua, N.Y., is majoring in fine arts and American
studies. He said he spent at least four hours a night night when school is in
session drawing his strip for The Yale Daily News, the student newspaper. He
said he put that assignment ahead of his studies.

From 1968 to 1970, The Daily News published Mr. Trudeau's strip ''Bull Tales.''
It was later syndicated as ''Doonesbury'' and is now published in more than 800
newspapers. Mr. Trudeau received a Pulitzer Prize in 1975.

Unlike most of the other student cartoonists who have drawn for The Daily News
since Mr. Trudeau graduated, Mr. Streeter sees his work more as a job than a
hobby. His hope, he said, is to have his own syndicated strip.

Mr. Streeter's cartoons, which are published five days a week, began appearing
in October 1984.

''He manages to poke fun at campus life in a humorous but subtle way,'' an
editor of The Daily News, Peter Dwiskin, said.

Mr. Streeter's work has begun to be noticed by the world outside. Interview
Magazine, in a recent profile, describes him as a ''comic-strip creator
extraordinaire.''

On campus, Mr. Streeter's strip is frequently compared to ''Doonesbury.'' As
with ''Doonesbury,'' Mr. Streeter's four-panel cartoons, called ''Hollenhead,''
for one of the regular characters, are serialized and rely heavily on satire and
irony.

Mr. Streeter said although Mr. Trudeau was a role model, he tried to create his
own style. During the clerical workers' strike last year, Mr. Streeter depicted
the president of the university, A. Bartlett Giamatti, and a union leader, John
Wilhelm, as fat midgets.

''I wanted them to look like two bickering children, thus expressing my sense of
frustration with the strike,'' he said.

Although Mr. Trudeau cartoon at Yale concerned such issues as coeducation, the
Vietnam War and civil rights, Mr. Streeter's focus on raising the drinking age,
the resurgence of fraternities and the growth of preprofessionalism.

Mr. Streeter said his philosophy differed considerably from that of Mr. Trudeau,
who graduated in 1970.

''He comes very much from the 1960's, and I don't know if I come from the
1980's, but I certainly come from somewhere different,'' Mr. Streeter said.

Unlike ''Doonesbury,'' Mr. Streeter's strip tends to shy away from political
messages. He said he would rather tell a good joke than make a good point.

''I like cartoons, because they let you communicate,'' Mr. Streeter said. ''I
like the idea of giving people altered perspectives of things. I'm not so much
interested in communicating a series of polemical ideas.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of cartoon strip by Garry Trudeau

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 11, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LONG ISLAND OPINION;
LEARNING TO LOVE MOTHER, AGAIN

BYLINE: By R. G. MURPHY; R. G. Murphy lives in Remsenburg.

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 20, Column 4; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 768 words


MY mother read my horoscope to me: ''Do some serious thinking about a personal
relationship. Relinquishing this tie could free you to live a happier life.''

She meant well, and I don't think she'd ever suspect that the only tie I've
considered relinquishing is my relationship with her.

We're very different people, my mother and I. She reads horoscopes, I read
Proust. I am tailored wool suits and leather, she is floral polyester and
plastic. I am PBS, she is ''General Hospital.'' I am holistic medicine and
crudites, she is chocolate marshmallow ice cream and tuna casserole.

I long ago accepted the status quo. I no longer wrap Gucci totes as Christmas
gifts for her. I shop for purple synthetic-pile car coats.

She persists in presenting me with gaily wrapped corduroy purses and acetate
blouses festooned with neon cabbage roses.

As a young child I loved my mother very much. I well remember thinking that she
was the nicest, most wonderful, best mother in the world.

By the time I had become an adolescent, I had also become a perfectionist. I saw
my mother as casual, lackadaisical and representing the antithesis of all my
preferences. Her favorite expression was, ''It's good enough,'' at a time when
nothing could be good enough in my eyes.

In high school I was caught up, passionately, in the maelstrom of the Vietnam
War and civil rights. My mother was bored by politics, and moved to rapture by
the ''Lawrence Welk Show.''

I left for college and heaved a sigh of relief. I'd never consider going home
again, I knew - my mother and I simply could not live in the same house.

As my circle of friends (and experience in the world at large) expanded, I met
other young women like myself. There were women who worshipped their mothers, to
be sure, but there were far more who elected to be free of their mothers. Many
of my peers held grudges for slights, real and imaginary, against mothers who
forced them into orthodontia and ruined their social lives, or mothers who
didn't care enough to have them fitted for braces.

Mothers were blamed for acne, overweight, bad grades, introversion, myopia,
manic-depressive tendencies, nightmares, mousey hair, phobias, criminal behavior
and any and all failure.

Letters from home arrived in college mailboxes and went unread. The sentiments -
''Take typing and bookkeeping, why don't you?'' and ''Don't drink so much soda,
it rusts nails'' -were all too familiar and unwanted. The money enclosed with
the letters was gleefully and guiltlessly removed and spent on soda.

After marriage my relationship with my mother became further strained. I'd moved
into a world of my own making and did not appreciate any of the advice she was
willing to offer. She hated my taste in decorating, and was hurt when I refused
her offer to buy sheer nylon curtains for me.

When my son was born, I had drifted so far from my mother that I neither
expected nor wanted her to visit me. Our conversations were fraught with
arguments over such mundane issues as why I would spend money on expensive baby
formulas when ''good old evaporated milk'' was ''good enough'' for her as a
young mother.

I made a conscious, calculated decision to salvage the relationship I had with
my mother for the sake of my child. I put aside my feelings so that my son could
know his grandmother, and she him.

It soon became apparent, and a surprising source of pleasure, that the one
person who loved my son almost as much as my husband and I was my mother. Our
differences paled in comparison to the feeling we shared.

It became apparent, too, as I began to make mistakes of my own, that I'd been
much too hard on my mother.

The mistakes of motherhood are made innocently. All mothers want the very best
for their children, I was soon to find. However abysmally they may fail, it is
not for lack of trying to do the very best they know how to do. That realization
may be the single step that signals the end of childhood and the acceptance of
adult responsibility.

My son is nearing adolescence now, and I know he thinks that I am
overprotective. He is adventurous where I am timid. I condemn the behavior of
some of his friends (I know this is wrong, but am unable to control myself) and
incur his wrath.

The one characteristic that separates mothers from all others is the
selflessness of their love. They are quite willing to sacrifice the love of
their children if it ensures that those children may have happier, healthier
lives as a result.

In the final analysis my mother and I are not as very, very dissimilar as once I
thought.

Oddly enough, I love her very much.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 11, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER;
LACKLUSTER 'AGNES' AT THE CROSSROADS

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 20, Column 3; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 700 words

DATELINE: NEW BRUNSWICK


LACKING the luster of bravura performances, ''Agnes of God'' is merely a
meretricious little play. While titilating one with the sordid details of a
contrived, convoluted plot that never gets resolved, the playwright John
Pielmeier presumes to raise issues: mystic, abstract, religious and psychiatric.

By now, everyone, assumedly, knows that ''Agnes of God'' is about a young nun
who may or may not have murdered the baby she has somehow borne she knows not
how.

The infant was found strangled by its umbilical cord in a wastebasket, and Agnes
does not remember a thing.

A court-appointed psychiatrist is determined to get to the bottom of all this.
The Mother Superior, who, in a wild revelation, turns out to be Agnes's aunt, is
going to protect the girl.

Here are the unanswered questions: Is Agnes perfectly sane, perfectly perfect, a
real saint, ''totally bananas'' or ''slightly off center,'' a good liar or a bad
liar or God's victim - possessed by the Holy Ghost or by the Devil?

Mr. Pielmeier does not tell one a thing. However, during the course of a quite
literally bloody series of events, including hypnosis, he implies much about the
need for and the possibility of miracles, of wonder and how reason can destroy
all that.

Too bad the theater world has not progressed to the enlightened state of taking
for granted integrated casting whenever no specific race is indicated in the
script.

Thus, one feels obliged to point out that the Crossroads Theatre Company
production, which runs through May 25, has an all-black cast, just as the
theater's publicity releases make a point of it. The real point, however, is
that none of the three actresses herein transcends Mr. Pielmeier's tawdry text.

Although Harold Scott, the director, cannot avoid the overall effect of
staginess or conceal the play's pretentiousness, he does make it all too clear
that the playwright is really on the side of the angels and against the mundane
techniques of psychiatry, which is sometimes carelessly referred to as
psychology.

The director, who is an associate professor at the Mason Gross School of the
Arts at Rutgers University as well as head of the university's Master of Fine
Arts directing program, illuminates a bit of the playwright's murkiness.

In that sense, he is aided by Erica Gimpel, who is known to many as Coco
Hernandez in the television series ''Fame.'' Miss Gimpel smiles sweetly as Agnes
and, what is more, looks so wholesome that her appearance alone would convince
anyone of Agnes's purity.

After a time, though, the effect is cloying, and Miss Gimpel substitutes a
childlike hysteria for real histrionics.

The overwrought, chain-smoking Dr. Martha Livingstone could have been conceived
as a Bette Davis caricature. In the role, Lorraine Toussaint, posturing and
puffing away, does little to dispel that notion. She is forceful, for sure, and
driven by doubt at the end, if one believes it.

Petie Trigg Seale appears to be a rather put-upon Mother Superior. The actress
works dutifully, but seems hard pressed to conceal impatience as the play wears
on.

''Agnes of God'' created a bit of a stir on Broadway in 1982, mainly because of
three scenery-chewing performances - by Amanda Plummer, who was, indeed, a
harrowing Agnes for all time; Geraldine Page as Mother Miriam Ruth and Elizabeth
Ashley as the doctor. Indeed, dazzling performances can deceive one into
believing that ''Agnes'' has something worth figuring out.

Even at its theatrical best, the play hardly makes sense. At Crossroads, it is
all simplified, which means the ''buildup'' is all the more frustrating because
there is simply no payoff.

In retrospect, it may be significant to note that Mr. Pielmeier wrote one of the
worst plays of this past Broadway season: ''The Boys of Winter,'' which reduced
the Vietnam conflict to an interminable harangue of expletives while likewise
managing to make pompous statements.

''Agnes of God'' ends the eighth season at the Crossroads, where the roster of
subscribers has tripled from 500 to 1,500 in four years, according to a
post-curtain announcement by the theater's executive director, Rick Kahn.

For information and tickets, call (201) 249-5560.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Erica Gimpel with Trigg Seale in ''Agnes of God''

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 12, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

And So It Goes: Responses to Kurt Vonnegut

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 196 words


To the Editor:

Although it is usually not a good idea to answer a rhetorical question, I will
attempt to respond to Kurt Vonnegut's as to why we are hated.

I have an inkling he found out when he was a soldier in Europe, as I found out
while a soldier in Vietnam. Military occupiers are a despised lot; the natives
love you when you throw around your money, but hate you when you throw around
your weight. The United States today, unfortunately, is perceived as the
military occupier of the Earth.

We make it worse with our high visibility, underscoring our foreign policy by
posting aircraft carriers off foreign coasts and sending messages to countries
with cluster bombs. We are truly an empire, with our warships sailing every sea
and our troops and missiles on almost every continent. We meddle in local feuds,
flexing our muscles, acting like a police force when nobody seems to want
policing. We feel that we lead; they feel we dictate. Our diplomacy is gunboat
diplomacy; we tend to solve problems with steel and bullets. Not that problems
can't be solved with steel and bullets, but you have to make sure you solve
them. MICHAEL B. BRODIN New York, May 3, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 12, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

RELATIONSHIPS;
REACTIONS TO THOSE WHO BEG

BYLINE: By Georgia Dullea

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; Style Desk

LENGTH: 791 words


THEY meet the trains from Connecticut and Westchester and Long Island in the
morning. With hands and cups extended to catch the dropping coins, they form a
kind of human toll road over which the suburban commuters must pass to enter the
city.

''To get out of Penn Station you have to pay a toll,'' says Howard Kogan, a
psychoanalyst who commutes from Long Island. ''If the person begging makes eye
contact there's something almost obligatory about giving. That's why you see a
lot of determined looking away.''

He and other mental-health professionals have observed that those who beg around
the city - in subway, train and bus stations, from street corners and doorways -
seem to suffer from the same prejudices as do others in society.

''The more attractive ones in terms of looks and personality do better than the
less attractive ones,'' said Mr. Kogan, a director of the Training Institute for
Mental Health Practitioners in Manhattan. ''If they're clean rather than
disheveled, if they're quiet rather than shouting, they are more likely to get a
sympathetic as opposed to a hostile response.''

''There's a group that appeals to me,'' he added, ''those with pluck. A guy
comes up to me the other day and says: 'I really need to get drunk. You got any
change?' In a perverse way, I have a hard time resisting someone like that.''

Others take a moralistic and even a puritanical view. What prompts them to reach
into their pockets, they say, are those whose misfortunes appear to be not of
their own doing. They give to the physically disabled and to a lesser extent to
the mentally disabled whose behavior is unobtrusive. They give to the old and to
the very young - children who should be playing instead of panhandling -
although they suspect the children are being exploited.

Men with signs saying ''Vietnam Vet'' sometimes touch them as do people with
pets. ''I worry about cats getting enough to eat,'' one woman said.

Even some who claim to be no easy marks now find themselves giving something to
the bag people, particularly their neighborhood bag person.

''Bag people are perceived as not being on alcohol or dope but just what they
are - homeless people, '' said Mark Sloane, who lives in Greenwich Village.
''The handouts to bag people are much more frequent because you become familiar
with them. They don't even have to ask. You see people who live or work in the
area pressing money and food on them, almost adopting them.''

In others, the sight of bag people may evoke feelings of guilt, anger or fear.
Dr. Herbert Freudenberger, a psychologist in Manhattan, says a good number of
the women among his patients identify with bag people, unlike the men.

''This phenomenon comes up every few weeks, usually with single women,'' he
said, ''She will say, 'I just saw a bag lady' and start to cry. 'If I don't do
something about my life I could be like that. Who would take care of me?' This
is a common response.''

Another response is no tears. As Dr. Freudenberger put it: ''They are upset
about their own numbness. They say, 'What's wrong with me that I could walk past
these people and feel nothing? How cold have I become? Is it the city? I never
felt this way before.' ''

For some, the bag woman calls forth guilt about not responding to parents and
other relatives in need. Once the patient realizes this, the psychologist said,
she may react by extending help to family members or becoming involved in
charitable groups.

Yet she does not necessarily give money to bag women. Nor does she join a group
that works with the homeless. ''These women may give more comfortably to other
populations,'' Dr. Freudenberger said. ''One is working with kids with cancer,
another volunteers at a foundling hospital and so on.''

Responses to a beggar's appeals are sometimes complicated. ''Superficially,''
said Harold M. Kase, ''if you're coming in from Westchester or Connecticut and
you see these people, you react perhaps with some aversion. There's almost a
feeling that I'm paying taxes to provide welfare and social services and who are
they cluttering up the station and embarrassing me by approaching me for a
handout.''

Mr. Kase rides the train in from Westchester to his job as director of the
social rehabilitation clinic at the Postgraduate Center for Mental Health in
Manhattan. He says he knows how his fellow commuters feel because he has engaged
them in casual conversation while moving along the toll road of beggars in Grand
Central Terminal.

''People react to what they see,'' he said. ''What they see is a disheveled
person, an obviously ill person who is an embarrassment. But if you talk to
them, as I have done, they sometimes see that this is a person in trouble and
react with compassion.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

7 AMERICANS HONORED WITH MEDAL OF FREEDOM

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 601 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 12


President Reagan, presenting the nation's highest civilian award to the medical
pioneer Albert B. Sabin and six other Americans, hailed them today as rebels who
defied conventional wisdom and won greatness.

After an East Room luncheon, Mr. Reagan and his wife, Nancy, presented the
Presidential Medal of Freedom to Dr. Sabin, developer of the oral polio vaccine,
Helen Hayes, the actress, Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona, Gen. Matthew B.
Ridgway, Earl (Red) Blaik, the former West Point football coach, the journalist
Vermont Royster, and Walter H. Annenberg, the former ambassador and publisher.

''You're a group of happy rebels,'' Mr. Reagan said, reminding them that George
Orwell had once said, ''Freedom is the right to say 'no.' ''

The President said the honorees had chosen to say '' 'no' to the conventional
wisdom - to limitations on yourselves and others.'' Instead, he continued, they
said ''a big 'yes' to courage, the untried, the supposedly impossible.''

''You're all originals,'' he declared. ''You all made America better.'' Dr.
Sabin, who is 79 years old, was born in Poland and came to the United States as
a boy. ''No one could have known that he would number among the most prominent
immigrants of our century,'' his award citation said.

'Peerless Actress, Peerless Star'

Miss Hayes was cited as ''a great actress, a great patriot and a great soul.''

''Peerless actress, peerless star, she has excelled in stage, screen and
television playing everything from virtuous young ingenues to Victorian
queens,'' her citation said.

General Ridgway was supreme Allied commander in Europe, then commander of United
States forces in Europe and, after retiring as Army Chief of Staff, a critic of
American involvement in Vietnam.

''Greatness is often born in quiet, in stillness,'' his citation said. ''So it
was that night in June of 1944 when Gen. Matthew B. Ridgway prayed the words God
spoke to Joshua: 'I will not fail thee nor forsake thee.' D-Day saved a
continent and so, a world; Ridgway helped save D-Day.''

Mr. Goldwater, the conservative Republican ending a 30-year Senate career this
year, was cited as a soldier and statesman at the center of American history.
''Respected by both ally and adversary,'' the citation read, ''Barry Goldwater's
celebrated candor and patriotism have made him an American legend.''

'Compelling Eloquence'

Mr. Royster, who retired as contributing editor and columnist for The Wall
Street Journal, was cited as a journalist, author and teacher who, over half a
century, ''illuminated the political and economic life of our times.''

''His common sense exploded the pretensions of 'expert opinion,' and his
compelling eloquence warned of the evils of a society loosed from its moorings
in faith,'' the citation said.

Mr. Annenberg, a close friend of the Reagans who was publisher of The
Philadelphia Inquirer and The Daily Racing Form and the magazines TV Guide and
Seventeen, was cited for ''a brilliant career in publishing and pioneering the
use of television for educational purposes.''

As Ambassador to Britain from 1969 to 1974, Mr. Annenberg ''served with
extraordinary diligence,'' the citation said, and has since ''devoted himself to
the development of higher education and has provided support to countless
institutions.''

Red Blaik, who was head coach at Army from 1941 to 1958, ''rallied the Black
Knights from a record of devastating defeats and spurred them on to some of
their greatest victories,'' his citation said, ''winning the esteem of his cadet
players and the admiration of his vanquished rivals.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Dr. Leland W. F. Stark Dies; A Retired Episcopal Bishop

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 155 words


The Rev. Dr. Leland William Frederick Stark, former Episcopal Bishop of Newark,
died Thursday at Mountainside Hospital in Montclair, N.J., after suffering a
heart attack. He was 78 years old and lived in Verona, N.J.

Dr. Stark became Bishop of the Newark Diocese in 1959. During his 15-year tenure
he traveled to Africa and Vietnam as head of international peace committees.

In 1967 he was at the center of a dispute for permitting Cathedral House, the
diocesan administrative office, to be used for a national black power
conference. The meeting was to begin a week after the onset of the race riots in
Newark, and Gov. Richard J. Hughes feared a further outbreak. However, nearly
1,000 people attended the four-day conference without incident. Bishop Stark
retired in 1973.  He is survived by his wife, the former Phyllis Anderson; two
sons, Craig, of Verona, and Bradley, of North Scituate, Mass., and four
grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 14, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

GOING OUT GUIDE

BYLINE: By C. Gerald Fraser

SECTION: Section C; Page 25, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 462 words


SAXOPHONIST Paquito D'Rivera did not come to the United States, abandoning his
native Cuba, because he lacked appreciation and status. In Cuba, until he left
in 1980, he worked with that nation's pre-eminent jazz group, the world-famous
Irakere. Here, he is also considered one of this country's major jazz
saxophonists and has made five popular solo albums.

John S. Wilson said in The New York Times that the saxophonist ''projects the
kind of joyous involvement that one associates with Cannonball Adderley, but
with a harder-driving edge that is carried into displays of remarkable
virtuosity. His tone, which can take on depth and power in the more intense
passages of his up-tempo pieces, soars on ballads up to a warm and tender
singing quality.''

Today he will demonstrate his musicianship in a concert with his Havana-New York
Quintet at Hostos Community College (960-1008). The college is in the Bronx, 500
Grand Concourse, at 149th Street. The performance will begin at 7 P.M. Admission
is free, but tickets are required. For reservations and tickets, call 960-1044.

MEN AT WAR

Robert S. Stokes has worked as a journalist for The Associated Press, Newsweek,
Life and The Asbury (N.J.) Park Press. He worked for a while in Vietnam. And
later, for The Press, he interviewed a number of American prisoners of war
returning from Vietnam to New Jersey.

One result of those interviews is his first play, ''Heartbreak.'' Mr. Stokes
says the prisoners in the Hao Lo prison gave the name Heartbreak to the place
where they were interrogated and tortured. His play is the story of men driven
to the edge of insanity and suicide, of men confronted by conflicts about duty,
honor and country.

This play, with a cast of 12 men directed by Ellen Cannon, opens today for
previews at 8 P.M. at the Harold Clurman Theater (594-2370), at 412 West 42d
Street. Preview ticket prices are $5 for veterans, and servicemen and women;
others, $10.

FINALLY

It took the San Francisco Moving Company 10 years to get to New York, but here
it is. This six-member dance troupe will make its New York debut today at the
Theater of the Riverside Church (864-2929), 120th Street and Riverside Drive, at
8 P.M.

The founder, Rhonda Martyn, got to New York before the group; she left the
Moving Company in 1983 and headed East. Ellen Bromberg took over as artistic
director. Two pieces the company will perform, ''Toonings'' (1985) and
''Journey'' (1984), were choreographed by Miss Bromberg. Two other pieces on the
program were created by the associate artistic director, Della Davidson. They
are ''Raw'' (1985) and ''Black Dogs'' (1986).

Members of the company are Cheryl Chaddick, Jess Curtis, Tina Misaka, Rip
Parker, Debbie Poulsen and Kirkland Smidt. Admission is $7.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 15, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

TODAY'S HEADLINE, TOMORROW'S BOOK

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 19, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1047 words


Even as American bombs were falling on Tripoli, Libya in retaliation for
terrorist incidents, Farrar Straus & Giroux was shipping to bookstores copies of
''Terrorism: How the West Can Win'' by Benjamin Netanyahu. Within hours of the
raid the author, the representative of Israel to the United Nations, was in
great demand on network television and radio interview shows, and the book is
now in its second printing.

Stein & Day's timing was almost as good. Although the formal publication date is
still several weeks away, it is currently shipping ''The War Against the
Terrorists: How to Win It'' by Gayle Rivers, an authority on counterterrorism.
''It has the biggest advance orders we've had in our 24 years as a publisher,''
said Sol Stein, the president of the company, which is publishing 100,000
copies, The timing, in both cases, was accidental, since the books were in the
works long before the American strike against Libya. ''The intention of a book
publisher should be to publish books that will have long-term value,'' Mr. Stein
said. ''Too many instant books are either superficial or rehashes of newspaper
stories.''

Nevertheless, on the assumption that many of today's headline stories will not
soon fade away, publishers have recently signed up a number of books on not only
terrorism but such other topics as the upheaval in the Philippines and troubles
at the National Aeronautical and Space Administration.

Works About the Philippines

Books about the Philippines appear to have particular appeal. Raymond Bonner, a
former foreign correspondent for The New York Times, is writing ''Waltzing With
the Dictator'' for Times Books. Stanley Karnow, who wrote a best-selling history
of Vietnam, is writing an untitled book for Random House about America's
colonial involvement there. William Chapman, the former Tokyo bureau chief of
The Washington Post, is writing a book for W. W. Norton about the New People's
Army in the Philippines. Robert Shaplen, long a staff writer for The New Yorker,
is writing a book on the Philippines for Harper & Row. And St. Martin's Press
has signed up ''The Rise and Fall of Imelda Marcos'' by Carmen Navarro Pedrora,
a Philippine journalist.

When those books are published, the Philippines is likely to be topical still.
But two books about the Philippines - ''Revolution in the Philippines'' by Max
Vanzi and Frederick King Poole (McGraw-Hill), and ''Sitting in Darkness'' by
David Bain (Houghton Mifflin) - disappeared with only scant notice when they
were published in 1984.

''At that time it was hard to get reviewers to take the Philippines seriously,''
said Marly Rusoff, the publicity manager for Houghton Mifflin. ''In book
publishing, it doesn't always pay to be a visionary.''

The Shuttle Disaster

The space shuttle disaster has generated several books, including a recent
paperback, ''Challengers: The Inspiring Life Stories of the Seven Brave
Astronauts of Shuttle Mission 51-L,'' by the staff of The Washington Post.
Published by Pocket Books, it is made up of a history of the space program as
well as biographies of the individual astronauts.

Meanwhile, early next year Random House will publish ''I Touched the Future,'' a
biography of Christa McAuliffe, one of the Challenger seven, by Robert Hohler, a
New Hampshire reporter. James Reston Jr. is writing a book for Macmillan about
NASA that is tied to the shuttle diaster and scheduled for publication in 1987.
And when McGraw-Hill publishes its paperback edition of ''Pioneering Space:
Living on the Next Frontier'' by James and Alcestis Oberg, it will be updated to
include the shuttle disaster.

Another book currently being updated is Robin Wright's ''Sacred Rage: The Wrath
of Militant Islam,'' published last year by Linden Press/ Simon & Schuster. The
paperback edition, to be published in August by Touchstone, will contain an
afterward dealing with terrorist acts and culminating with the bombing at
Tripoli.

Terrorism figures in two other books. ''Game Plan'' by Zbigniew Brzezinski, to
be published next month by the Atlantic Monthly Press, deals largely with United
States-Soviet relations, but part of it discusses terrorism. ''The Financing of
Terror'' by James Adams, to be published in the fall by Simon & Schuster,
examines the financing of the Palestine Liberation Organization, the Irish
Republican Army, the Red Brigades and the Colombian guerrilla group M-19.

A Look at the Mafia

Among other books tied to the news, on June 1 Schocken Books will publish ''The
Mafia Business'' by Pino Arlacchi, an Italian sociologist who provided the data
for the Italian Government to draw up the legislation that led to the trial of
470 suspected Mafia figures in Palermo, Sicily. His introduction is based on
that trial. Summit Books will soon publish the letters between Wallis Warfield
Simpson and Edward, the Prince of Wales, prior to his abdication and their
marriage. And the American division of Faber & Faber, the British house,
recently published ''Peacekeepers at War'' by Michael Petit, an account by a
former marine corporal of the attack at Beirut airport that killed 241 United
States servicemen.

Most of the publishers say they are taking steps to insure that the books will
endure.

''For serious nonfiction, you always try to anticipate,'' said Jonathan B.
Segal, the editorial director of Times Books. ''Since you can't compete with
newspapers and magazines, you have to have a longer historical framework and ask
different questions. Books are meant to be a distillation of experience.''

Mr. Segal offered the example of ''Waltzing With the Dictator,'' currently being
written by Mr. Bonner. ''It's not a chronicle of events about what happened in
the Philippines, but how America creates and executes foreign policy, using the
Philippines as a model,'' he said.

The book was signed up well before the ouster of Ferdinand Marcos as President
of the Philippines, and Mr. Segal said it did not really matter -for purposes of
the book's intrinsic merit - whether Mr. Marcos was in power, since the book was
not tied to his rise and fall. ''What the book will examine,'' he said, ''is how
does America commit its power, its word, its money and its strength in support
of a Government far beyond our shores.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of two books being published on current topics (NYT)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 16, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Legless Veteran Ends Cross-Country Trek

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 85 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 15


Bob Wieland, a legless Vietnam veteran, ended his 2,784-mile ''Walk for Hunger''
across the United States Wednesday as he began it, on his hands.

After he arrived here, Mr. Wieland met with President Reagan at the White House
and was greeted at the Capitol by Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., the House Speaker.

His journey, from California to the Vietnam Veteran's Memorial, took three and a
half years. He has raised $305,000 in donations to go to groups that feed the
hungry; his goal is to raise $25 million.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 16, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Not-So-Common Security Challenges to Europe and the U.S.

SECTION: Section A; Page 34, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 480 words


To the Editor:

In asserting that U.S.-European disagreements over third-world issues derive
from ''differing perceptions of . . . their respective capacities to exercise
power,'' Ambassador Richard Burt falls victim to the prevalent American tendency
to reduce objective conflicts of interest to disparities in capabilities (''Why
America and Europe Clashed,'' Op-Ed, May 7).

As such, Ambassador Burt reminds us of a longstanding American tradition to see
European unwillingness to act in ''out-of-area'' contingencies as somehow
deriving from the fact that Europe merely has regional interests, as opposed to
the global interests of the United States. Such a constriction of interests, it
is argued, is due to the limited capabilities of a fragmented Europe. As always,
the proposed solution to the problem is to encourage European unity, thus
combining the disparate power bases of European countries into the solid and
self-confident whole of a great global power.

And so the solution goes for Ambassador Burt: ''A strong and confident Europe
would be able to meet, with the United States, common security challenges.'' The
problem lies, however, in defining ''common security challenges,'' especially in
the third world, and to arrive at agreed-upon solutions. It is not at all clear
that a United Europe would act any differently from the way it acts today in its
fragmented state. Ambassador Burt's assumption that there are somehow
agreed-upon definitions of and solutions to these challenges is just that: an
assumption, not based on any examination of real interests.

Ambassador Burt refers to the positions European countries took on the Vietnam
War, the Middle East crisis of 1973, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and
Libya today as examples of cases where European and American perceptions clearly
diverged. Yet the European positions on these issues are not derived from
different power capabilities. Rather, they are arrived at through a complex
process, in which national interests (determined by geographical, historical,
political, cultural and, yes, military factors) may well dictate a policy
response different from that of the U.S.

In the final analysis, an exclusive focus on power as the determining element of
national interests is too crude a measure to serve as a guide to policy-making.
Deriding allies' true perception of their own interests will ultimately be
counterproductive. Instead, a focus on these interests and their origins might
be far more profitable. After all, for European countries to follow the advice
to dissolve their national identity into the greater whole of a United Europe
will require a significant adjustment in precisely those national interests of
the countries involved.IVO H. DAALDER Cambridge, Mass., May 9, 1986 The writer
is a pre-doctoral fellow at Harvard University's John F. Kennedy School of
Government.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 16, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AT AMERICAN LEGION POSTS, VETERANS OF VIETNAM FAN THE WINDS OF CHANGE

BYLINE: By JANE GROSS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1059 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, May 15


Herman Harrington was an infantryman in Europe, about to be shipped to the Far
East when the United States dropped the atomic bomb on Hiroshima near the end of
World War II. As a result, he argues with fervor that nuclear weapons can be
''life saving.''

But peacetime uses of nuclear weapons, or their proliferation in third-world
nations, are more ambiguous questions for Mr. Harrington, a member of American
Legion Post 1231 in nearby East Greenbush who is a former state commander in the
nation's largest veterans organization.

''Some of it is confusing in my mind,'' he said. ''Maybe I need some help.''

Mr. Harrington aired his confusion on Tuesday night at an unlikely gathering at
Albany High School. There, he and other American Legion members joined
representatives from local nuclear freeze groups and the League of Women Voters,
as well as area high school students, and played a game simulating a crisis in
which the world is on the brink of war.

Not a 'Nuke 'em' Group

The American Legion's enthusiastic participation in such a project, some members
and observers agree, is evidence that the organization is increasingly open to a
wide range of ideas.

''We don't believe in 'nuke 'em, nuke 'em,' '' said Richard Pedro, the Legion's
chief administrative officer in New York State, who accepted the invitation to
play the game, then requested that antinuclear groups participate to widen the
dialogue. ''Our thoughts are not that much different than theirs.''

Mr. Pedro, Mr. Harrington and other members from the World War II generation
insist that the Legion has never been a hawkish organization, despite the
prevailing stereotype, but they acknowledge that the recent influx of Vietnam
veterans has fanned the winds of change.

In the last two years, a more active recruitment drive has added 215,000
veterans to the 2.7 million-member organization, which now has more than 700,000
men and women from the Vietnam era. In addition, according to Legion officials,
85 percent of the national staff served in Vietnam and are making a significant
impact on policy.

Adding a Fresh View

''We appreciate their freshness and new thinking,'' said Mr. Harrington, whose
post has 135 Vietnam veterans among its 600 members. ''They're intelligent,
eloquent and more astute on third-world and social issues.''

Dr. Roger C. Molander, the president of the Roosevelt Center for American Policy
Studies, a Washington research group that created and sponsored the game, said
the American Legion has always been a more ''thoughtful'' group than stereotypes
would suggest. But, he said, the influx of younger members has encouraged ''a
broader menu of options.''

''Without the Vietnam veteran, I don't think they'd be taking as many risks,''
said Dr. Molander, who was a staff member on the White House National Security
Council from 1974 to 1981.

An example of current Legion attitudes, Dr. Molander said, is a resolution
passed at last year's national convention urging ''all reasonable steps to halt
nuclear proliferation'' and encouraging the membership to educate itself about
''this crucial topic.'' At the same convention, the Legion passed a resolution
advocating a verifiable, mutual freeze of nuclear forces by the United States
and the Soviet Union.

The Veterans of Foreign Wars, with 2.2 million members, including 650,000 from
the Vietnam era, is widely considered by those familiar with veterans
organizations to be a more conservative group. According to a spokesman, Ronald
A. Duchin, the V.F.W. has no comparable resolutions.

V.F.W. Declines to Play

In several cities, the V.F.W. has been invited to Roosevelt Center events, but
has consistently declined, according to Jim Walsh, a regional director of the
Roosevelt Center who conducted the game here in Albany. Mr. Walsh said there has
been avid participation from the Vietnam Veterans of America, which has 32,000
members and is generally acknowledged by those familiar with such groups to be
the most liberal of the veterans organizations.

John L. Behan, a Republican Assemblyman from Montauk who is a Vietnam veteran,
said that there was ''great competition'' between the Legion and the V.F.W. to
capture the younger veterans, who are now at the juncture in their lives when
they might consider such groups. Mr. Behan predicted that the Legion will be
more successful because the V.F.W. is persistent in its '' 'our country, do or
die' attitude.''

Mr. Behan said that the recent recruitment efforts were motivated by
self-interest, because without the Vietnam veterans the groups will die along
with their elderly members. But regardless of motivation, Mr. Behan said, ''it's
good, because it will get them to modify their archaic positions.''

Some Vietnam veterans who have shunned the two larger groups are skeptical about
the likelihood for change. ''If they've gotten social consciousness, I'd be
surprised,'' said Larry Chartienitz, the director of membership services at
Vietnam Veterans of America. ''I can't say for sure that they're not
strategizing, but I haven't seen any big changes.''

As Mr. Walsh conducts crisis-simulation games throughout the Northeast, he
observes differences between generations of veterans. ''The Vietnam guys are
more uneasy about cost-free use of military force,'' Mr. Walsh said. ''They're
less likely to think you can go in and out, with no problem. The older veteran
is a little quicker to resort to force and less likely to condition its use.''

'A More Mellow Approach'

American Legion members prefer to stress their common abhorrence of war rather
than their generational differences, but when prodded they echo Mr. Walsh.

''There may be a more mellow approach among the younger veterans,'' said John
Hanson, a Legion spokesman who was a B-52 mechanic in the Vietnam War. ''Perhaps
we're less hell-bent-for-leather because we see war gets worse in each
generation.''

Until recently, Assemblyman Behan said, the gulf between the generations often
seemed too wide to bridge.

''It's been pretty hard to go into a Legion cardroom or V.F.W. bar and hear them
talk about 'crazy Jane Fonda' even if on some level you agreed,'' Mr. Behan
said. ''But maybe now the older guys are realizing the younger guys have
something to say. And don't forget, the kids aren't kids any more. They're
getting to be 40.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Richard Pedre playing ''Wildfire'' with group of others
(NYT/David Jennings); Photo of crisis-simulation game, in which Legion members
represented Pakistan debating whether to launch a nuclear attack on India
(NYT/David Jennings

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 16, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AT PHOTO SHOWS, A KALEIDOSCOPE OF VISUAL DELIGHTS

BYLINE: By ANDY GRUNDBERG

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 2635 words


SPRING is the season when camera toters everywhere wipe the dust from their
lenses and head outdoors. The same sense of warm-weather vitality pervades
photography exhibitions this month. After a somewhat dormant winter, shows
devoted to camera images now seem to be blooming everywhere. It is more than a
weekend's occupation to take them all in, but luckily some of the season's
offerings will endure into summer.

If you crave variety, there is enough here to suit all tastes. In terms of
neighborhood, one can choose uptown, midtown or downtown. In terms of subject
matter, the choices include everything from pictures of Japan to images taken
off television sets. Chronologically, the range is from the mid-1800's to
practically yesterday. And the photographers are either deservedly famous, like
Eliot Porter, undeservedly little known, like Hiroshi Hamaya, or just beginning
to garner attention, like Stephen Frailey. Here are some of the season's
highlights:

John Thomson: A Window to the Orient (Asia Society, 725 Park Avenue at 70th
Street): Living at a time when camera images had yet to spoil the innocence of
experience, the Victorian English traveled with a grand passion. Eventually,
their numbers and their zeal sparked a new industry, the photography of ancient
monuments and sites along the ''grand tour'' routes, which initially included
Italy, Greece, Egypt and Palestine. These pictures were sold to tourists as
evidence, and as reminiscence, of what they had seen.

The more adventurous photogra-phers went as far as the Orient in their quest for
foreign scenes and adventures. One who did, and whose photographs are unlike any
others of the Victorian age, was John Thomson. A Scotsman of amiable and
resourceful temperament, Thomson recorded China, Singapore, Siam, Cambodia and
Hong Kong over a 10-year period, starting in 1862. The pictorial results of his
ground-breaking activity, as remarkable now as then, can be seen in the
exhibition ''John Thomson: A Window to the Orient,'' through Aug. 3.

Thomson's Asian pictures, of which more than 100 are on view, are distinguished
both for their exquisite beauty and for their subject matter. At the time,
photographers in the Orient were few and far between, and the Chinese in
particular were sufficiently skeptical about the practice to believe that
photographs were made from the eyes of small children. Thomson not only endured
such suspicion and much danger, but he also persevered in the face of
overwhelming technical difficulties. He was required by the photographic process
of the time to pitch his darkroom whenever he wanted to take a picture. And he
had to learn to live with tropical heat and to survive perilous journeys by
donkey and raft. That his negatives were capable of producing such exquisite
prints as those in the show is testament to his resourcefulness.

Much more than any other 19th-century travel photographer, Thomson was able to
make foreign lands seem at once wondrous and familiar. Often he accomplished
this by including people in his compositions. In a picture of the interior of a
Mandarin dwelling in China, the second-floor balcony is filled with the figures
of doll-like children and women, regarding the camera with just as much
confidence as the average Victorian. But Thomson's photographic appetite went
beyond portraits to include landscapes, urban panoramas, architectural views and
even still lifes, one of which records that most exotic of fruits, the
pineapple, for Victorian delectation.

Sometimes his ambitions exceeded his grasp, as when he tried to show the angry
rapids on the Min River, only to have them turn into a pillowy-soft blur because
of the slow shutter speed he had to use. But usually he succeeded, making images
that can look surprisingly modern. Two images of the Peking Observatory, in
particular, have the kind of atmospheric splendor that we now associate with
Eugene Atget.

It is clear from the exhibition that Thomson was a documentary photographer of
the first order, both scrupulous in his attention to detail and drawn to
recording other cultures in sympathetic terms. Indeed, this is the same John
Thomson who already figures in the history of photography for being a pioneer of
photojournalism. His pictures for the book ''Street Life in London,'' taken five
years after his return from the Orient, depict slum conditions without demeaning
slum dwellers, and are among the first social-reformist photographs ever
published. On the basis of this exhibition, historians need to give Thomson an
even larger place in 19th-century photography.

''John Thomson: A Window to the Orient'' was organized by the International
Museum of Photography at George Eastman House in Rochester, N.Y., with support
from the Gannett Foundation. The majority of the photographs are from the
collection of Stephen White of Los Angeles, who was co-curator of the exhibition
with Robert Sobieszek.

''South Africa: The Cordoned Heart'' (International Center of Photography (1130
Fifth Avenue, at 94th Street): The 20 photographers whose black-and-white,
photojournalistic pictures make up this show were sponsored by a Carnegie
Corporation study of poverty and development in South Africa. The study's
findings indict South Africa's apartheid system, and the photographs are
intended to reinforce the written message by giving it a human face. This they
do, painting a depressingly bleak picture of conditions under apartheid.

Edited by Omar Badsha, a South African of Indian descent, and organized for
exhibition by the Center for Documentary Photography at Duke University, the
show successfully dramatizes the dislocation and disenfranchisement of South
African blacks, their utter poverty and their efforts to force a change. But its
good intentions are subverted by a presentation that shrieks more than it
convinces. The photographs, by themselves fairly conventional, are reduced to
mere pawns in a larger game. Red banners displaying inspirational sayings and
poems loom above the black-painted walls of the gallery, conspiring to give the
impression that one has walked into a Soviet propaganda pavilion circa the
1920's. Against these odds, even Dorothea Lange's photographs would pale.

This is, in short, a political show and not a museum show. Accompanying it is a
related exhibition, ''Africa Then: 1849-1918,'' which includes mostly vintage
prints taken of Africa and Africans by Europeans. Although more scholarly and
disinterested than ''The Cordoned Heart,'' it shows the exploitation of native
Africans every bit as vividly. (Through June 22.) Judith Barry, ''Echo'' (Museum
of Modern Art): A Post-Modernist in the temple of the Modern, Judith Barry melds
photography, film and sound in an installation piece that is part of the
museum's recently revived ''Projects'' series. Named for the nymph who fell
hopelessly in love with the self-concerned Narcissus, the work features an
11-by-19-foot, double-sided screen, onto which are projected slide images of the
exteriors and interiors of what appear to be corporate office buildings. In
''windows'' within these imposing images, Miss Barry presents film vignettes
that endlessly repeat every 60 seconds. And in the background we hear the
constant drone of a portentous sound track.

Both sides of the work suggest the anonymity and anomie of corporate work
places, and the narcissism of those who inhabit them. The film segments get the
point across most effectively. In them, men in business suits walk around in
various states of self-absorption. One admires himself in a mirror, another
reconnoiters a swimming pool and ends up perched on the end of its diving board;
still another walks from a high-style country house into the woods. Miss Barry
is making a fairly glum point about the quality of contemporary life, but she
does it with inventiveness and economy. (Through June 3.) Victor Burgin (John
Weber Gallery, 142 Greene Street): Called ''Office at Night'' after Edward
Hopper's 1940 painting, the English artist Victor Burgin's one-man show
considers sexual office politics in relation to the codes of body language, eye
contact and pictorial signs. Each of the six works consists of three panels: a
mural-size photograph, a solid color strip, and an end piece bearing one or more
cryptic symbols. The photographs depict a woman with certain office props (a
filing cabinet, a stool, a phone). The colors are blue, green, yellow and red.
The symbols, called isotypes, are from a pictorial language designed in 1936
that was meant to be universally understood.

As was true of Burgin's last show, ''Bridge'' - which was inspired by a
Hitchcock film - ''Office at Night'' is full of psychological, political and
semiotic insights. (Burgin is also a prolific critical essayist and lecturer.)
It is, that is to say, a heady combination of Freudian, Marxist and
structuralist thinking. As the artist himself puts it in the text accompanying
the show, the work is about ''the organization of Desire within the Law, couched
in terms of the particular problem of the organization of sexuality within
capitalism.''

Unfortunately, without Burgin's text there is little access to his more complex
meanings. Fortunately, however, the works are self-sufficient enough, and
engaging enough, that we can feel rewarded by simply puzzling them out on our
own. They are, in fact, Burgin's most attractive and least polemic pictures to
date. (Through May 31.) Eliot Porter (Witkin Gallery, 415 West Broadway, between
Spring and Prince Streets): Eliot Porter is known primarily for his pioneering
color landscape photographs, which have been reproduced in countless Sierra Club
publications and exhibited at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. When Porter began
making those pictures in the 1940's, color was persona non grata in the world of
serious photography, and it is to his eternal credit that he helped make it a
naturalized citizen of the art world. But what are we to make of this, an
exhibition devoted exclusively to black-and-white pictures taken in the American
Southwest?

The two-dozen prints on view, from as distant a past as 1940, are 8-by-10-inch,
intricately detailed, view-camera images solidly within the stylistic tradition
of Edward Weston and Ansel Adams. In terms of subject matter, Porter's eye
ranges the well-known High Modernist repertory of rocks, trees, weathered door
frames and abandoned buildings. All are executed with considerable technical
polish and compositional grace, and a few - a vertical array of doorbell
buttons, a view of mountaintops called ''Tent Rocks, N.M.'' - are stamped by the
artist's own personality. But by and large, they lack any redeeming
idiosyncrasy. One senses that Porter was barking too closely at the heels of
Adams and Weston in his black-and-white work. In light of these pictures, his
decision to devote most of his energy to color seems all the more felicitious.
(Through May 31.) ''Acceptable Entertainment'' (Bruno Facchetti Gallery, 211
East Third Street): This group exhibition of the work of more than 20 artists
demonstrates how profoundly, and widely, television imagery has infiltrated the
realm of still photography. Sometimes we find the television set included in the
photograph as furniture, as in Lee Friedlander's picture of an otherwise barren
room, ''Galax, Va.'' Sometimes the television image is captured whole, as in
John Pfahl's jovial platinum print ''Shock of the New'' (based on Robert
Hughes's series of that name). And sometimes it is absorbed into a matrix of
other images, as in Frank Majore's glamorous still life.

The title is clearly meant to be taken in two ways. Television, and the notion
of entertainment itself, is now ''acceptable'' within today's art. On the other
hand, television images, with their fuzziness and scanning lines, are no more
than ''acceptable'' in terms of our visual experience. This second meaning
explains why many of the pictures seem to be seen through myopic eyes, their
putative subjects barely discernible. Among the entertaining curiosities
selected for the show by the curators Paul Laster and Renee Riccardo are a
recent in-camera montage by Harry Callahan and a biting collage by Karl Baden
that juxtaposes Eddie Adams's famous Vietnam image of a prisoner being shot in
the head, with Harold Edgerton's stroboscopic picture of a bullet slicing
through a playing card. (Through May 25.) Hiroshi Hamaya (International Center
of Photography/Midtown, International Paper Plaza, 77 West 45th Street): Hiroshi
Hamaya is one of the most revered living photographers in Japan, one whose work
of the late 40's and 50's helped Japanese photography emerge in the aftermath of
World War II. If Japanese photography today is finally beginning to achieve an
indigenous identity, some of the credit has to go to Hamaya.

The 70-year-old photographer's exhibition at the International Center of
Photography's midtown gallery space is a small-scale retrospective of his
accomplishments. It includes his early, documentary-style essays on Japanese
rural life, done in black and white, as well as large and dramatic color
pictures of scenic vistas around the world. The distance between the two types
of images is considerable, in terms of not only of style but also ambition. The
black-and-white essays are modest and self-effacing, requiring and rewarding
close attention. The scenic color prints, on the other hand, hit us over the
head with all the subtlety of picture postcards, which they greatly resemble.

The metamorphosis of Hamaya's pictures is perhaps analogous to the postwar
journey of Japan from abject humility to soaring self-confidence, but it is also
disconcerting. His documentary images, whether showing a woman in a muddy rice
field or children of Japan's ''snow country'' parading to ward off evil spirits,
are imbued with a wry, poetic feeling. His color landscapes, typified by a
sunset-tinged view of Ayer's Rock in Australia, seem overwrought and cliched by
comparison. Supposedly Hamaya's recent color work is saturated with the ethos of
Zen, but seldom have Zen and tourist promotion been so thoroughly conflated.
(Through June 5.) Stephen Frailey (303 Gallery, 303 Park Avenue South, at 23d
Street): It has been Stephen Frailey's unhappy lot to be known as a
second-generation ''appropriator,'' one whose penchant for adopting existing
images as his own postdates that of Barbara Kruger, Sherrie Levine and Richard
Prince. As such, his interruptions in the order of the image universe have
tended to seem small potatoes. Yet the work has, since the 80's began, contained
hints of larger things to come.

With this show of 11 photographs, those larger things have arrived. Besides
being physically larger than Frailey's earlier work, they clearly reveal the
Surrealist-inspired wit that sets his work apart from that of his predecessors.
Most of the pictures pit two images against each other, in collage fashion. In
one, a portrait of Marian Anderson, in black and white, shares space with a
color image of a pack of cigarettes. In another, a package of Q-tips and a group
portrait of famous photographers (Alfred Eisenstaedt, Richard Avedon, Philippe
Halsmann) coexist uneasily.

Culled from old magazines and the like, most of the images float in a sea of
solid, glossy black, giving them a corporate sheen. Because they place a
consumer product (cigarettes, Q-tips) on top of plain but ambiguous background
scenes, they resemble advertisements. But their inducements are unlike those of
real advertisements, and the messages they emit are enchantingly contradictory.
What are we to make of a still-life image of a piece of coal, to which Frailey
has added an olive? At last, appropriation seems to be having fun, and letting
us join in as well. (Through May 30.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of photos which will be exhibited in upcoming photo shows

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 16, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FILM: 'THE BOY IN BLUE'

BYLINE: By Nina Darnton

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 699 words


''T HE BOY IN BLUE'' is yet another movie about athletes and it doesn't go
beyond the cliche. It follows the by now obligatory formula: start with a
good-looking man, preferably young, inarticulate and lower-class, with bulging
biceps, shown as frequently as possible glistening with sweat. Then add a crusty
coach with a heart of gold. It helps to throw in a few scenes of the grueling
training, maybe a true love to spur the hero on, and end in victory accompanied
by a swelling musical score. When the formula doesn't work, the film looks just
plain silly. In ''The Boy in Blue,'' which opens today at the Festival and other
theaters, it doesn't work.

The film is a witless, tedious contrivance based on the life of the Canadian
rower Ned Hanlan, who lived a century ago. Mr. Hanlan - whom the movie depicts
as none too bright -developed his rowing muscles when, as a young bootlegger, he
regularly fled the law in a rowboat he used to deliver the moonshine.

In addition to these characters, the Canadian scriptwriter Douglas Bowie has
added a hodgepodge of other stereotypes, as if such a smattering, culled from a
variety of successful movies, would insure that he would hit on at least
something that would pull the audience in. There is Bill (David Naughton), the
roguish manager, whose friendship to Ned Hanlan is supposed to provide the theme
of male bonding. The two fight off their enemies together like a parody of Butch
Cassidy and the Sundance Kid. There is also the evil, one-dimensional Colonel
Knox (Christoper Plummer), who backs Ned when he can make money from him and
discards him when he can't, and his aristocratic niece Margaret (Cynthia Dale),
who provides the motif of a poor boy in love out of his class - a basic ''Lady
and the Tramp'' theme. The script is also filled with the kind of easy
coincidences that are thrown in to advance the plot without any internal
justification, and unimaginative and corny dialogue.

Although the director Charles Jarrott (who directed ''Anne of a Thousand Days''
and ''Mary, Queen of Scots'') tries to recreate the most famous races of the
rower's career, shooting on location in Ontario and Quebec and using elaborate
period costumes, he has failed to make the film exciting - even the colors are
dull, looking as if everything was washed with yellow.

For the most part, the performances are no more exciting than the script.
Nicolas Cage (who gave an interesting performance as the Vietnam veteran in
''Birdy'') and Cynthia Dale both seem to suffer from the same problem: they are
playing a quality rather than a character - she, some idea of an aristocrat, and
he, an untutored, boorish sort of lout with a good heart. But neither actor
infused the role with the kind of personal depth or individual detail that would
make the characters come alive, and we are left with an outer shell that, in
both cases, seems phony. Mr. Naughton has charm as the manager, and a nice
twinkle in his eye, and Mr. Plummer seems to be playing with the role he was
given - an evil opportunist who has about as much depth as the stock character
of the wax-mustachioed villain who ties the young damsel to the railroad ties.
Mr. Plummer, the distinguished Canadian, plays the evil colonel with aplomb,
almost seeming to enjoy doing a caricature instead of a character. But
unfortunately the film itself seems like a caricature of several better films
from which it borrows, and does not, from beginning to end, have a truly honest
moment. Row, Row, Row THE BOY IN BLUE, directed by Charles Jarrott; written by
Douglas Bowie, based on an original idea by John Trent; director of photography,
Pierre Mignot; edited by Rit Wallis; music by Roger Webb; produced by John
Kemeny; released by the 20th Century-Fox Film Corporation. At the Festival, 6
West 57th Street; the 34th Street Showplace, at Second Avenue; the 86th Street
East, at Third Avenue. Running time: 98 minutes. This film is rated R.
NedNicolas Cage MargaretCynthia Dale KnoxChristopher Plummer BillDavid Naughton
WalterSean Sullivan DulcieMelody Anderson CollinsJames B. Douglas MayorWalter
Massey BainbridgeAustin Willis KinnearPhilip Craig TrickettRobert McCormick
CooneyTim Weber

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Nicolas Cage

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THAILAND CLOSES LONG-USED REFUGEE CAMPS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 22, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 681 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 17


The Thai Government has closed three refugee camps housing Vietnamese and
Laotian exiles, among them the Songkhla reception center on the Gulf of Siam,
where arriving Vietnamese ''boat people'' have been sheltered for more than a
decade.

Another camp for Vietnamese at Sikhiu in Northeastern Thailand is also being
closed, along with a camp for Laotians at Ubon, also in the northeast.

At the same time, however, American immigration officials have begun accepting
thousands of Laotians for resettlement in the United States, after a Thai
decision late last year to make the Laotians available for interviews, according
to refugee officials.

This year, Laotians - both ''lowland'' Lao from Vientiane and the Mekong River
valley and tribe people from the Laotian highlands - are expected to dominate
the 23,000 places set aside for immigration by ethnic Indochinese. Nearly 90,000
Laotian exiles are now in Thai camps, and more arrive each month.

Interviewed by Officials

Under an agreement between Bangkok and Vientiane that went into effect last
July, Laotians arriving in Thailand - many by swimming or taking boats or rafts
across the Mekong - are interviewed by local officials at their point of
arrival.

Those determined not to be refugees are held in police stations awaiting
repatriation to Laos. But Laos has so far refused to take any of the exiles
back, despite the accord. More than a thousand of them are now living in one
police compound alone at the Thai river town of Nakhon Phanom.

As camps around Thailand close, Vietnamese refugees will be moved to a
resettlement reprocessing center in eastern Thailand, officials say. Future
Vietnamese arrivals will therefore go straight to the center, at Phanat Nikhom,
theoretically making their movement to a third country much more certain and
quicker.

Some refugee workers are concerned that when this news reaches Vietnam, as all
news about refugee matters quickly does, more people may again risk the
pirate-infested Gulf of Siam. Recently, many Vietnamese boat people had been
heading away from Thai waters toward Malaysia, Indonesia or the sea lanes
leading to Singapore, where pirate attacks are rare and resettlement is faster.

Camp a Safety Hazard

Most exiles from Laos will be grouped with other Laotians at the large camp at
Na Pho near the Mekong River, or will be returned voluntarily to Laos, officials
say. The Na Pho camp, built for about 15,000 refugees, now houses more than
32,000 and has long been considered a safety hazard. In late February, a fire at
the enclosure destroyed the homes of 7,000 people, camp workers say.

The move to reduce by three the 11 refugee camps in Thailand - the country of
first refuge for about a million and a half Indochinese refugees since Communist
governments came to power in 1975 in Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos - is seen by
Thai and international refugee officials as an attempt to constrict and finally
phase out the long-running refugee program here.

Officials in Thailand, which still provides shelter to more than 125,000
refugees and about 240,000 displaced Cambodians camped along the Thai-Cambodian
border, say they are concerned that the flow of resettlement to Western and
other nations has been reduced.

Many refugees remaining in Thailand have been rejected by most if not all
resettlement countries, and Thailand does not want them to become a permanent
burden on a tightening local economy. Thailand is suffering the results of
falling commodity prices, and many farmers who live in the areas where the
refugees are temporarily housed are complaining of food and other supplies going
to the camps.

Questions are again being raised about the future of Thailand's best-known
refugee center, Khao I Dang, several miles from the Cambodian border in eastern
Thailand. Thai officials indicate that this center, with more than 25,000
people, some of whom have been in the camp nearly a decade, will sooner or later
be closed also.

Its inhabitants, unable to find homes in the West, are expected to be moved back
to the Cambodian frontier.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE OTHER BATTLE IN CAMBODIA: THE CHILDREN

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 23, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 631 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 17


In refugees' bamboo huts at the edge of Thailand, in spartan classrooms in Phnom
Penh, Cambodia, and in exile communities in France and the United States, a
quiet struggle is being waged over Cambodia's children.

In Government offices in Vietnam, in Khmer Rouge camps and among the
non-Communist forces of Prince Norodom Sihanouk and Son Sann - leaders who would
concur on little else - there is agreement that how the next generation of
Cambodians view their history and culture will play a large role in determining
whether peace can be achieved in the ravaged country.

Central to the debate is the interpretation of Cambodia's historical
relationship to Vietnam, whose troops now keep a pro-Hanoi Government in power
in Phnom Penh.

''1975-1979,'' a white-haired teacher wrote on the blackboard of a thatched
schoolroom in a Khmer Rouge camp called Site 8. Those were the dates of the
regime of Pol Pot, who came to power 11 years ago in April.

''If you understand what came before that,'' the teacher said, ''you will
understand what happened then - and what is happening now.''

The former Phnom Penh high-school teacher is Mey Mann, a mathematician who has
been an associate and supporter of Pol Pot since the early 1950's, when many of
Cambodia's Communist leaders were young nationalists in Paris, actively opposed
to French rule in Indochina.

Mey Mann, 64 years old, is now training other teachers for new schools at Site 8
on the Thai-Cambodian border, home to tens of thousands of civilian followers of
the Khmer Rouge. A reporter had asked him what these children of one of the
world's most brutal governments were being taught about their history.

The theme he outlined on the small blackboard was a deeply nationalistic,
bitterly anti-Vietnamese one. Hanoi, Mey Mann said, dipping back centuries for
supporting evidence, ''has always wanted to swallow Cambodia whole.''

It was the Vietnamese, he said, who bore the responsibility for the massacres
and death by dislocation and disease of the 1975-79 period. Failing six times to
overthrow Pol Pot from within the Cambodian Communist movement, he said, Hanoi
turned to murderous provocation and finally invasion.

Scholars, while accepting that Communist infighting was a factor in the
brutality that left the country in ruins, would object to so simple and
nationalistic a view of events. But this is what Khmer Rouge children are being
taught, and it becomes their history, and their reason to continue fighting.

Across the border in Cambodia, young people living under the
Vietnamese-installed Heng Samrin rule, which supplanted the Khmer Rouge in 1979,
are given a radically different account of their past.

Political education, a major part of formal curriculums and informal lessons in
villages and worksites, teaches the youth of Cambodia that the two nations share
a common ''anti-imperialist'' history that should serve as the basis of closer
integration.

At the Site 2 exile camp, home to more than 120,000 followers of the
non-Communist Khmer People's National Liberation Front, a Cambodian in his 20's
who fled Phnom Penh more than a year and a half ago said that as an army recruit
he had been forced to attend political meetings ''aimed at strengthening the
solidarity between Vietnam and Kampuchea,'' the name by which the country is
known in Asia.

The young man, Chea Sokha, who is compiling a diary of his years under the Khmer
Rouge and then the Vietnamese, wrote:

''We were told of how the Vietnamese sacrificed their lives on Cambodian
territory. Vietnamese soldiers told us they had come to Cambodia for the third
time to save us from death.

''They said they had liberated us first from the French colonialists and then in
1970 to 1973 from the Lon Nol regime,'' Chea Sokha recalled.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TEAMSTERS' LEADER IS FREED AFTER FACING CHARGES

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 27, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 659 words

DATELINE: CLEVELAND, May 17


Jackie Presser, president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters,
surrendered to Federal officials today on charges of embezzlement and
racketeering involving the local that has been his power base for 19 years.

Mr. Presser and two top aides of the local, Harold Friedman and Anthony Hughes,
were indicted Friday by a Federal grand jury here. Today, after being
fingerprinted, they appeared before Federal Magistrate Joseph Bartunek and were
released on $50,000 bond.

Neither the 59-year-old president of the nation's largest union nor his two
co-defendants were required to enter a plea to the charges against them. They
will be arraigned after they return from the the teamsters' national convention
next week in Las Vegas, where Mr. Presser plans to seek re-election.

Payroll-Padding Charged

The indictment charges that the three used a paroll-padding scheme in which
checks co-signed by Mr. Presser were given to people who performed no work for
his Cleveland teamster group, Local 507. Mr. Presser retained his job as
secretary-treasurer of Local 507 after taking over as head of the international
in 1983, Mr. Friedman is president of the local and Mr. Hughes the recording
secretary.

Mr. Presser is the fourth of the last five leaders of the teamsters' union to
face Federal charges. Roy L. Williams, James R. Hoffa and Dave Beck were
convicted.

Mr. Presser, who has been a central figure in a politically sensitive Federal
investigation of union corruption, has repeatedly denied any wrongdoing. Mr.
Presser said little in court today, answering the Magistrate's questions about
procedural details in the case with one- or two-word responses.

''Would you have a reaction if you were just indicted?'' Mr. Presser said on his
way to the hearing. ''My reaction is the same as any other citizen's would be:
It will all be discussed at the trial.''

Mr. Presser's lawyer, John R. Climaco, was asked whether he believed that the
Government had timed the indictment to coincide with the convention. ''I think
it speaks for itself,'' he replied.

A Federal investigation of Mr. Presser was dropped last year without
indictments. But on Friday the Justice Department said it had reopened the
inquiry after learning that agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation in
Cleveland might have lied about whether the bureau had authorized Mr. Presser to
make the payments outlined in the indictment.

F.B.I. Agent Was Charged

In connection with that aspect of the case, the supervisor of the bureau's
organized-crime squad here, Robert S. Friedrick, was indicted by a grand jury in
Washington. He is charged with lying to Justice Department investigators last
year by saying that bureau agents had approved the improper payments by the
teamster local.

Mr. Presser was charged with two counts of labor racketeering, one count of
embezzlement and two counts of filing false reports with the Government. The
indictment says that in his role as secretary-treasurer of Local 507 he
co-signed checks to his uncle, Allen Friedman, and to John Nardi Jr., a business
agent for the local.

Allen Friedman is not related to Harold Friedman, the local's president.

The charges facing Mr. Presser carry a maximum prison term of 51 years. Those
facing Mr. Friedman carry a term of up to 52 years abd those facing Mr. Hughes
45 years.

No arraignment date has been set the 42-year-old Mr. Friedrick, who graduated
from the Naval Academy in 1965, and has been an F.B.I. agent for 13 years.
According to his lawyer, William Beyer, Mr. Friedrick served as a Marine Corps
platoon commander in Vietnam. He was awarded a Purple Heart for being wounded in
1966.

In 1977, he was assigned to investigate the death of a Cleveland underworld
leader who was suspected of arranging the murder of Mr. Nardi's father. The case
led to the conviction of the top crime leaders in Cleveland, as well as an
F.B.I. clerk who was selling confidential documents.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN PENNSYLVANIA, DIVISIVE PRIMARIES

BYLINE: By WILLIAM K. STEVENS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 32, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 650 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, May 16


As Democrats prepare to nominate candidates for Governor and United States
Senator in Tuesday's Pennsylvania primary, some Democratic leaders say that
their party's future as a statewide force is at stake.

Since 1962 the Democrats have not elected a United States Senator and have won
the governorship only twice, with the election of Milton Shapp in 1970 and his
re-election in 1974. To fail again this year, some Democrats fear, might insure
Republican dominance indefinitely.

''Nothing's ever final,'' says Edward Mezvinsky of Philadelphia, the state
Democratic chairman. ''But it would be a very serious blow if we don't win a
major statewide race in 1986. How devastating, I don't know.'' Moreover, he went
on, losing both major races ''would make it exceedingly difficult for us to put
Pennsylvania in the Democratic column'' in the 1988 Presidential election.

On top of that, at least 50 candidates allied with the extremist Lyndon H.
LaRouche Jr. are running in the primary as Democrats, mostly for lower-level
offices. And while none is expected to win any major nomination, their uncertain
impact in the lesser races is considered by Mr. Mezvinksy to pose an internal
challenge to the party.

Divisive Primary Campaigns

Mr. Mezvinsky and others believe that matters have not been helped by the
aggressive, financially draining and potentially divisive primary campaigns now
drawing to an end. While some of the Democratic aspirants have fought and often
engaged in negative advertising campaigns, the Republicans have sat back united
and flush with money.

Lieut. Gov. William W. Scranton 3d, the Republican candidate to succeed Gov.
Dick Thornburgh, who must step down after having served two terms, is unopposed
in the primary. Senator Arlen Specter, the moderate Philadelphia Republican who
is is up for election this year, has only minor opposition in the primary and is
expected to win easily.

With the Democrats, it is a far different story. The close and spirited race for
the Senate nomination pits a six-term Philadelphia-area Congressman, Bob Edgar,
against Don Bailey, a former Congressman from western Pennsylvania who lost his
seat to redistricting in 1982 and was elected the State Auditor General in 1984.
The LaRouche candidate is George R. H. Elder.

In the race for the gubernatorial nomination, Robert P. Casey, a Scranton lawyer
and former Auditor General, faces Edward G. Rendell, who until this year was the
Philadelphia District Attorney. The LaRouche candidate is Steve Douglas.

Edgar a Liberal Democrat

Representative Edgar is a 42-year-old Methodist minister who has consistently
won re-election as a liberal Democrat in a heavily Republican suburban district.
He first ran for the House because he was outraged by the Watergate scandals,
and became an outspoken critic of the Vietnam War.

His opponent, the 40-year-old Mr. Bailey, received a number of combat
decorations, including the Silver Star, in that war. He is a lawyer who once
played football at the University of Michigan.

Mr. Bailey considers himself a liberal on social issues but a conservative on
national defense. He opposes abortion. He argues that he is better equipped to
defeat Senator Specter in November because his more conservative stance would
enable him to draw Republican votes.

Fourth Try for Nomination

Mr. Casey, 54 years old, is making his fourth try for the gubernatorial
nomination. His loss in one race was attributed to confusion with a candidate
who had the same name. His campaign committee this year is ''The Real Bob Casey
Committee.'' He has made economic revitalization the cornerstone of his
campaign.

Mr. Rendell, 42 years old, is a liberal who built a reputation as a tough
law-enforcement official. Economic development has also been a major campaign
theme for him, and he has attacked the public utilities for rates he says are
too high.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Gov. Dick Thornburgh (UPI)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FUND SEEKING KIN OF 39 VIETNAM CASUALTIES

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 33, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 518 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 17


A search is under way for family members of 39 casualties of the Vietnam War
whose names are being added to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial.

The 39 people were among 109 who were omitted from the list of Vietnam War dead
originally inscribed on the V-shaped memorial on the Mall in Washington.

A Memorial Day ceremony is planned to honor the servicemen who are being added,
and officials of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund want to invite family
members.

''Neither the Defense Department nor the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund have
addresses for any relatives of these men,'' said Rebecca Kirtland, vice
president of the fund.

Ninety-five of the 109 casualties were service members who died in war-related
service outside of the war zone Their names were originally left off the
memorial. Fourteen others who are being added died after the war of wounds they
suffered in Vietnam, she said.

Anyone knowing relatives of these men is asked to call the fund at 202-659-9419:
VAUGHN, Lieut. Col. James L., Air Force, Huntsville, Ark. ALSTON, Sgt. Kenneth,
Air Force, Santee, Calif. WRIGHT, Maj. Gene T., Air Force, San Diego. DUNNING,
Ens. Allan Lombard Jr., Navy, Stonington, Conn. LONG, Maj. Warren L., Air Force,
Ona, Fla. CREWS, Sgt. Arthur B., Air Force, Barnesville, Ga. MEWBORN, Petty
Officer 1st Class Weslie David, Navy, Atlanta. WALLACE, Staff Sgt. Glen E., Air
Force, Albany, Ga. CROW, Staff Sgt. Clyde A., Air Force, Boise, Idaho. BANNING,
Lieut. Terry L., Air Force, Andalusia, Ill. THOMAS, Lieut. Comdr. John Clarence,
Navy, Portland, Ind. GRIFFIN, Maj. William J., Air Force, Homedale, Iowa.
SPANGLER, Lieut. James N., Air Force, Mayking, Ky. STUART, Staff Sgt. Charles
E., Bangor, Maine.

DAVIS, Lance Cpl. Gregory Chalmers, Marine

Corps, N. Andover, Mass. FRANCIS, Airman 1st Class James E., Air Force, St.
Louis. PLATT, Capt. Russell L., Air Force, Las Cruces, N.M. HERNANDEZ-DIAZ,
Airman 1st Class Miguel A., Air Force, New York City. MAJOR, Airman 1st Class
Allan S., Air Force, Maspeth, Queens.

SCHWARTZ, Airman 1st Class Abraham, Air

Force, Brooklyn. STROBL, Capt. John G., Air Force, Cincinnati.

PRICE, First Lieut. Robert H., Air Force, Milton-

Freewater, Ore. DOOLEY, Sgt. Marvin L., Air Force, Seneca, S.C. WATERS, Sgt.
Franklin D., Air Force, Greer, S.C. MONEYMAKER, Sgt. Wayne, Air Force,
Knoxville, Tenn. McCUNE, Maj. Ray E., Air Force, Waco, Tex. OLSSON, Capt. Jon
M., Air Force, San Antonio. MILLER, Airman 1st Class Jan D., Air Force,
Clarkston, Wash.

MARTIN, Sgt. Alan C. Martin, Air Force, Nova

Scotia, Canada. BEETS, Specialist 4 Ronnie D., Army, Odessa, Tex. FINK, Pfc.
Charles K., Army, Bedford, Va. MAHER, Petty Officer 2nd Class Christopher
Loring, Navy, Montgomery, Ala. McGUIRE, Airman Michael Kelly, Navy, Buffalo.
PHILHOWER, Fireman Apprentice Charles Albert, Navy, Morristown, N.J. SIMPSON,
Pfc. Joel B., Army, Battle Creek, Mich. SNOCK, Lance Cpl. James Edward, Marine
Corps, Philadelphia. STEPHAN, Richard Edward, Navy, Mercer, N.J. STEWART, Pfc.
Joshua B., Army, Salt Lake City. WEBSTER, Specialist 4 Owen, Army, Vinalhaven,
Maine.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV VIEW;
'ON WINGS OF EAGLES' PLODS TO SUPERFICIAL HEIGHTS

BYLINE: By John J. O'Connor

SECTION: Section 2; Page 27, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1011 words


The timing, it seems, couldn't be better. The five-hour production of ''On Wings
of Eagles'' is just the sort of ''we're not going to be pushed around anymore''
adventure story that, in light of the enthusiastic polls following the recent
raid on Libya, many Americans should relish. Beginning tonight at 8 on NBC and
continuing tomorrow evening at 9, the two-part mini-series recounts the true
story of how H. Ross Perot, the Texas industrialist, went about rescuing two of
his top executives from imprisonment in Iran in 1979. Bucking the newly
victorious Ayatollah Khomeini and assorted namby-pamby officials in the Carter
Administration, Mr. Perot simply recruited a tough former Army colonel who, with
a special team of Perot employees, led a secret mission to get the job done
quickly and efficiently. The result is a kind of Rambo in a three-piece business
suit.

The teleplay by Sam Rolfe is based on a book by Ken Follett, a Welshman who
specializes in covert-action thrillers (''Eye of the Needle,'' ''The Key to
Rebecca''). On the whole, the TV adaptation sticks close to the factual scenario
traced by Mr. Follett. As the collapse of the Shah's regime begins to appear
inevitable in December of 1968, Electronic Data Systems (E.D.S.) decides to
evacuate its employees and their families. But two executives -Paul Chiapparone
(played by Louis Giambalvo) and Bill Gaylord (Jim Metzler) - are detained for
questioning by a clearly hostile magistrate named Dadgar (Parviz Sayad).
Completely puzzled as to the charges against them, they are thrown into jail and
bail is set at the staggering sum of $13 million.

Learning about the situation at his vacation home in Vail, Colo., Mr. Perot vows
that ''whatever it takes, whoever it takes, I'll get them out.'' He is soon
turning for help to Arthur ''Bull'' Simons, the retired colonel with a
reputation for taking on dangerous assignments. In case there be any doubt about
who the heroes of this piece are supposed to be, Mr. Perot is played by Richard
Crenna and Colonel Simons by Burt Lancaster, with the kind of square-jawed
integrity that these capable actors can summon up at the flick of a makeup
stick.

In fact, Mr. Perot's commando operation was impressive. It demanded skill and
bravery, and in the end it got the job done, lingering on in the public
imagination as a rebuke to the later disastrous attempt by the Carter
Administration to get American hostages out of Iran. But television, in its
never-ending crusade to simplify complicated issues, takes an interesting feat
and reduces it to good guys/bad guys mush - easy to swallow, perhaps, but
impossible to digest.

There is, of course, little or no effort made to be anything more than
superficial. On the one hand, we have these sincere-looking American businessmen
and their worried families; on the other, those dark-skinned foreigners, just
about all of whom have to be distrusted on principle. The two E.D.S. executives
seem to be thrown into prison for no reason at all, but even Mr. Follett's book
makes clear that the company was handling huge amounts of money and, in a land
notorious for ''deals,'' suspicions of bribery were not completely unreasonable,
especially when E.D.S. had to do business with Iranians with already shady
backgrounds.

And then the whole question of why the Shah was overthrown is simply avoided.
The opposition is depicted as nothing more than a gang of street rowdies who,
when not destroying automobiles, are partial to self-flagellation. The Shah's
hated secret-police organization, Savak, is actually reduced to a joke that
ensnares an enemy of the commandos.

But hold on. Television is also interested in attracting certain kinds of
audiences, especially of the young-consumer variety, the kind of women who are
perhaps taken with pretty faces and the kind of men who enjoy the brashness of,
say, ''Miami Vice's'' Crockett and Tubbs. ''On Wings of Eagles'' does happen to
have such a character and, dropping the stereotypes momentarily, he is an
Iranian, albeit of the Stepin Fetchit variety. Rashid, played by Esai Morales,
is a young man who adores his American employers and dreams of living in the
United States one day. The Brooklyn-born Mr. Morales, previously seen in the
film ''Bad Boys,'' has the kind of personality and energy that just about jump
off the screen, and the producer, Lynn Raynor, has obviously noticed. As the
story progresses, Rashid spends an increasing amount of time on camera and
becomes so instrumental in the rescue operation that the rest of the characters
begin fading into insignificance. Mr. Perot ends up sharing his hero's mantle
with an irrepressible Iranian.

Meanwhile, directed ploddingly by Andrew V. McLaglen, the television version of
the rescue operation is interrupted periodically for glimpses of worried wives,
who are drawn so broadly that their hysterics border on being ludicrous. At the
same time, their husbands are presented as perfect corporate types: aggressive,
loyal and still fond of a good game of poker with ''the boys.'' They are the
eagles of the title. Mr. Perot is fond of saying that ''eagles don't flock, you
have to find them one at a time.''

As the industrialist, Mr. Crenna projects gutsy sincerity without even
attempting a Texas drawl. Mr. Lancaster is more restrained as the enigmatic Bull
Simons, the kind of leader who can maintain total control without raising his
voice. Mr. Follett tells how, when Mr. Perot threw a party in the 1970's for
returning Vietnam POW's, John Wayne shook Colonel Simons's hand with tears in
his eyes and said, ''You are the man I play in the movies.'' Mr. Lancaster has
got the type down pat.  In 1962, Mr. Perot launched what would become E.D.S. on
an investment of $1,000. He sold the company to General Motors in 1984, and his
current personal fortune is estimated at $2 billion. He still likes to think of
himself as an ''irritant'' who, by persistence, gets things done. But even he,
apparently, is unable to get television entertainment to shuck some of its more
irritating habits.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Burt Lancaster

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DOCUMENTARIES AND BALANCE

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25, Column 5; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 347 words


To the Editor:

In his recent excellent article on television documentaries and journalistic
balance, John Corry takes note of the propensity of the Public Broadcasting
Service to air left-wing documentaries. Barry Chase, the PBS vice president whom
he quoted, has said many times that this is because there is a scarcity of
documentaries from the right.

Mr. Corry suggests, perhaps tongue in cheek, that the Corporation for Public
Broadcasting, which dispenses the Federal funds that finance many of the
documentaries aired by PBS, might start an affirmative action program for
conservative documentary producers.

We may have to come to that, but in the meantime there is a simpler remedy. PBS
could quit discriminating against the producers of non-leftist documentaries who
try to get it to air their films.

Mr. Chase and his colleagues at PBS have refused to air the second hour of
Accuracy in Media's critique of PBS's 13-hour series, ''Vietnam: A Television
History.'' They aired the first hour last June, winning praise from such critics
as John Corry, Edwin Diamond and Neil Hickey for breaking new ground in daring
to air criticism of one of their own programs.

The PBS staff has acknowledged that the second hour of the A.I.M. series, which,
like the first, was narrated by Charlton Heston, was even better than the first.
They have refused to air it on the specious ground that it is one-sided and the
even more absurd ground that they have covered the subject in other programs.

The documentary, ''Television's Vietnam: The Impact of Media,'' has been praised
by President Reagan as a film that all Americans should see. Susan Weil, the
senior vice president for programming at PBS, violently disagrees, saying that
she simply cannot accept its thesis that the media had anything to do with the
outcome of the Vietnam War. She told me, ''That's a view that absolutely boggles
my mind.'' So, public television viewers won't have a chance to see the film.
Some might call it ''censorship.''REED IRVINE Chairman of the Board, Accuracy in
Media Washington, D. C.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AID IS NOW AN EVEN TOUGHER SELL

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 870 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


EVER since the United States began giving military and economic assistance to
other countries at the end of World War II, there have been those who vigorously
opposed it. This year, as the budget-cutting atmosphere in Washington makes it
harder to justify giving away billions in foreign aid while funds are being
slashed from programs to aid Americans at home, there seem to be more doubters
than ever.

The chairman of the House Appropriations subcommittee for foreign operations,
David R. Obey, Democrat of Wisconsin, was blunt: ''I can't pass a foreign aid
bill on the House floor no matter what shape it is in, so long as the members of
the House see that we're increasing foreign aid and we're paying for that
increase by gutting cancer research, gutting educational opportunity and things
of that nature.''

In the current climate, the cuts may go beyond foreign aid to the funds for
diplomatic missions abroad. In the aftermath of the attacks on United States
embassies and diplomats, Congress had virtually promised to provide a blank
check for a comprehensive security plan. But when presented with a five-year,
$4.4 billion proposal for enhanced protection and embassy furnishings - in
addition to foreign aid funds - Congress balked.

Except for aid to Israel, Egypt and a few other nations, the foreign aid portion
of the $22 billion State Department package is clearly in deep trouble. Old
arguments about having too many embassies and about waste and fraud in
foreign-aid programs abound on Capitol Hill. (Congress and the budget, page 5.)
Congressional reluctance has angered Secretary of State George P. Shultz. He
told reporters he was considering ''dropping everything'' to lobby for for
foreign aid, embassy security and other State Department appropriations such as
the peace corps and food for peace. The State Department, after all, is the
smallest Cabinet-level agency. And, as Mr. Shultz noted at a press conference on
Wednesday, ''only 2 percent of the Federal budget goes to all activities
directly in support of our foreign policy.'' ''So the budget issue comes down to
this question,'' he said: ''Are we willing to devote 2 cents of every budget
dollar to our foreign policy goals?''

The argument is reminiscent of other eras. President Eisenhower, never
enthusiastic about foreign aid, nevertheless felt committed to a modest program.
And despite his vow to ''fight to the bitter end,'' a coalition of Republicans
and Democrats, led by the conservative Republican Senate majority leader,
William Knowland, regularly cut his foreign aid requests by more than 20 percent
throughout the 1950's. It was no easier for other Presidents. For instance, in
1968, Congress, deeply troubled by Vietnam, cut the Johnson Administration's
final foreign aid request by 39.7 percent. These cuts are in line with the
indications that more than 20 percent will be slashed from the 1987 budget
request.

Theodore Sorensen, in his biography of President Kennedy, wrote of Mr. Kennedy's
difficulty with Congress on the subject of foreign assistance. ''No powerful
constituencies or interest groups backed foreign aid,'' he wrote. ''The Marshall
Plan at least had appealed to Americans who traced their roots to the Western
European nations aided. But there were few voters who identified with India,
Colombia or Tanganyika.''

Polls through the years have shown little public enthusiasm for foreign aid,
particularly in recent years for military assistance. And Congress has reflected
the public mood. But successive Presidents, despite the wide differences among
them on domestic policy, have shared in perceiving a need to maintain the
leverage with friendly countries that economic and military aid often provides.

The one major change in the pattern of assistance occurred after the 1973
Israeli-Arab war and the subsequent agreements between Israel and Egypt,
brokered by the United States. Israel and Egypt thereupon became major
beneficaries of American foreign aid. Israel has become heavily dependent on
American aid; it expects to receive $3.6 billion this fiscal year, as against
$2.5 billion for Egypt. Without the supporters of Israeli in Congress, many
Administration officials believe, there would be no foreign aid bill at all.

To convince Americans that foreign aid is not a drain, the Administration has
amassed numerous statistical charts. For instance, the amount given by the
United States to aid economic development in other nations comes to two-tenths
of 1 percent of total gross national product, the lowest given by any of the 17
leading economic powers that are members of the aid committee of the
Organization for Economic Development. By comparision, the Netherlands, which is
first, provides about 1 percent of its gross national product.

But Congress remains unimpressed. The Administration, for fiscal 1987, sought
$22.6 billion for its foreign affairs account. The Senate in its budget
resolution voted a ceiling of $17.9 billion and the House a limit of $17
billion.

''The drastic reductions now being pushed in Congress would be a telling
declaration to the world that we are not so confident of our ideas, or our
success in representing them,'' Mr. Schultz said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of George Shultz (Special Features/Sipa Press/Trippett); Table
lists ten largest recipients of direct U.S. military and economic aid, 1984-86
(Source: Agency for International Development)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FROM BIDEN TO BABBITT TO NUNN

BYLINE: By Phil Gailey; Phil Gailey is a reporter in The New York Times's
Washington bureau.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 70, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3928 words


AGAINST A BACKDROP OF A UNITED States flag that overwhelmed their hotel meeting
room in Atlanta, members of the Democratic Policy Commission two weeks ago began
drafting recommendations on such issues as the rural economy, international
trade, family life and military policy. ''The larger interests and broader
agenda of the Democratic Party and the nation have superseded the singular
agenda of elite groups,'' declared Paul G. Kirk Jr., the Democratic national
chairman who had limited the panel's membership to elected officials.

At the same time, in Washington, more than 1,000 liberal Democrats, mostly
feminists, members of minority groups, labor leaders, peace activists and
advocates of homosexual rights, rallied to bitterly denounce what they perceive
as the party's swerve to the right since 1984. One of the key speakers, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, charged that the party was producing ''schizophrenic leaders who
want to look like John Kennedy with hair flowing to the left and act like Ronald
Reagan with behavior flowing to the right.''

A reconfigured Democratic establishment has emerged out of the trauma and
confusion of the 1984 Presidential election, in which President Reagan
overwhelmed Walter F. Mondale in 49 states. Its new politics and electoral
strategies are tilted heavily toward the South and the West, politically
muscular regions that cast 272 of the 538 Electoral College votes for President.
And its leadership is dominated by a new generation of politicians, most of whom
were little more than bystanders at the party's 1984 convention and whose names
even now are unfamiliar to many Americans.

When the country chooses its next President, the three Democrats most
prominently identified with the policies and traditions of the New Deal will be
on the sidelines. Last December, 13 months after Mondale announced his
retirement from elective politics, Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts
removed himself from the 1988 Presidential field. And at the end of this year,
Speaker of the House Thomas P. (Tip) O'Neill will lay down his gavel and retire
from political life.

The party's ascendant leaders are mostly Southerners and Westerners in their
mid- to late-40's whose politics are rooted more in pragmatism than ideology.
They have met little resistance from the remnants of the Democratic old guard as
they have taken command of the debate over how to recast the party's image and
message to connect Democrats with lost constituencies, including the baby boom
generation, which, in 1988, will constitute one of the largest voting blocs in
American history.

Although there is little question that the party's center of gravity is
shifting, it would be premature to write off the traditional wing, which is
prominently represented in the Congress and still controls foreign policy within
the party. In the months ahead, the political debate will be increasingly
dominated by the party's Presidential hopefuls, and two of the leading ones,
Senator Gary Hart of Colorado and Gov. Mario M. Cuomo of New York, have been
sharp critics of the Reagan agenda and staunch defenders of many traditional
Democratic positions.

In the field of possible 1988 Presidential primary candidates, Hart and Cuomo
would find themselves running to the left of such Democrats as Representative
Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri and Gov. Bruce Babbitt of Arizona. Hart says he
will make his record of opposition to nearly all of Reagan's major legislative
proposals an important part of his campaign.

''People want a program and a policy and a vision that is different from Ronald
Reagan's but is put positively,'' he says. ''In 1988, everybody is going to be
called to account on how they voted on all these Reagan policies. How did he
vote on the tax cuts? How did he vote on Gramm-Rudman? How did he vote on aid to
the contras? How did you vote on a whole list of things? It's going to be
uncomfortable for some of the Democratic leaders because they're going to have
to justify having voted right down the line with Reagan. I don't have to do that
because I haven't done it, and I'm one of the few who hasn't.''

In the 1984 campaign, there were few fundamental policy differences between Hart
and Mondale. The real difference was in the public perception of the two
contenders. Mondale was viewed by many as a captive of the party's
special-interest groups, especially organized labor, and as a symbol of the
past. Hart came across as fresh, independent and forward-looking. His campaign
eventually stalled on questions of character -for example, why he changed his
last name and the confusion over his age.

Other Democrats moving to the forefront are generally known more for their
stands on particular issues than for a broad political philosophy. Senator Sam
Nunn of Georgia, without question the most influential lawmaker in either party
on military issues, is the commanding general of the party's effort to shed its
''soft-on-defense'' image.

Babbitt is a leading advocate of shifting more responsibilities from Washington
to the states and of advancing the argument that Social Security and other
Federal entitlement programs should be related to need. Senator Bill Bradley of
New Jersey, along with Gephardt, was the architect of an early tax-revision bill
that helped frame the debate on that issue.

Former Gov. Charles S. Robb of Virginia has emerged as a spokesman for fiscal
conservatism, a tougher foreign policy and new social priorities. And in
Massachusetts, the only state that preferred George McGovern to Richard Nixon in
1972, Gov. Michael S. Dukakis has redefined the liberal approach to welfare and
unemployment with programs that have attracted national attention.

These are problem-solving governors and legislators who have built their
reputations on innovative programs and policy initiatives and who have little
allegiance to the party establishment or its interest groups.

S OME ANALYSTS BE-lieve that the next President will be a Democrat or Republican
who is able to catch the spirit of the times - as did Franklin D. Roosevelt in
1932, John F. Kennedy in 1960 and Ronald Reagan in 1980.

One man with that potential is Cuomo, the 53-year-old son of Italian immigrants
whom some party strategists regard as the most promising of their Presidential
prospects, perhaps the one Democrat able to bridge the chasm between the party's
traditional values and its new political imperatives, including how to appeal to
young voters and other constituencies that have drifted into the Republican
ranks.

Another is Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware, a 43-year-old Irish-Catholic
who rivals Cuomo as a passionate speaker and whose approach to politics is more
thematic than programmatic. Biden, who is so committed to his family that he
commutes daily by train between Washington and his home in Wilmington, is a
harsh critic of his party. Democrats, he says, have put the narrow agendas of
special interests ahead of the national interest and have been guilty of
''intellectual snobbism.''

Biden's critics say he is more style than substance, contending that even after
13 years of grappling with national and international issues in the Senate, he
does not have a clear political identity. He has been a strong supporter of
civil rights bills but has long opposed busing as a means of achieving school
desegregation. He has taken positions on both sides of the abortion issue,
although women's groups say he generally has voted against a woman's right to
choose. As a member of the Foreign Relations Committee, he established himself
as its leading authority on nuclear arms control, but he now admits he has
temporarily dropped the issue ''because it's not going anywhere'' in the Reagan
Administration.

Biden says that if he runs in 1988, he will look forward to matching his
knowledge of domestic and foreign affairs with his opponents. But to counter the
impression that he does not always do his political homework, he has begun
consulting with academic, political and Government experts on a range of policy
questions. ''I don't think anyone really questions my substance, especially my
Senate colleagues,'' he says. ''I think some people just assume that anybody who
is being talked about in terms of style must be lacking in substance.''

Most of the party's Presidential prospects agree on the need for arms control,
policies to spur economic growth and competitiveness in foreign trade,
reindustrialization, military reorganization and closer cooperation among
Government, business and labor. They speak of a more activist Government in some
areas, but they also emphasize the limitations of Government. Unlike their
party's Congressional leadership, some of them call for higher taxes, if
necessary, to balance the Federal budget and for removing Social Security and
other entitlement programs from the list of political untouchables. On national
defense, Nunn and Hart, as well as the others, are saying the same thing: It's
time to shift the debate from the size of the Pentagon budget to the need for
military reorganization and a coherent military strategy.

The Democratic Party, however, remains deeply divided on foreign policy, which
Hart says ''none of us have thought through completely.'' Robb and Nunn, for
example, support the President on providing military assistance to the contras.
But Hart, Cuomo, Babbitt, Gephardt and Biden oppose the President's policy. Most
of the party's Presidential as-pirants supported the bombing raid on Libya. The
exceptions were Hart, who contended that nonmilitary responses to terrorism
would be more effective, and Jesse Jackson.

''I don't think there have been Democrats in the last 10 or 15 years who have
spelled out in any detail their framework for a foreign policy of the future,''
says Hart, who is planning a series of speeches this year outlining his own
views. ''We've been operating in a vacuum since Vietnam. We have voted against
things. We've been against Marines in Lebanon. We've been against contra aid.
Some of us have been against the Grenada invasion. We haven't said what we are
for.'' The most difficult foreign policy question facing Democrats, he added,
''is when and where do we use military force.''

H ART WILL BE 51 IN 1988 and the old man of the new generation unless Cuomo
runs. One of his problems is to preserve the sense of generational change that
surrounded his 1984 candidacy. Many of his ''new ideas'' have lost their
freshness or have been nibbled away by some of his potential rivals, and he is
still saddled with a $3 million campaign debt.

Hart has spent the last year sharpening his own message, gorging himself on
policy papers and writing a book on military reform called ''America Can Win.''
The 1988 contest, he says, will be decided on the strength of ideas.

''All the candidates for President will be new people, new in the sense that
none of them have ever held national office and, except in my case, have never
run for national office,'' says Hart. ''And virtually all of them are in their
40's. Now that's phenomenal when you think about it.''

But there is another Democrat who ran for President in 1984 and is expected to
do so again in 1988 - Jesse Jackson, who until recently had been dismissed by
party leaders as a one-campaign phenomenon. The former aide to the Rev. Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. won almost 21 percent of the nationwide primary and
caucus vote last time - 80 percent of it black. Some party strategists believe
Jackson has the potential to be an even stronger force this time around.

Jackson has not been vis-ible at party meetings since 1984, and his estrangement
from the Democratic hierarchy makes it more likely that his candidacy will
reopen divisions within the party. He has spent much of the last year trying to
fashion a political organization by reaching out to desperate farmers and to a
variety of dissidents who have grown disenchanted with the centrist drift of
their party.

If some Democrats are nervous about the prospect of another Jackson candidacy,
there are good reasons. For one thing, some strategists say Jackson will benefit
from the Southern regional primary scheduled for early March in 1988. It will be
one of the first delegate-selection contests, after the Iowa caucuses and the
New Hampshire primary. Some also fear that Jackson's leftist agenda and rhetoric
could become a polarizing force - in the aftermath of the attack on Libya, he
charged that President Reagan ''practices terrorism'' by supporting
anti-Communist rebels in Nicaragua and Angola. This would increase the pressure
on other candidates to attack him directly, which neither Mondale nor any of the
other 1984 Presidential candidates could bring themselves to do.

So far, Mayor Andrew Young of Atlanta is one of the few black Democrats to
declare that he has no intention of supporting Jesse Jackson in another bid for
the Presidency. ''Only in America,'' says Young, ''can someone who could not be
elected mayor, governor or congressman run for President.''

Some believe that Mario Cuomo is the one Presidential prospect who could fill
the vacuum created by Kennedy's withdrawal and prevent many of the party's
liberal constituencies, including blacks, from feeling that Jackson offers the
only political shelter. But Cuomo, who is agonizing over whether to run, does
not appear eager to claim the Kennedy mantle and is struggling to create his own
political identity.

Cuomo gained national prominence on the strength of his stirring keynote address
to the 1984 Democratic National Convention. That speech, many political experts
believe, offered the Democrats a chance to redefine liberalism in a period of
conservative dominance. ''We believe in only the Government we need, but we
insist on all the Government we need,'' Cuomo told the convention, going on in
homiletic tones to speak of ''the sharing of benefits and burdens for the good
of all.''

But Cuomo has offered few specific alternatives to Reagan policies. On foreign
policy - the debate he seems most reluctant to join - he has moved from saying
he has no expertise in the field to making general observations to consulting
foreign-policy experts. Unlike other prominent Democrats, Cuomo has not tried to
distance himself from Mondale. He continues to say that the former Vice
President was ''right on all the issues in 1984'' and he let it be known
recently that Mondale was among the Democrats with whom he was consulting.

Some experts question whether Cuomo has the personality and temperament to
survive the pressures of a Presidential campaign. He has a reputation for being
a thin-skinned and unpredictable politician with an appetite for controversy.
''Every time I mention his name on television or in newspaper interviews I get
two or three calls from his staff wanting to know what I meant by my remarks,''
says Charles Robb. ''If he wasn't thinking about running, I don't think he and
his staff would be that sensitive.''

R OBB SAYS HIS CANDIDATE for President is Sam Nunn.

Nunn says he thinks Robb should run. Both are viewed as potential Vice
Presidential choices who seem more in sync with Gephardt and Babbitt than with
Hart and Cuomo.

Gephardt, the chairman of the House Democratic Caucus, favors tuition tax
credits when the budget permits; favors taxing some health-care fringe benefits,
and opposes abortion, busing and additional gun controls.

Babbitt, a geologist and Harvard-educated lawyer, advocates a means test to
relate Social Security and other Federal entitlement progams to need. His
''crockery-breaking talk about domestic policy assumptions,'' wrote the
conservative commentator George Will, ''makes him the miner's canary of the
Democratic Party.''

The ideological centrism of some of these Democrats may appeal to many
Americans, but not to the party activists who play a key role in the
Presidential nomination process. Babbitt admits to being baffled about one
aspect of Democratic politics: Why interest groups seem to hold Presidential
candidates to a higher standard on ''litmus test'' issues than they hold
candidates for state and local office, where Democrats have overwhelming
strength and numbers.

''Those of us elected at the state and local levels have never had to pass these
litmus tests,'' he says. ''The interest groups seem to be much more pragmatic
and accommodating at these levels and I don't know why. For example, Chuck Robb
has been highly acceptable to constituency groups in Virginia - labor, feminists
and minorities - and I'm sure if he were a candidate for President these same
groups would try to hold him to a different standard.''

If he runs for President in 1988, Gephardt is likely to find himself mired in
one of the most emotional debates in today's politics. According to the National
Women's Political Caucus, Gephardt ''has almost always voted against a woman's
right to choose'' an abortion. Caucus officials point out that he has
co-sponsored constitutional amendments to outlaw abortions, and in 1985
supported a bill to prohibit the District of Columbia from using its own funds
to pay for abortions, even when the mother's life was at stake.

''I feel that abortion is an issue on which a clear consensus has not been
formed,'' Gephardt says. ''My conviction is that abortion should not be used as
birth control, but as President, I would not make abortion a litmus test for my
judicial appointments.'' In an effort to reposition himself on the issue,
Gephardt recently dropped his support for a constitutional amendment banning
abortion. His move provoked an angry response from the National Right to Life
Committee, which accused him of ''political capitulation to proabortion
activists.''

No Democrat is working the Presidential campaign trail harder than Gephardt,
whose strategy is to make a breakthrough in the Iowa caucuses, the first contest
of the 1988 primary season. So far his reviews have been favorable, partly
because his earnest Eagle Scout image has made him one of the most likable
Presidential hopefuls on the circuit.

''His stuff is still vague and at some point he has to get sharp,'' says one
Capitol Hill Democrat. ''What is lacking in Gephardt's image is any sense of his
willingness to take risks or go for the jugular. He and Bill Bradley started out
owning tax reform, but Gephardt backed off when it became a hot issue.''

S OME DEMOCRATS saw the 1984 election as a triumph of the Republican message of
opportunity over the Democratic assertion that the Reagan policies are unfair to
the poor and middle-income people. But public-opinion surveys suggest that the
fairness question still has political value, and that the President, his
popularity notwithstanding, has failed to move the country significantly closer
to his ideology.

In January, a nationwide New York Times/CBS News Poll asked 1,581 persons a
number of political questions that were first asked in early 1981. The responses
showed no definitive evidence of change in a conservative direction. There was,
for example, no significant change in the percentage of those who believe that
the Government should see to it that everyone has a good job and a decent
standard of living.

And despite the realignment talk prevalent throughout much of 1985, there is
also ample evidence that the Reagan Presidency has failed to move Republicans
closer to their goal of becoming the majority party in this century. For most of
1985, polling data showed that the Democratic and Republican parties were at
rough parity in the percentage of voters who identified with them. But by early
1986 the gap in party identification was back to about where it had been when
Mr. Reagan first took office: 49 percent Democratic and 41 percent Republican,
figures that include independents with identifiable leanings.

As the post-Mondale chairman of the Democratic National Committee, Paul Kirk, a
Boston lawyer and former aide to Edward Kennedy, surprised many Democrats by his
deference to Sun Belt Democrats and their agenda. Despite the reservations of
many Democrats, Kirk did nothing to discourage Southerners from organizing a
regional Presidential primary and has encouraged the notion that the party will
need a Southern candidate on its 1988 ticket. And under his leadership the party
reduced its number of special-interest caucuses and increased the role of
elected officials in party affairs, including the number who will be automatic
delegates to the 1988 national convention.

At the same time, Kirk has tried to shift the spotlight from the Democratic
establishment in Washington to ''success stories'' in the states. As an
alternate approach to welfare policy, he cites what Michael Dukakis has
accomplished in Massachusetts, where the employment training program encourages
welfare recipients to obtain job counseling and training, education and
unsubsidized employment.

Despite Kirk's gestures, Sun Belt Democrats organized the Democratic Leadership
Council in February 1985 to act as an independent force in steering the party
away from its old politics. With more than 100 elected officials on board, the
council has held forums throughout the South and the West to promote its views
and showcase its founders: Nunn, Robb, Gephardt, Babbitt and Senator Lawton
Chiles of Florida. Once derided as ''the white-male caucus,'' the council
started out as a halfway house for disaffected Democrats in the South and the
West. But recently it has turned its attention to attracting blacks and women
and to influencing the intellectual and policy debate within the party.

Shortly after taking over as chairman of the council from Gephardt, Robb
challenged Democrats to end their ''conspiracy of silence'' and start a frank
discussion of ''the new obstacles to black progress'' - high rates of teen-age
pregnancy, illiteracy, drug addiction and violent crime. Speaking at Hofstra
University in April, Robb said, ''It's time to shift the primary focus from
racism, the traditional enemy from without, to self-defeating patterns of
behavior, the new enemy within.''

Kirk originally opposed the D.L.C., but now says it is playing a
''constructive'' role, especially in bringing more elected officials into party
affairs. A good example is Sam Nunn. The 47-year-old Georgian had remained aloof
from the party for most of his political career. But in recent months Nunn's
role in the D.L.C. - insiders say he is its most influential leader - has
transformed him into a party activist who has used his credibility on military
affairs to shield his party from Republican attacks on the national defense
issue.

John White, a former chairman of the Democratic National Committee who is
helping the council with fund raising, says: ''The D.L.C. is a counterbalance to
the Americans for Democratic Action faction that has had influence way beyond
its numbers. It's filling a vacuum in the Scoop Jackson wing of the party that
has a broad constituency but has not had a leader since his death.''

Gary Hart has used the D.L.C. to promote his views on trade policy, but he has
declined to become part of its larger political effort. ''You've got this D.L.C.
group that wants to move the party to the center,'' he says. ''The only question
is, what does the center mean? Apparently for some of them it means financing
contra aid in Central America and voting for Reagan economic policies. Well, if
that's what they define the center as being, we shouldn't have a Democratic
Party. You know, it's Reagan in Franklin Roosevelt's clothing.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Sen. Joseph R. Biden Jr., Gov. Bruce Babbit and Sen. Sam Nunn
(Terry Arthur/Camera 5; Al Stephenson/Picture Group; John Ficara/Woodfin Camp &
Associates); Photo of Ex-Gov. Charles S. Robb (Paul Conklin) (Page 74); Photo of
Rep. Richard A. Gephardt (Cynthia Johnson/Gamma-Liaison) (Page 78)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE DE MENIL FAMILY: THE MEDICI OF MODERN ART

BYLINE: By Grace Glueck; Grace Glueck is art editor of The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 28, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 7984 words


GROWING UP IN HOUSTON, ADELAIDE DE MENIL was embarrassed to bring her friends to
the art-filled home of her parents, Dominique and John de Menil. Adelaide wished
that the starkly modern house, designed by the then-Mies-disciple Philip
Johnson, could be like everyone else's. ''But there were all these weird
paintings hanging on the walls,'' she says. ''For instance, there was a big
purple and yellow canvas by Leger, and I hated to take my friends through the
hall where they could see it. And I loathed the black-tiled floor. I wanted a
wooden one.''

As it turned out, her parents, thanks to their holdings in Schlumberger, the
giant multinational oil-field services company, were en route to developing one
of the world's largest private art collections, noted today for its examples of
Cubism, Surrealism, African sculpture, Mediterranean antiquities and
contemporary works. And Adelaide herself now has a home or two not like everyone
else's, in which the art is at least as ''weird'' as that owned by her parents.
Guided by her longtime companion, the anthropologist Edmund Carpenter, she has
acquired a formidable collection of objects from tribal cultures - Peruvian
feather hangings, Polynesian sculptures, Eskimo carvings, masks by Northwest
Coast Indians.

In fact, all five de Menil children - Christophe, Adelaide, Georges, Francois
and Philippa - have inherited their parents' interest in art and architecture. A
big show of the family's art collections was held at the Grand Palais in Paris
two years ago. And next month, Dominique de Menil, the family matriarch (her
husband John, ne Jean, died in 1973), will see the completion in Houston of a
new $21 million museum known as the Menil Collection, minus the de, in the
interest of simplicity.

Ironically, planned in a time of boom for Houston, the museum will be finished
in a time of bust, due to falling oil prices. It will house the more than 10,000
objects acquired by the couple. Though the building is not loved by some of
Dominique's children, it is hoped that eventually the varied holdings of all of
them will repose there, too. Designed by the Italian architect Renzo Piano,
co-creator of the high-tech Pompidou Center in Paris, the museum is so favorably
looked upon by Houston bigwigs that more than half of its building costs are
being met by local money.

Dominique de Menil appears regularly in Forbes magazine's annual listing of the
400 richest people in America, with an estimated worth of ''at least'' $200
million in Schlumberger stock and art alone. But one family member suggests that
the figure ''could easily be twice that amount.'' (Box, page 38.) Millionaires
are different from us, as everyone knows, but as a clan the de Menils are
different even from their fellow millionaires, most noticeably in the
unconventional ways in which they spend their money. Unlike the normal
superwealthy, their pursuits do not run to clubs, yachts or horseracing.
Collectively, they have disbursed tens of millions of dollars for purchases,
commissions and general support of art - contributions, to be sure, that more
than occasionally have been attended by an impulse to control. They have also
come to the aid of liberal-left politicians and Islamic religious groups,
avant-garde music and counterculture films, archeological digs and art
education, Long Island fishermen and anti-Vietnam activists. Their associates
tend not to be other superrichlings, but artists, film makers, poets,
anthropologists, activists, professors, priests and - in the case of Philippa,
who is involved with Sufism, an Islamic philosophy - sheiks and whirling
dervishes.

Small wonder that in Houston, a city where, as a local gadfly once observed,
''it's easier to be rich than interesting,'' the de Menils are something of a
legend. When they arrived there from Paris in the early 1940's, they were not
yet as wealthy as they would become, but they were almost too interesting.
Hewing to the European tradition of millionaire radicals, they came to be
Houston's most rewardingly subversive citizens, bringing maverick ideas to the
provinces about art, politics and what to do with money. For starters, in a
locale where the ideal home was a formal white-pillared mansion, the de Menils
got Philip Johnson to do them a sprawling, one-level house. In a stronghold of
segregation, they not only backed civil rights and Martin Luther King, but
entertained blacks at dinner. And in a place where modern art was still regarded
with suspicion, these ''pioneer cultural wildcatters,'' as one Houstonian calls
them, established one of the world's outstanding collections, mounted shows and
gave works to institutions - adding insult to injury by bringing the artists
themselves to town.

''They came as intellectuals to an intellectual void,'' says Isaac Arnold Jr.,
chairman of Houston's Museum of Fine Arts and also of Quintana Petroleum. ''Not
only were they considered radical, but really different. They had a foreign
accent, and political views that for Texas were extremely liberal.''

AT 78, DOMINIQUE IS A HANDSOME WOMAN OF frail, unassuming presence, whose
''spiritual'' mien and austere garb evoke the image of a medieval saint. In
fact, she is referred to by her oldest son, Georges, as ''the Reverend Mother
Superior.'' (Brought up a Protestant, she converted to Catholicism to marry
John.) She is not a ''go-getter,'' she insists in her French-tinged English.
''Things just happen to me.'' Yet for all her protests, her modest, low-key
bearing conceals the drive of a captain of industry, and one of her associates
says, ''The phrase 'steel butterfly' was coined for her. Behind that fragile,
otherworldly facade is a complex person of very ambitious reach.''

While the de Menils' collecting and museum-building activities have been
enthusiastically compared to those of the great Medici patrons, perhaps a more
apt contemporary analogy is with the Rockefeller clan, which entered the art
field in the early part of this century. Like the Rockefellers, the de Menils
are distinguished by the variety and scope of their art interests.
Collector-watchers point out, however, that - starting later and with less money
- the de Menils have not yet managed to give us the equivalent of the Cloisters,
the Museum of Modern art and Colonial Williamsburg. (As one Texan commented,
''The de Menils have done so much good with so little money,'' pointing out that
their wealth was ''really peanuts, compared to some fortunes down here.'')
Raised in a code of stern Protestant morality, Dominique is quite prepared to
give a million to a worthy cause, but not to spend money on such frivolities as
taxis, according to Edmund (Ted) Carpenter. He remembers a rainy night in Paris,
when he was ill with a cold but had a manuscipt to deliver to the noted
anthropologist Claude Levi-Strauss. ''Dominque said, 'I'll take it,' and she
bundled herself in a tacky fur coat and went trudging through the rain, arriving
at Levi-Strauss's looking like a drowned rat. He later realized who had
delivered the manuscript and wrote her a note.'' On the other hand, she can be
imperious. A European artist, who is a friend of Adelaide's and Ted's, remembers
making an appointment through them to see Dominique on a visit to Houston. The
day and hour were set, with Dominique's agreement. But when the artist arrived,
she appeared for a moment only. ''I'm really too busy to see you today,'' she
announced, and vanished.

Indeed, shuttling among residences in Houston, New York and Paris, Dominique has
a heavy agenda. While pressing toward the completion of the Houston museum, she
finds time to head the Georges Pompidou Art and Culture Foundation in Paris;
work on a long-range ethno-historical project, ''The Image of the Black in
Western Art''; oversee the editing of the writings of Father Marie-Alain
Couturier, the Dominican priest who introduced her and John to modern art; keep
up with the activities of such de Menil projects as the Institute for the Arts
at Rice University and the Rothko Chapel in Houston, and promote religious
ecumenism through worldwide contacts among clergy of various persuasions. An
informal art historian and teacher, Dominique has also organized some remarkable
exhibitions, innovatively installed. And she goes on collecting - though at a
much slower pace, she says, because prices have risen so high.

''Mother lives at two levels,'' says Georges. ''In the here and now, with great
acuity and effectiveness; but also, at a moment's notice, in the Kingdom of
Benin or the Byzantine Empire.'' Dominique's way of not always paying full
attention to this world has been transmitted to some of her offspring.
Christophe, for example, was once chided by an East Hampton hostess for not
showing up at a party. ''Wasn't I there?'' she asked, in genuine surprise.

ALTHOUGH DOMI-nique's children function in somewhat lower gear, they also have
made ambitious forays into - and even careers in - the arts. Christophe, who at
53 is the oldest (and a grandmother of three, by her daughter Taya) has always
been attuned to the avant-garde. She began to collect work by contemporary
Americans even before her parents did, and exerted considerable influence on
their acquisitions in the field. But as a friend notes, ''She is maybe not so
much a collector as a catalyst who makes things happen.'' For years, she has
quietly but wholeheartedly backed the work of such performance artists, dancers
and musicians as Robert Whitman, La Monte Young, Robert Wilson, Twyla Tharp,
Philip Glass, Trisha Brown and Terry Riley. Described by another friend as a
''warm, impulsive, kind person who is something of a mark,'' Christophe, in
designing costumes for Wilson's theater pieces, discovered a talent for
inventing clothes, and has recently set up as a couturier.

Adelaide, two years younger and known as Addie to the family, is a photographer,
and travels with Ted Carpenter on a far-flung anthropological and collecting
beat. (The two recently returned from a trek to western Tibet to take in the
ruins of an 11th-century Buddhist temple.) Perhaps the closest of the children
to her late father, who was an outspoken liberal drawn to minority causes,
Adelaide has developed an interest in the lives of the ''bonackers,'' the
vanishing tribe of fishermen and their families native to the eastern tip of
Long Island. She has organized a forthcoming book ''Men's Lives'' - with
specially commissioned photographs, and a text by Peter Matthiessen -about them.
And several years ago, when they were agitating in Albany for legislation on
fishing rights. she subsidized a lobbying effort on their behalf.

With Francois and Georges, she is also making a film about her father, who
carried on his venturesome art and community activities while functioning as a
key executive in the development of Schlumberger Ltd. ''She is painfully shy,
but generous and thoughtful,'' a friend says. He remembers admiring a photograph
by Henri Cartier-Bresson at Adelaide's house. Shortly thereafter, she gave him a
book of Cartier-Bresson photographs, inscribed to him by the master himself, who
had been staying with her for the weekend.

The middle child is Georges, an elegant and articulate - if slightly stuffy
-scholar of 45 who more or less oversees the family's financial matters. The
most conservative of the children, and the most involved with family tradition,
he uses - in France - his title, Baron, bestowed on the de Menil family by
Napoleon. An economist, with a Ph.D. from the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, he has taught at Princeton and is founding director of the economics
research division of the Institute for Advanced Studies in the Social Sciences
in Paris, where he is a professor and where he spends time teaching each year.
His accomplished wife, Lois, a political historian with a Ph.D. from Harvard, is
writing a book on a prominent 19th-century Schlumberger ancestor, Francois
Guizot, Premier of France under Louis Philippe. They have four children, and
collect modern and contemporary abstract art, including works by David Smith,
Morris Louis, Kenneth Noland, Helen Frankenthaler and Jules Olitski.

The two youngest children are Francois, 41, and Philippa, 39. Both born in
Houston - their three elders were born in France - they grew up in the
rebellious 60's and seem to have come to terms more uneasily than the others
with the Schlumberger aura. A former film maker, short-time magazine publisher,
pilot and hell-raiser who never finished college, Fran,cois - who has his
father's baby face - is now a hard-working architectural student at The Cooper
Union. Married to Susan Silver, a Barnard graduate (their son was born in
January), he collects contemporary art, furniture, craft objects of the
turn-of-the-century Vienna Secessionist school and rare books on art and
architecture. ''If only my father could see him now,'' his sister Adelaide has
remarked proudly.

Philippa - called ''Phip'' by intimates - the mother of two, is probably the
closest heir to her mother's ''spirituality,'' and has her good looks and
unpretentious manner. Her second husband is is a German-born former art dealer,
Heiner Friedrich, with whom she is deeply engaged in Sufism. Of the siblings,
she has also undertaken the most wildly ambitious involvement with the arts, as
patron of the financially troubled Dia Foundation, whose aim is to support
venturesome artists' projects of a nature or scale that make it difficult to
obtain other backing. The foundation's extravagant expenditures have
necessitated a family rescue effort.

I'M VERY PROUD OF them,'' Dominique says of the children, ''and gratified that
they have John's and my interests. I try to stay close to them, and as time goes
on, we are more and more in touch.'' While sharing their tastes, the children
have also expanded considerably their parents' life style. Each is not only
glamorously housed in Manhattan, most of them on the Upper East Side, but also
has one or two lavish residences elsewhere -Paris, Texas, the Hamptons.
Dominique, who maintains three homes herself, shakes her head indulgently over
their ''extravagance.''

Easily the most spectacular residence is Francois's, built a few years ago on
seven acres of expensive East Hampton beachfront as a vacation retreat from his
handsome Manhattan apartment. Designed by the architect Charles Gwathmey and
built at a reported cost of $6 million, the house - called ''Toad Hall'' by its
owner - is a fantasy version of a luxury ocean liner, with a three-story
greenhouse, screening room, game room, exercise salon, wine cellar and the
obligatory swimming pool.

A more reticent, but still attention-getting, project is Adelaide's 40-acre
housing complex, set in a former potato field not far from Francois's
establishment. Playing savior to old buildings in the area, she and Ted
Carpenter have rescued 15 of them and restored most, with the aid of the Houston
architect, Howard Barnstone, a longtime family friend. ''Ted really started it -
he saved an old house that was going to be demolished, and so we bought the
land,'' she says.

Until very recently, Christophe also had a sizable house in East Hampton, but it
burned down during Hurricane Gloria last fall. (Spookily enough, another
dwelling she had built on the same site about 20 years ago met the same end.)
She recently bought another place near Sag Harbor, and in Manhattan she has a
splendid three-story former carriage house with a swimming pool on the ground
floor, redone with help from the Los Angeles architect Frank Gehry and the
''light sculptor'' Douglas Wheeler. Georges and Lois de Menil have not lagged
behind. Their Georgian town house of brick and marble, while more for-mally
ordered than the digs of the others, serves as a setting for high-caliber
contemporary art, and is one of the Upper East Side's more elegant private
dwellings. Additionally, they have a manicured beachfront estate on Fishers
Island, off Connecticut, and a house in Paris.

Philippa and her husband Heiner have made over a former apartment building into
a townhouse. (One takes off one's shoes on entering.) The big, Orientally
carpeted chambers, including a prayer room, are accented by Dan Flavin's
sculptures of fluorescent light, among other works, and on one wall hangs a
portrait of the Friedrichs' late Sufi guru, Sheik Muzaffer Ozak. The couple also
has a house in Bridgehampton, L.I., and a 60-square-mile holding in Texas, known
as Mesquite Ranch, that is being restored, possibly for use as a retreat or
conference center.

The children and their mother also occasionally drop in on Val-Richer, the vast
estate in Normandy passed down by Schlumberger ancestors. An 11th-century abbey
revamped during the 18th century, the chateau has perhaps 100 rooms. ''Each
branch of the Schlumberger clan has a wing,'' Christophe explains. ''It gives us
a strong family feeling.''

BUT, AS DOMINIQUE likes to point out, she and John didn't start out rich. The
two met at a ball in Versailles, and were married in 1931, when Dominique was 22
and John was 27 and working in a Paris bank. Seven years later, John joined
Schlumberger Ltd.

Their backgrounds were very different. Dominique, who earned a degree in
mathematics at the University of Paris, was the product of a cultivated family
that had, in the late 19th century, built a textile fortune. And she was
surrounded by accomplished relatives. (An uncle, Jean Schlumberger, helped found
the celebrated literary magazine Nouvelle Revue Francaise). She grew up, the
middle sister of three, watching her physicist father, Conrad Schlumberger,
struggle to perfect his invention, an electric measuring device that disclosed
the location of oil deposits.

Though John was born to a titled military family, he grew up poor, thanks to the
efforts of his father to pay off a relative's debt. To supple-ment the scanty
family income, John dropped out of school to work in a bank. Later, attending
classes at night, he got a degree from the University of Paris, adding other
degrees in political science and law before taking his compulsory army service
in the Rif Mountains of Morocco during some tribal wars - and falling in love
for life with Africa. (For their honeymoon, he took Dominique on a bus trip
through Morocco.) For the marriage, Dominique converted to John's Catholicism, a
move that at first shocked her clannish family. Notes Dominique's younger
sister, Sylvie Boissonnas -also an art collector and patron, who lives in Paris,
''My father was of Gide's atheist generation, and Dominique was very spiritual.
She badly needed a religion.''

Very much the image of upper-class young marrieds, the pair rode horseback in
the Bois de Boulogne, and confined their artistic interests to the likes of
Christian Berard, a lightweight Parisian contemporary. ''We didn't really buy
art, because we didn't have the money and we didn't think of it,'' says
Dominique, whose scientist father considered spending money on art frivolous.
Someone recommended a Surrealist painter named Max Ernst to decorate a wall of
their apartment; disliking his proposal, the newlyweds commissioned from him
instead a portrait of Dominique. They hated the result, and hid it away. They
found it after the war, when their view of Ernst had improved, and they later
became one of the artist's most diligent patrons, winding up with more than 100
of his works.

After the Nazi invasion of France, Dominique fled Paris with her then-three
children (Georges was a babe in arms), made her way to Spain and at Bilbao
boarded a small freighter for Havana. ''Christophe and I had chicken pox,''
remembers Adelaide. ''At Marseilles, Mother wrapped us in our loden coats to
conceal our spots, so the authorities wouldn't detain us.'' The family was met
in Havana by John, who - having joined Schlumberger in 1938 - had been in
Rumania, overseeing Schlumberger operations there, as well as putting sand into
the gear boxes of Rumanian trains carrying oil to Germany. The reunited family
went to Houston, then the American headquarters for the company.

It was there that the de Menils began their institutional involvement with art.
(Such involvements were not confined to Houston, however; among other
affiliations, John was a trustee of the Museum of Modern Art and the Museum of
Primitive Art in New York.) Dominique, who from childhood had an impulse toward
collecting, acquiring such objects as ''shells, cut-out images, exotic seeds,''
attributes her interest in art -late-blooming as it was - to her mother, who
would have collected, save for her husband's disapproval. ''She had a passion
for art, and in later years she did buy it, but she gave it to her grandchildren
- small things, a little Klee, a little Picasso, a little Rouault,'' says
Dominique. ''What I inherited was my mother's craving.'''

Dominique's craving found expression during the couple's frequent visits to New
York in the 40's and 50's, where they met Father Marie-Alain Couturier, a French
Dominican priest who spent the war years there. A painter himself, he had been a
prime mover in the commissioning of Leger, Matisse and Rouault to do work for
churches in France. He took the the couple around to galleries, singing the
praises of the modernists. ''He made us greedy,'' Dominique says, remembering
that the priest once appeared for lunch with a Rouault painting under his arm.
Soon the couple was on a collecting spree, venturing from Cezanne to Braque to
Picasso, then - under the influence of the dealer Alexander Iolas - heavily into
Surrealism. So hooked were they that, ''We went crazy,'' says Dominique. ''We
even borrowed money to buy art.''

Because Dominique saw ''collecting'' as pretentious, she was reluctant until
recently to use the term. She says now that she never imagined their
acquisitions would someday fill a museum. And the approaching actuality still
surprises her: ''It's a long way from my early days as a young wife and mother.
. . .''

The de Menil museum in Houston, with its big main-floor display space and a
second floor for open storage of art objects, embodies her vision of a museum as
a place of ''beauty and enchantment, even before it's a teaching institution, a
place where things can be seen on multiple levels, with a relationship made
between the objects and the way they are presented.'' As with the de Menils'
Houston home, by Texas standards the building is more than a little understated.
Though designed by one of the architects of the flamboyant Pompidou Center in
Paris, which wears its plumbing on its facade, it bears no resemblance to that
outrageous folly. In fact, its long, low bulk looks more like, say, the suburban
branch of an elegant department store. The building, primly sheathed in what one
Houstonian calls ''Protestant gray clapboard'' (probably a first for a museum in
this country), has on the ground floor exhibition spaces set in a landscaped
garden. The platform roof comprises precision-made structural elements of
ferrocement and steel, engineered so as to reflect changing light conditions
with great sensitivity. The bulk of the vast collection - reportedly worth
between $150 milllion and $175 million - will be kept on the second floor in
open storage, visible to anyone who wants to see it. Expansive main-floor
displays will be made up of works in the storage areas, with space set aside for
the spectacular theme shows that Dominique and the museum's director, Walter
Hopps, have been doing together for years. Hopps, a well known presence in the
field of contemporary art, comes from California and made a reputation early on
as director of the esteemed Pasadena Museum of Art.

Though the collection has strengths in Mediterranean antiquities, Eurasian and
European artifacts, African art, Cubism, Surrealism and contemporary American
and European works, it lacks a museum ''profile.'' Dominique emphasizes that
it's a very ''personal'' assemblage, ''idiosyncratic,'' with major gaps. Yet
these holdings, together with those of the nearby Museum of Fine Arts and the
Contemporary Arts Museum, should boost Houston's cultural status to that of a
world-class center for the visual arts.

The Menil Collection's discreet, low-key architecture befits its site in
Montrose, a modest, socially mixed residential area of Houston. Most of the land
and houses within a six-block radius, quietly assembled by John, are under de
Menil ownership. The gray clapboard of the museum is in keeping with the small,
traditional timber-frame homes -some used as foundation offices, others rented
to friends, associates and various locals - that surround it. At the suggestion
of the Houston designer Howard Barnstone, who might be called the de Menils'
architect-in-residence, the houses have mostly been painted a uniform gray, so
that the museum and the bungalows together have the aspect of a small, but by no
means unpleasant, company town.

Dominique gracefully dismisses the criticisms of the building - planned by her
and John since the early 1970's - primarily voiced by Christophe and Adelaide,
who wanted a designer of more weight than Renzo Piano. ''Each of the children,''
says Adelaide now, ''would have preferred his or her own choice of architects,
but after all, it is my mother's museum.''

''I wanted a functional museum and they wanted great architecture,'' comments
Dominique. Her ideas are defended by her son-the-architectural-student. ''It's
Dominique's museum and it's important to her,'' Francois says. ''She feels a
museum is all about interior spaces. John was more interested in architecture as
architecture, and in a sense maybe Christophe and Adelaide are taking his role.
But I think it will turn out superbly.''

The conflict, as is the case with most de Menil disagreements, actually reveals
the strength of the family's ties, according to Ted Carpenter: ''It's like an
Italian family arguing over the pasta. The minute the cops arrive, they form
ranks. Actually, her children venerate Dominique almost to the point of copying
her.'' Indeed, Adelaide has recently given the museum an important piece from
her collection.

Dominique, who was courted by other cities, says that the museum is in Houston
because ''I was so encouraged here.'' And there is no question that Houston's
cultural establishment takes the new museum quite seriously. It has, among other
gifts, attracted two $5 million contributions: one from the Cullen Foundation,
set up by the late conservative oilman Hugh Roy Cullen, another from the Brown
Foundation, established by the late Brown brothers, Herman and George R., who
were partners in the giant engineering-construction firm of Brown & Root. The
Menil Foundation is contributing not only the art but about $8 million.

THE NEW BUILDING will be close to another, even more un-Houstonian de Menil
monument. The Rothko Chapel, with its sculpture, Barnett Newman's ''Broken
Obelisk,'' expresses their involvement not only with art, but with politics and
religion. The chapel, opened in 1971, is an all-faith center, a ''no man's land
of God,'' Dominique says. It serves the vi-sion of a place ''for people in
search of peace, meditation and a more intense consciousness of our time.'' It
is named for the late Abstract Expressionist painter Mark Rothko, whom the de
Menils commissioned to do 14 dark, meditative paintings that are the only
adornment of the octagonal building.

Since its inception, the chapel has witnessed all manner of events, from
high-minded colloquia to weddings, bar mitzvahs, a Sufi ceremony by whirling
dervishes from Turkey, a reception for the Dalai Lama and avant-garde concerts.
In 1981, on the chapel's 10th birthday, awards of $10,000 each were given to a
dozen exemplary figures working in the cause of human rights -ranging from
Tatiana Velikanova, a Russian mathematician, to Ned O'Gorman, a poet who founded
the Children's Storefront in Harlem. The Barnett Newman ''Broken Obelisk,'' made
of Cor-Ten steel, stands 26 feet high in a reflecting pool that faces the
chapel's entrance. When the de Menils acquired the sculpture in 1968, the year
the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King was assassinated, they offered it to the city of
Houston on condition that it be dedicated to the black leader. While the city
council hemmed and hawed over acceptance of the gift, Newman himself suggested
that it be placed at its present site.

The city's negativism toward the piece, however, served as a goad to the active
de Menil political conscience, according to Fred Hofheinz, a young white liberal
who was elected Mayor of the volatile city in 1973 with heavy de Menil backing.
''We changed the basic political structure of Houston,'' says Hofheinz -now
chairman of Tangent Oil and Gas - whose four-year mayoral stint corresponded
with Houston's ''go-go'' period of growth. ''Before that it was the old Bourbon
alliance, blue-collar whites and white-collar businessmen. Now it's a coalition
of businessmen and minorities who run the city.''

During an earlier school board election, the de Menils helped launch the
political career of Mickey Leland, a young black militant from Houston's grubby
Fifth Ward, who is now serving his fourth term in the United States Congress.
Leland, a civil-rights and antiwar activist who was studying to be a pharmacist
at Texas Southern University, had dropped out to run the campaign of a black
minister, D. Leon Everett, who sought a seat on the then-all-white board. Helped
by Citizens for Good Schools, a progressive organization supported by de Menil
money, Everett won his seat, along with the other three candidates supported by
the citizens group.

Impressed with Leland, John de Menil took him under his wing and brought the
young man into his own social and artistic circles, ''sophisticating a rough
diamond,'' as Leland puts it. ''I went to breakfast, lunch and dinner at their
house and met every important person they knew. I spent hours talking with John
about world politics and philosophy. He wanted me to be exposed to every aspect
of their life that would give me a chance to do things for my community. They
helped make a black militant who hated white people into a humanitarian.'' THE
DE MENILS' civil-rights activities earned them epithets ranging from '''radical
chic'' to ''Communist.'' A local citizen once called John up and railed against
him as a ''red'' for his support of King. John listened patiently to the
telephone tirade and then said, ''Listen, my friend, why don't you come to my
house for a drink? Then you can see how a Communist lives.'' The caller hung up.
''John's feeling for the underdog really started in his childhood,'' says
Dominique. ''Life had been tough for him, and he saw how hard it was for some
others.''

The de Menils' involvement with blacks has not only been on the political level.
A good part of the Menil Collection comprises objects of African and other
tribal art, and the foundation began, in 1961, a long-range research project,
''The Image of the Black in Western Art.'' The project, not universally
appreciated by black scholars who tend to feel the emphasis should be placed on
what blacks themselves have created, has so far published two books on the
subject.

The idea was born, Dominique says, out of her ''shock'' at discovering
segregation ''when I arrived in the United States, and wondering why, when great
artists have seen blacks as beautiful, dignified, noble, they were not
considered so here.''

The theoretical thrust of ''The Image of the Black'' reflects Dominique more
than John, whose interests were apt to find more direct expression. While the
two had mutual feelings for art and social problems, Dominique was reticent and
understated, John was ebullient, opinionated, action-oriented. ''Dominique and
John were entirely separate people who worked not so much together but in
parallel ways,'' suggests Fred Hofheinz.

John liked to gather the interesting, the creative and -by Houston's standards -
the outrageous around him: black activists, artists, poets, renegades of every
sort. Later in his life, spending more time in New York, he would give lavish
dinners for them and make the rounds -in a chauffeured limousine -of poetry
readings, performances and parties, bestowing gifts on those who interested him.
(Once, for instance, he surprised the dance critic Jill Johnston with a
round-trip ticket to England, so she could visit her birthplace.) John's
assertiveness made itself felt even as he lay dying of cancer, when he prepared
a scenario for his funeral. After his death, he lay in state, wrapped in a sheet
in his own bed. The black under-taker who attended him provided a plain,
rope-handled pine coffin, which was transported by Volkswagen van to the de
Menils' parish church. Plans called for Bob Dylan to sing at the service, but he
was unavailable, and a tape was played of John's Dylan favorites. Rites were
performed not only by a Catholic prelate, but a black Baptist minister, a rabbi,
and a Buddhist priest. More than 1,000 mourners, an international assemblage
including a local contingent of Black Panthers - to whom John had given money
for setting up a free children's breakfast program - turned out in a heavy
rainstorm. ''It was very grand and typically him,'' says Adelaide. ''It was the
most extraordinary thing that ever happened in Houston.''

THE DE MENILS' IN-volvement in the Houston art world began in the 1940's - an
inevitable consequence of Father Couturier's evangelism. Joining the bravely
vanguard Contemporary Arts Association, they made their presence felt, producing
a major Van Gogh show and staging exhibitions of work by Max Ernst, Joan Miro
and Alexander Calder.

Eventually - despite their contributions of time and art - their ambitious
projects brought them into conflict with budget-minded trustees. They began to
concentrate on the more established Museum of Fine Arts. As a trustee there,
John was responsible in 1961 for bringing in as director the distinguished but
controversial James Johnson Sweeney, former director of the Guggenheim Museum in
New York. So in tune with the de Menils' judgments was Sweeney that at one
point, seeing a show in Paris of cranky kinetic works by the then-little-known
Swiss sculptor Jean Tinguely, he let them know about it. Back came a cable:
''BUY WHOLE SHOW.'' He did.

Inevitably, John's impulse to control brought him into conflict with other
trustees, notably John Blaffer, son of a powerful Houston family. Sweeney, the
de Menils' man, was eventually dismissed, partly because he questioned the
attributions of works the Blaffer family proposed to donate. At that point, the
de Menils began to drift away from the museum. ''When they didn't control
things, they stepped aside,'' says Philippe de Montebello, now director of the
Metropolitan Museum of Art, who took the job in Houston after Sweeney. ''Yet I
admire them, and I don't want to belittle their achievements.'' THE COUPLE'S
MOST INTENSE Houston involvement was with St. Thomas University, a small
Catholic college. Believing in art education and - though committed Catholics
-religious ecumenism, they saw in St. Thomas, run by the Basilian Fathers, a
chance to further the school and their causes. Over the course of nearly 20
years, beginning in the late 1940's, they set up a full-fledged art and art
history department, hiring -and paying for - teachers, researchers and what one
of the former de-scribes as ''others with whom they have loose and flexible
arrangements.'' They gave major gifts of art to the school, bought land to
expand the campus and hired Philip Johnson to design new buildings.

Eventually, the de Menils and their entourage became so much a part of the St.
Thomas scene that ''it became difficult to operate without stepping on one of
their toes,'' says Father Patrick O. Braden, president of the college at the
time. ''It began to look more like de Menil University than St. Thomas. The
issue was really the kind of institution St. Thomas was to be - would it
maintain its Catholic identity or would it become a secular college? John shot
from the hip. He was my particular nemesis. I could have worked with
Dominique.''

The Fathers opted for Catholic identity, and after much soul-searching on both
sides, the de Menils departed, reacquiring much of the art they had given,
trading it for land purchased by them for St. Thomas's expansion. Today,
Dominique says, her relationship with the still-small institution is ''very
friendly. Looking back, I suppose we were too ambitious, and they felt
overwhelmed.'' The Fathers, too, can now see both sides. ''If it hadn't been for
them, we wouldn't be here,'' says Father Frank H. Bredeweg, now president of the
college.

Early in 1969, the de Menils transferred their patronage from St. Thomas to Rice
University, a secular, science-oriented school then beginning to branch out into
the liberal arts. Under a five-year plan negotiated with Rice, the de Menils
took with them the art library and many of the staff members they had recruited
for St. Thomas. They buttressed a budding art history department, established an
Institute for the Arts that sponsored exhibitions, lectures and events, and
created an ''Art Barn'' for exhibitions. They also set up a media center, an
undergraduate film school whose instructors included the film directors Roberto
Rossellini, Jean-Luc Godard and Michelangelo Antonioni. Soon, Rice was a beehive
of arts activities.

Explains William Camfield, whom the de Menils brought over as professor of art
history from St. Thomas, ''At Rice, the de Menils said, 'Let's see if it works
and if you like it. And then, you can move in and we can move out.' They
actually maintained their support here for six or seven years before it began to
happen.'' Today, while Dominique still administers the Institute for the Arts,
and contributes to such programs as fellowships for graduate students in art
history, the de Menil presence there has shrunk considerably.

T HE SECOND-GENERATION de Menils all have established their own lives and
embarked on their own projects - though none, perhaps, with the drive and range
of their parents' activities.

Christophe, a tall, graceful woman, who has a long history of supporting
''difficult'' art projects, began designing costumes for Robert Wilson in 1981.
She has now turned her East Side carriage house into a fashion atelier. (To help
finance this expensive venture, she sold a number of important paintings last
year at Sotheby-Parke Bernet, realizing more than $2 million. At the sale,
Dominique bought a Barnett Newman and Adelaide picked up her first de Kooning.)
There, surreal-looking dress dummies and women assistants with pins in their
mouths share space with art by Cy Twombly, Yves Klein, Ralph Humphrey and John
Chamberlain as well as furniture by the late Charles James, Dominique's favorite
dress designer.

''I'm extreme and I have strong tastes,'' says Christophe, who is also an
excellent though unexhibited photographer. ''I get that so much from my mother -
decide what you're aiming at and strike out after it. Before, I did things for
others, and now I'm doing something for myself. Flowering, in a way. Expanding.
Now I have a vocation and much better bearings.''

Meanwhile, grandiosity and the Schlumberger stock slide have caused the serious
foundering of the Dia Foundation, established by Philippa and Heiner Friedrich,
to support the ambitious projects of several hand-picked artists. So serious, in
fact, was the recent plight of Dia that Dominique asked her son Georges, a
trustee of Philippa's inheritance, to help. As a result, Georges's wife Lois has
been appointed to Dia's reconstituted board, and Heiner has resigned. The story
goes back to the early 70's when Heiner, a European dealer, transferred his
activities to New York, while retaining his interest in his Munich gallery. He
met Philippa through Helen Winkler, an employee of the Menil Foundation.
Philippa was then married to Francesco Pellizzi, an Italian anthropology
student, and already exploring with him the concept of helping artists realize
large-scale environmental works.

''The funny thing is, how it came out in me after my parents' collecting,'' says
Philippa, a fresh-faced blonde who has her mother's unpretentious manner and
good looks. ''I was interested in art, but shy and out of contact with the art
world. I never really wanted to collect, but the idea of a foundation that would
help artists build excited me. You were sharing in the great adventure of making
a work of art that was maybe too crazy to realize in any other way.'' Heiner's
Wagnerian ambitions to serve as impresario for artists with grand-scale visions
appealed to her. ''He reminds me of my father,'' she says, ''with his strong
idealism and willingness to undertake certain things that others wouldn't.
Heiner has helped me step out into life.''

In 1974, the two formed the Dia Foundation - the name is Greek for catalyst -
subsidized solely by Philippa's shares in Schlumberger Ltd. Dia soon became one
of the largest and most venturesome nonprofit funding sources in the field of
contemporary art, buying up the works of certain artists -more than 125 of John
Chamberlain's sculptures of crushed auto parts, for example - and sponsoring
projects that range from Walter de Maria's permanent ''earth sculpture,''
comprising 280,000 pounds of dirt that fill a gallery in a SoHo building, to the
vast ''Art Museum of the Pecos,'' in Marfa, Tex., a compound of more than 340
acres which has deployed an array of indoor and outdoor works by Donald Judd and
other artists.

For several artists besides Judd, houses with studio or living arrangements were
provided along with annual stipends, and museums were set up for the work of
others. ''It's absolutely crazy what they did,'' says one New York dealer. ''You
support artists by buying their work, not by making shrines to them.''

In 1983, the foundation listed assets of approximately $30 million in art and
real estate. But the falling price of Schlumberger stock and serious
administrative problems brought big financial troubles. And early last year,
facing an inquiry by the New York State Attorney General into its management
practices - with a debt of more than $6 million, a projected budget of $5
million, but no visible source of income - Dia began to pull in its horns.

A new board was appointed. The foundation cut back drastically on its support of
artists, began to sell some of its extensive real estate holdings and, at
auction, some of its choice art works. Naturally, the artists involved - two of
whom, Robert Whitman and La Monte Young, lost elaborate performance and living
quarters - were hugely disappointed. Whitman brought a suit against Dia, which
is pending. And Donald Judd has gone public with vociferous denunciations of the
foundation, which is now but a shadow of itself.

Says Dominique, ''The idea of the foundation was marvelous, and they've done
great things. But Heiner lives in a dream. You can't just expand and expand.
What they do should be balanced against what's possible.''

Francois, who stopped making films (''I was dissatisfied with what I was doing
and felt a change would be good''), is still elated over his admission to The
Cooper Union, achieved in part by hiring special tutors to prepare him in
necessary disciplines, such as mathematics. His interest in architecture, he
says, comes from his father and from working with Charles Gwathmey, who designed
his East Hampton house. Francois's taste in art is more of a mixed bag than
Christophe's, ranging from works by Matisse, de Chirico, Picasso and Rothko to a
flock of life-size fake sheep by the French artists Francois-Xavier and Claude
Lalanne. In the dining room, 18 rare chairs by the Viennese architect Josef
Hoffman surround a pair of tables designed by Gwathmey.

''The things I've collected resemble the sort of works my parents acquired, but
maybe less broad in range and less expensive,'' he says, pointing out, on a hall
wall, a favorite Braque painting of his father's given him by Dominique. Like
the other children, he realizes fully that his parents are a difficult act to
follow. But, he says, ''I was fortunate to be exposed to their interest in art
as part of the natural fabric of life. We - my brothers and sisters and I - each
have a different focus. But we are definitely a collection of people very much
influenced by John and Dominique. Their fervor spilled over into us. It was
inescapable. There was a moral obligation to get involved with their
involvements. They were compelling.'' Beyond the family, their influence has
been substantial, too. They have been adventurous patrons, perhaps less
concerned than many with the kudos and the cash that go with art patronage in
American society. Says Philip Johnson, who met Dominique and John when they were
''still living in a tract house'' in Houston, ''They were unpretentious, yet
arrogant enough. They were an extraordinary couple. The family has done
everything as dedicated amateurs, but they helped the right people at the right
time. There are some who think they're crazy. I think they're inspired.''

WHERE THE DE MENIL MONEY COMES FROM

Schlumberger Ltd. - tHE Source of the de Menil family's fortune - was
established in 1934 by Conrad Schlumberger, Dominique de Menil's father, and
Marcel Schlumberger, her uncle. Its basis was a device that was lowered by cable
into the ground to measure the electrical resistance of formations in the earth.
This in turn enabled the inventors to determine the location of an oil deposit.
Called ''well logging,'' the process became the basic asset of the company,
eventually proving indispensable to oil companies around the world.

Schlumberger is still the global leader in well logging, and has expanded over
the years into the manufacture of electric and gas meters, transformers,
microcircuits, instruments and test systems for aerospace and other industries.
One of the world's largest corporations - its stock was worth nearly $10 billion
at the end of 1985 - it employs some 73,000 people in more than 100 countries.

When their children were still young, and Schlumberger shares were worth
comparatively little, John and Dominique de Menil decided they would put half of
their holdings in trust funds for each of their five children. After a
substantial inheritance from their Schlumberger grandmother, nothing more would
be forthcoming, the children were given to understand. The rest of John's and
Dominique's estates would go to their own causes. ''Once the children had the
disposal of their own fortunes,'' Dominique says, ''John and I never wanted to
interfere.'' And when John died in 1973, he left his estate in part to Dominique
and in part to the Menil Foundation, set up in 1954 to support ecumenism,
education, the arts and minority causes.

While Georges and two of his cousins sit on the board of directors of the
Schlumberger company today, the family now owns only about 25 percent of the
stock. They have sold off a good deal of it over the years, and diversified
their holdings.

Since its 1980 high of 87 1/8 a share, the Schlumberger stock has slipped to its
present $30 or so, due in part to the sluggish oil market. Thus, the 657,829
shares owned by Georges de Menil and his wife and children, now worth about $20
million, have shrunk in value from the $57 million they were worth at the
stock's high. The stock decline was an element in the recent heavy retrenchment
of the Dia Foundation, entirely supported by Philippa de Menil, to the tune of
several million dollars a year. Although family members say that the decline has
affected them ''minimally,'' Dominique de Menil notes, ''A lot has been
eroded.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Dominique de Menil and family (Marc Ribaud; Neil Selkirk;
Anthony Edgeworth; Dmitri Kasterine; Photos of art works owned by de Menils;
Photo of Menil Collection museum under costruction (Hickey-Robertson)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MISS LIBERTY'S SCRAPBOOK

BYLINE: By David W. Dunlap; David W. Dunlap is a reporter on the metropolitan
staff of The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Part 2, Page 36, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4393 words


Never mind, for a moment, that she is here, in New York Harbor. Try to think,
instead, how this city would look without her: how disembodied and abstract our
immigrant heritage would seem, how empty the upper bay, how lifeless those
postcard ''Greetings From New York.'' It is, of course, impossible to imagine.
The Statue of Liberty and the City of New York are indivisible.

We can be a very sentimental lot in this city, but we usually don't like getting
caught in the act. How many New Yorkers have even been out to Liberty Island?
Those who have are likely to admit it sheepishly, as if there had been no choice
- relatives visiting from out of town, an educational excursion for the kids,
that kind of thing.

But as dwellers in a city of immigrants and dreamers, we treasure her. Since she
has an important birthday coming up, we are giving her a gigantic party, just as
we did for her inauguration.

To raise the curtain, here is something of a scrapbook, clippings that tell the
story of the relationship - rarely smooth, always intense - between statue and
city. The story is, for the most part, adapted from contemporary accounts. These
vignettes show not only how Liberty was regarded and how her image has evolved,
but they also suggest why we love her.

The idea of the Statue of Liberty is, after all, the idea of New York.

THE NEW YORK INSPIRATION

Six years after the idea of a statue was born in France, the sculptor Frederic
Auguste Bartholdi embarks on his first voyage to the United States. Sailing into
New York Harbor in 1871, it is love at first sight. In a flash Bartholdi has
found Bedloe's Island and has concluded that it is the ideal setting for
''Liberty Enlightening the World.''

''The picture that is presented to the view when one arrives at New York is
marvelous; when, after some days of voyaging, in the pearly radiance of a
beautiful morning is revealed the magnificent spectacle of those immense cities
[Brooklyn and Manhattan], of those rivers extending as far as the eye can reach,
festooned with masts and flags; when one awakes, so to speak, in the midst of
that interior sea covered with vessels, some giants in size, some dwarfs, which
swarm about, puffing, whistling, swinging the great arms of their uncovered
walking beams, moving to and fro like a crowd upon a public place.

''It is thrilling. It is, indeed, the New World, which appears in its majestic
expanse, with the ardor of its glowing life. Was it not wholly natural that the
artist was inspired by this spectacle? Yes, in this very place shall be raised
the Statue of Liberty, grand as the idea which it embodies, radiant upon the two
worlds. If, then, the form of the accomplished work is mine, to the Americans I
owe the thought and the inspiration which gave it birth. I was conscious when I
landed at New York that I had found the idea which my friends had hoped for.''

NEW YORK THROWS A PARTY, OCT. 28, 1886

On the day that ''Liberty Enlightening the World'' is unveiled, the city cannot
restrain its enthusiasm.

Neither can The

Times, whose account begins:

''Liberty!

''A hundred Fourths of July broke loose to exalt her name, and despite the
calendar rolled themselves into a delirious and glorious one.''

* ''At daybreak, the city stirred nimbly and flung a million colors to the heavy
air, for the cloud king had covered the heavens and moved upon the waters; but
she plumed herself and showered scarlet, and snow, and azure, and gold, defying
the skies to darken her festival.

''Then streamed the people; convergent rivers of life hurrying and sweeping
through a thousand channels to the path of the pageant; there eddying, or
gathered, or running counter to the onward tide, till the great thoroughfares
overflowed and billows of humanity surged crosswise and splashed sprays of small
boys to every ledge and cornice and accessible foothold till the very lampposts
were crowded and the doomed telegraph poles creaked with their burden.''

* ''Adventurous souls chartered wherry or dingy and tumbled about on the waves
like a cockle, narrowly missing this paddle wheel to encounter that, and earning
many a frenzied pilot's blessing. There stole a white-winged yacht like a ghost,
coming and vanishing and coming again. Huge steamers swept in stately silence.

''Here, there and everywhere moved the ferries and the passenger boats - all
black with humanity. Now lifted the brooding cloud for a moment, and showed the
ships of war, brilliant with bunting, pointing to the tide -the island - the
waiting goddess - a hundred plunging tugs and speeding yachts and saucy launches
- then the cloud dropped and they were hidden.''

* ''It was 2 o'clock when the steamer Magenta, with the first load of persons
holding platform tickets, landed. On arriving the visitors ascended a temporary
flight of stairs to the platform.

''The entire stand was trimmed with French and American flags. Above the
platform arose majestically the great form of the statue, glistening with rain
and rich in tints of brown and gray. Across the face was stretched a flag that
constantly fluttered in the breeze.

''It was 2:45 o'clock when the French delegation arrived. With the exception of
Count Ferdinand de Lesseps, who ascended to the speakers' stand, they took seats
on the platform on the front row. M. Bartholdi sat at the extreme left, with
Mme. Bartholdi at his side.''

* ''The Board of Aldermen visited the scene of the unveiling in a body. They
were accompanied by most of the city officers of Newark, N. J. The City Fathers
were out for pleasure, and they showed their brethren how New-York Aldermen can
enjoy themselves.

''As soon as the lines were cast off a rush was made for the bar, where an
unknown quanity of wine was stored. The Aldermen put a bottle in each overcoat
pocket and one under each arm, and formed in small groups to drink at the
expense of the city.

''When Bedloe's Island was reached, President Nooney of the Board of Aldermen
asked the pilot what he meant by not making a landing. He replied that the
officer on the dock would not allow him to make his boat fast. '' 'We represent
the great city of New-York,' said Mr. Nooney. 'You get alongside of that dock
and we'll land or I'll know the reason why.'

''The pilot did as he was ordered and the City Fathers and their friends swarmed
on the island. They elbowed their way to the grand stand, and in the twinkling
of an eye President Cleveland was surrounded by a group of New-York Aldermen all
ready to grasp his hand.''

* Those on Bedloe's Island hear the speeches:

Count Ferdinand de Lesseps: ''You have reason, citizens of America, to be proud
of your 'go ahead.' You have made great headway during one hundred years. The
representatives of France deem America powerful and free to-day, and present to
her this emblem to proclaim that she is now the personification of liberty.''

President Cleveland: ''We will not forget that Liberty has here made her home;
nor shall her chosen altar be neglected. Willing votaries will constantly keep
alive its fires, and these shall gleam upon the shores of our sister republic in
the East. Reflected thence, and joined with answering rays, a stream of light
shall pierce the darkness of ignorance and man's oppression, until liberty
enlightens the world.''

Senator William M. Evarts reaches the halfway point of his speech:

''At this point Mr. Evarts made a pause. A young gentleman standing near him had
been watching for the end of his address.

''Away up in the mist and rain, on the head of the statue, were three men
eagerly watching the young man near Mr. Evarts: M. Auguste Bartholdi, Richard
Butler, Secretary of the American committee, and D. H. King, who erected the
statue. They held in their hands the cord attached to the veil over the face of
the statue.

''When Mr. Evarts paused the young man beside him pulled out the handkerchief
and waved it madly. The three men above gave the cord a pull and the veil fell
from the face of Liberty. M. Bartholdi, shaken with emotion, turned and kissed
and embraced the two men with him.

''All the noise that had gone before was child's play to what broke forth
then.'' It was the end of the oration of Mr. Evarts and the start of a Liberty
legend.

* For the rest of the city, floating in the harbor or gathered at the shores,
the scene looked and sounded like this at the moment Senator Evarts made his
fateful pause:

''All eyes were fixed upon the veil which hid the mighty face. Half an hour
passed. Suddenly it dropped, and the majesty of the goddess was seen.

''The throngs on the island and on the river shouted one thundering paean of
acclamations that swept down the Bay on the wings of the northeast gale and
smote the hills of Staten Island with a huge shock of sound. Through the mist in
every direction could be seen leaping sudden, sharp flashes of light, and then
the peal of guns across the water.

''Thunder after thunder shook cloud and sea, the brazen voice of steam lifted
its utmost clamors, colors dipped, men cheered and women applauded, the sounds
from the sea were hurled back from the land, bell spoke to bell and cannon to
cannon, till all men of the thousands gathered in her honor knew that Liberty
had been given and received.''

STREETS CLOGGED WITH TUBAS

The Times coverage of the event continues:

''It seemed to have rained brass bands during the night and hailed gorgeousness,
with no drainage to carry the surplus away. There were bands of 70 pieces and
bands of 7; bands striped and feathered and zoned and trimmed and buttoned
galore, not a square inch of plainness visible on any tooting Teuton . . . Bands
from every armory, theater and dance hall in the city; windy bands from Boston
with vociferous horns; mild bands from Buffalo with a dropsical tuba that
cadenced the march with immeasurably absymal grunts; bands from Hoboken and
Newark; bands from Sing Sing and Poughkeepsie and Newburg; bands from Albany
that ought to have been poisoned or blown up on the way, squealing and wheezing
their excited course through the maddened air; bands from Washington that could
be heard a mile; bands from Philadelphia that couldn't be heard at all . . .
bands proud and bands humble, bands full and bands skimpy, they tooted and
whistled and shrieked, more and more coming each minute, and still they came.''

WALL STREET GOES WILD

A further report of the day's festivities describes what may be the prototype of
the ticker-tape parade:

''Wall Street didn't have a holiday, but it managed to have great sport in its
own way. The street was packed and many were the strangers and pretty country
cousins gazing in open-mouthed wonder at the colossal buildings.

''All this display was an inspiration to so many imps of office boys, who, from
a hundred windows, began to unreel the spools of tape that record the fateful
messages of the 'ticker.' In a moment the air was white with curling streamers.

''This was altogether too much fun, and the office boys had to give way to their
elders. More and more of the tape went skimming through the air. There was
seemingly no end to it. Every window appeared to be a mill spouting out
squirming lines of tape.''

PERFIDIOUS BOSTON

On Sept. 29, 1876, The Times waxes sardonic in an editorial deriding the statue,
whose right arm is on display in Madison Square, as a ''useless gift.''

But on Oct. 29, 1882, when it has been suggested that the statue might go to
Boston, the newspaper reverses itself:

''Boston has dealt us the latest stab. Mindful of our apparent indifference in
the matter of M. Bartholdi's statue, she has stretched forth her hand. She
proposes to take our neglected statue of Liberty and warm it over for her own
uses and glory.

''This statue is dear to us, though we have never looked upon it, and no
third-rate town is going to step in and take it from us. Philadelphia tried that
in 1876, and failed. Let Boston be warned.

''We have more than a million people in this City who are resolved that that
great lighthouse statue shall be smashed into minute fragments before it shall
be stuck up in Boston Harbor. If we are to lose the statue it shall go to some
worthier and more modest place - Painted Post, for instance, or Glover, Vt. . .
.

''Those of us who have pensively contemplated the Titanic fist of this statue
during its prolonged exhibition in Madison Square are haunted with a desire to
see the completed work.'' LIBERTY, AHOY!  From The Times of June 16, 1885:

''About 10 miles off Sandy Hook lightship, a pilot boat ran close under the bows
of an odd-looking, bark-rigged propeller. The man on lookout shouted down the
companionway to the pilot that he thought it was a tramp.

''The vessel was hailed and a voice asked, 'What ship?'

'' 'Isere, from Rouen,' came back through the darkness, in broken English.

'' 'It's all right,' said Pilot Henderson, getting into a small boat and heading
for the vessel, 'She's got that big Liberty aboard.' ''

A MODEST PROPOSAL

From the makers of Castoria laxative to the Pedestal Fund Committee, March 25,
1884:

''So far as we know the largest single subscription for the Pedestal Fund is
$5,000. To promote the good work we tender you a subscription of twenty-five
thousand dollars, provided that for the period of one year you permit us to
place across the top of the pedestal the word 'Castoria.' Thus art and science,
the symbol of liberty to man, and of health to his children, would be more
closely enshrined in the hearts of our people.

''Very respectfully, yours''

The offer is declined.

THE PEDESTAL, ON AND OFF

Funds for a pedestal for the statue are slow in coming in. Sensing that they
must make some display of progress to capture the popular imagination, the
American Committee for the Statue of Liberty plans an impressive
cornerstone-laying ceremony on Bedloe's Island with the knowledge that there is
not enough money to finish the job.

The ceremony is drenched in rain. As The Times reports on Aug. 6, 1884:
''Hundreds who had received invitations were kept away by the storm, and there
were only about 1,500 persons altogether on the island. Nearly one-half of the
gathering was made up of Frenchmen.''

Richard Morris Hunt, architect of the pedestal, is there. The first American to
study at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris, Hunt has grown rich and famous
designing homes for New York's wealthy. His pedestal is not all that he
originally intended. The shortage of building funds has led to a reduction in
its height, from 114 feet to 89 feet. Hunt puts so much ornamentation on his
pedestal, however, that in the end no savings are made.

Work on Bedloe's Island is stopped on March 10, 1885, because the committee
lacks funds to pay for it.

PULITZER TO THE RESCUE

Despite a decade of effort by the American Committee for the Statue of Liberty
to raise funds to provide a pedestal for the statue, the money has almost run
out by March 1885. In eight years, the committee has raised a total of
$182,491.40; now less than $3,000 remains and $100,000 more is needed.

Joseph Pulitzer, the Hungarian-born publisher of The New York World, announces a
drive to raise that sum.

Here are some samples of the response:

* ''I see by the paper this morning, that a little boy, one year old,
contributed one dollar to the pedestal fund. Although I cannot creep, I can
shout for the cause of liberty when my papa and mama want to sleep. Enclosed
please find one dollar from a little boy eight months.''

* ''Since leaving off smoking cigarettes I have gained twenty-five pounds, so I
cheerfully inclose a penny for each pound.''

* ''A lonely and very aged woman with very limited means wishes to add her mite
to the Bartholdi fund. Hoping that the inclosed dollar may induce multitudes all
over the country to respond and that the enterprise may be very speedily
accomplished is the earnest wish of the writer.''

The goal is reached. On Aug. 1, 1885, The World's headline trumpets: ONE HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLARS!

By May 1886 the pedestal is in place.

EMMA LAZARUS

On Dec. 3,1883, at a fund-raising event for the statue at the National Academy
of Design, F. Hopkinson Smith, an engineer, artist and writer, reads for the
first time a sonnet called ''The New Colossus,'' written by a young New York
poet named Emma Lazarus. Her poem is destined for 20 years of obscurity.  From
The Times of Nov. 20, 1887: ''After a long and very painful illness, there died
yesterday a young writer of New York.'' At the age of 38, Emma Lazarus is dead
of Hodgkin's disease. Coming from ''one of the best-known and oldest Hebrew
families of the city,'' as The Times notes, her life was transformed by her
first sight of poor immigrant Jews, refugees from the pogroms of Czarist Russia.

Nowhere in the obituary is mention made of ''The New Colossus.'' Her sonnet
still is in eclipse and Emma Lazarus will never know that it will give the
statue her most enduring and affecting identity as the Mother of Exiles.

Liberty's most important symbolic transformation occurs so quietly that it is
scarcely noticed. As The Times of May 6, 1903, reports:

''The memory of Emma Lazarus, a writer of note in her day, has been revived by
her friend, Miss Georgina Schuyler, by a graceful act. Yesterday a memorial
bronze tablet was unveiled at Bedloe's or Liberty Island as it is now called,
just inside the entrance to the pedestal of Bartholdi's gigantic statue.'' On
the plaque are these words:

Not like the brazen giant of Greek fame, With conquering limbs astride from land
to land, Here at our sea-washed, sunset-gates shall stand A mighty woman with a
torch, whose flame Is the imprisoned lightning, and her name Mother of Exiles.
From her beacon-hand Glows world-wide welcome, her mild eyes command The
air-bridged harbor that twin-cities frame. ''Keep, ancient lands, your storied
pomp!'' cries she, With silent lips. ''Give me your tired, your poor, Your
huddled masses yearning to breathe free, The wretched refuse of your teeming
shore, Send these, the homeless, tempest-tost to me, I lift my lamp beside the
golden door!''

THE AMERICAN GOD

Exiled from Russia, Maxim Gorki arrives in New York in 1905. In ''The City of
the Yellow Devil'' he describes his arrival: '' 'Who's that?' a Polish girl asks
softly, staring in wonder at the Statue of Liberty. '' 'The American god,'
someone replies. ''The massive figure of the bronze woman is covered from head
to foot with verdigris. The cold face stares blindly through the fog, out to the
wastes of ocean, as though the bronze is waiting for the sun to bring sight to
its sightless eyes. There is very little ground under Liberty's feet, she
appears to rise from the ocean on a pedestal of petrified waves. Her arm, raised
aloft over the ocean and the masts of the ships, gives a proud majesty and
beauty to her pose. The torch so tightly gripped in her hand seems about to
burst into a bright flame, driving away the gray smoke and bathing all around in
fierce and joyous light.''

MOTHER OF EXILES

* In 1886, the year that the statue is dedicated, 334,203 immigrants arrive in
the United States. The three largest groups come from Germany (84,403), Great
Britain (62,929) and Ireland (49,619).

* In ''How the Other Half Lives'' (1890), Jacob A. Riis writes, ''A map of the
city, colored to designate nationalities, would show more stripes than on the
skin of a zebra and more colors than any rainbow.''

* A new New York City is emerging, one that will impress upon the Statue of
Liberty her most enduring legacy. In 1907, 1,285,349 immigrants reach these
shores.

* On Oct. 28, 1936, President Roosevelt, speaking at the statue's rededication
ceremony, says, as reported by The Times: ''Perhaps Providence did prepare this
American continent to be a place of the second chance. Certainly, millions of
men and women have made it that. It is the memory of all these eager-seeking
millions that make this one of America's places of great romance.''

Presiding at the rededication ceremonies is Mayor La Guardia, who had once been
an interpreter at Ellis Island.

* On Oct. 3, 1965, President Johnson stands within the shadow of the statue to
sign a far-reaching immigration reform bill, designed to undo ''the harsh
injustices of the National Origins Quota System.'' ''We can all believe,'' he
says, ''that the lamp of this grand old lady is brighter today - and the golden
door she guards gleams more brilliantly in the light of an increased liberty for
people from all countries.''

* On Sept. 26, 1972, President Nixon presides at the dedication of the American
Museum of Immigration on Liberty Island.

* On May 18, 1982, President Reagan appoints Lee Iacocca as chairman of a
commission to raise funds to restore the Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island.

Echoing the words of President Roosevelt, Mr. Reagan says, ''I can't help but
believe - you can call it mysticism, if you will - that God must have placed
this land here between the two oceans to be found by a certain kind of people,
that whatever corner of the world they came from they had the courage and the
desire for freedom that went with it to uproot themselves and come to this
strange land.''

WAR AND PEACE

The Statue of Liberty is undergoing another transformation, coming more and more
to mean simply America, the home of liberty, a place to be defended by the young
men who sail beneath her gaze to the battlefields of France. As World War I
begins, her image as a sentinel of democracy is used to finance the war effort,
to get all Americans, old and new, to contribute their dollars - and their sons
- to the war effort. She proves to be an effective saleswoman.

In a letter dated April 24, 1919, an artillery officer named Harry S Truman,
returning from the war, writes to his wife-to-be:

''Camp Mills, L.I. ''Dear Bess, ''I've never seen anything that looked so good
as the Liberty Lady in New York Harbor and the mayor's welcoming boat, which
came down the river to meet us. You know the men have seen so much and have been
in so many hard places that it takes something real to give them a thrill, but
when the band on that boat played 'Home Sweet Home' there were not many dry
eyes. The hardest of hard-boiled cookies even had to blow his nose a time or
two. ''Always, ''Harry''

In the early days of World War II, the torch is browned out because ''the U-boat
menace off our Atlantic seaboard was at its height,'' but on D-Day, June 6,
1944, it is relighted for 15 minutes to celebrate the Normandy invasion.

On May 8, 1945, the torch again shines forth in celebration of V-E Day. It is
lighted by nearly 25,000 watts, twice its normal brilliance. ''In keeping with
the spirit of democracy, which never was fully extinguished throughout the
world, the Statue of Liberty has never been blacked out entirely,'' The Times
remembers. ''A few incandescent lamps were left burning in the torch to serve as
a guide to airmen.''

Meanwhile, hundreds of thousands descend on Times Square to celebrate victory in
Europe around a giant replica of the statue that has been erected there to aid
in selling war bonds.

On Nov. 19, 1956, at the height of the cold war, The Times reports that ''a red,
white and green Hungarian flag flew below the torch of the Statue of Liberty for
about half an hour yesterday morning.'' The Stars and Stripes flies beside it.

''A stocky, blond Hungarian, who refused to give his name, said last night he
had placed the two banners to show that 'we want the same liberty in Hungary as
the United States - freedom.' ''

On Dec. 27, 1971, during the war in Vietnam, 16 antiwar veterans seize control
of the Statue and vow to stay there until New Year's Eve as a protest.

Their occupation will last 42 hours. During that time, Tom McCormick, a
24-year-old former medical corpsman from Somerville, N.J., writes a statement of
what the occupation means:

''The reason we chose the Statue of Liberty is that since we were children, the
statue has been analogous in our minds with freedom and an America we love.

''Then we went to fight a war in the name of freedom. We saw that freedom is a
selective expression allowed only to those who are white and who maintain the
status quo.

''Until this symbol again takes on the meaning it was intended to have, we must
continue our demonstrations all over the nation of our love of freedom and of
America.''

ASHES TO ASHES

''A few years ago, visitors landing on the little island were apt to find
themselves caught in little flurries of ashes, for it was for a time quite the
thing, among widows and widowers with cremated partners, to mount to the top of
Liberty and toss the ashes to the four winds.'' This little-noted aspect of life
on Bedloe's Island is found in ''The Book of New York'' by Robert Shackleton,
published in 1917.

MISS MOVIE STAR

The statue plays a heroic role in the war effort in Alfred Hitchcock's
''Saboteur,'' which opens at Radio City Music Hall on May 8, 1942.

In the film, Robert Cummings chases a Nazi spy (Norman Lloyd) clear up to the
torch, where the Nazi learns, in a typically macabre, Hitchcockian way, that he
who would destroy liberty is himself destroyed by Liberty.

WORTH A JOURNEY

Almost from the start, the statue has been among New York's pre-eminent tourist
attractions. Here is what some travel writers have said about her:

Paul Morand, ''New York'' (1930): ''This pregnant lady, in the bronze folds of
her dressing gown, with a great candlestick in her hand, is Liberty giving light
to the world, by Bartholdi. She is turning her torch slightly towards Europe, as
if to light that first.''

V. S. Pritchett, ''New York Proclaimed'' (1965): ''New York is the metropolis of
the United States because it is the most European city in the country; that is
to say, it reproduces in miniature the fundamental foreignness of Europe, where
we are all foreign to one another. That lonely Statue of Liberty, standing in
the bay with tourists clambering round it, is French, La France in person.''

Norval White and Elliot Willensky, ''AIA Guide to New York City'' (1968):
''Liberty is considered corny these days, but corn is here a necessary
ingredient. . . . Like an old shoe to New Yorkers, she is always there, has worn
and continues to wear well.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Portrait of Frederic Auguste Bartholdi; Drawing of Emma Lazarus; Photo
of unveiling of staute, 1886; Drawings

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GROWING UP POST-JEWISH

BYLINE: By Leslie Fiedler; Leslie Fiedler's many books include ''Love and Death
in the American Novel'' and, most recently, ''What Was Literature?''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 13, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1660 words


THE GREAT PRETENDER By James Atlas. 277 pp. New York: Atheneum. $15.95.

I MUST confess that my aging Jewish comedian's heart skipped a beat when I read
the jacket blurb describing a book written by someone under 40 as ''the most
important comic-Jewish novel since 'Portnoy's Complaint' '' (a summary that goes
to the heart of the novel's anxieties, even though the blurb has disappeared
from the final version). Scarcely any writers of that age who seem in any sense
''important'' these days are ''Jews.'' Indeed, I have long since decided that
the Jewish-American novel is over and done with, a part of history rather than a
living literature. To be sure, many of the Jewish-American authors whose newest
work we used to await so breathlessly only a decade ago are still alive and
writing. Moreover, they continue to be honored with prestigious awards,
memorialized in adulatory biographies and mined for quotations on Ph.D.
examinations. In part for this very reason, however, their more recent books
have come to seem not merely irrelevant but posthumous. In any case, from the
start the Jewishness of such laureates of Jewish-American life was already
vestigial, approaching degree zero - and their exploitation of it has come to
seem in retrospect a final act of assimilation into the homogenized, postethnic
society that made them rich and famous. It was perhaps an awareness of this that
impelled Saul Bellow to make the fictional alter ego of his latest novel for the
first time not even a vestigial Jew but a goy.

How is it possible, then, I asked myself, picking up ''The Great Pretender,'' to
make an authentically Jewish comedy out of an account of the growing up of Ben
Janis, the assimilated son of an already totally secularized ex-Jewish family,
who passes from his suburban high school and a summer stint as a subeditor on
Poetry magazine, via Harvard and Oxford and various unsatisfactory erotic
adventures, to a good job on Time -dreaming all the while, to be sure, of
becoming a Great Poet. This is funny enough, in fact, but not Jewish funny;
which is to say, not quite as funny as such comic minor masterpieces of the
Jewish-American Golden Age as Wallace Markfield's ''To an Early Grave'' or ''A
Mother's Kisses'' by Bruce Jay Friedman. James Atlas's autobiographical first
novel (the career of its protagonist is scarcely distinguishable from the
author's) is, moreover, undercut throughout by a kind of covert self-pity and
self-adulation reminiscent of James Joyce's ''Portrait of the Artist as a Young
Man,'' clearly the chief model for this latter-day manifesto of a writer intent
on forging in the smithy of his soul the ''uncreated conscience of my race.''
But what race? one is tempted to ask of Mr. Atlas, as one is not of Joyce.

It is, in any event, the ''Jewishness'' of this book which remains for me
problematical - all the more so because it is not felt by its writer as a
problem, although it is a pervasive issue. Symptomatically, the words ''Jew''
and ''Jewish'' appear rarely on its pages, and the word ''gentile,'' I think,
never; certainly not shiksa or goy, the pejorative names by which the alien
other -despised or desired - is called in the ancestral mother tongue. There
are, it is true, a handful of Yiddish words scattered through the novel: ranging
from the endearment ''boychick'' to a few nouns - ''pupik,'' meaning
bellybutton, and of course ''tsuris,'' meaning trouble. But there are quite as
many words in Russian and even more in French.

The only two characters specifically identified as ''Jewish'' are Ben's two
grandmothers, about whom he writes bad poems for his classes in creative
writing, and with the evocation of whom his narrative opens and closes. The last
words we hear from one of those grand-mothers in the book's final chapter,
however, are Russian: a passage from Pushkin that she reads aloud from a volume
Ben has brought to her in the nursing home where she has come to die. Even in
the Old World, and at a remove of two generations, Ben's family has already been
assimilated into gentile culture. To be sure, in the first scene, which
describes a grimly secular funeral service for his other grandmother, ''a few
words in Hebrew'' are spoken. But they are not reported, and in any case, they
are spoken by a lay friend of the family. No rabbis allowed. (Was there no
Kaddish, the traditional Jewish prayer for the dead?) There are, indeed, no
descriptions of any Jewish rites, no celebrations of any Holy Days no matter how
high. Nothing in the past is denied, only forgotten in a kind of total amnesia.
Though there are peripheral passing mentions of pogroms in Russia and the
annihilation of European Jewry under the Nazis, neither event resonates in Ben's
deep psyche, any more than does the Zionist dream of a return to Israel.
Scarcely surprising, then, that the fact or even the possibility of
anti-Semitism in his own America never occurs to the overprivileged Ben. He is
immune even to the vestigial paranoia that haunted the Jewish-American writers
of the Golden Age, guilt-ridden and fearful, even as they were invited into a
world for so long considered trayf, taboo.

Yet the novel and its author (whose first book was ''Delmore Schwartz: The Life
of an American Poet'') are haunted by the specters of those somehow still Jewish
predecessors: Saul Bellow, Isaac Rosenfeld, Lionel Trilling, Alfred Kazin,
Irving Howe, George Steiner. Their names are evoked, however, side by side with
those of eminent gentile ''intellectuals'' and artists like Mary McCarthy,
Dwight Macdonald - and especially Robert Lowell, to whom, under a transparent
pseudonym, Mr. Atlas devotes one of the most hilarious and heartbreaking
passages of the book. These are the New Chosen People in whom Ben's presumably
irreligious father brought him to believe: their teaching preserved in the
secular scriptures constituted by Partisan Review, Commentary and Encounter -
journals edited, of course, largely by ex-Trotskyite ex-Jews. It is only against
this Religion of High Culture that Ben revolts, as earlier generations had
against Judaism, declaring blasphemously at one point, ''I hate art''; and at
his books's end marching off shamelessly to take a job with Henry Luce, heretic
purveyor of Mass Culture.

But though his father mildly demurs, Ben is not really an Oedipal apostate.
After all, he has dutifully pursued good grades, published poems and at one
point even done his best to slog his way through Rene Wellek's ''History of
Modern Criticism,'' a non-Hanukkah, non-Christmas present from his father.
Moreover, like that father, all his life long, he has lived in communities of
ex-Jews like himself. His alienation from the Jewish past, that is to say (it is
the novel's penultimate wry joke), has not mitigated his alienation from the
gentile present. The enclave of Evanston, Ill., in which he grows up is as
insulated from the gentile Evanston of his neighbors, the true-blue Protestant
ladies of the W.C.T.U., as it is from that of the blacks in Chicago just south
of its border.

Nor does he really quite ''pass'' when he goes off to school. At Harvard, where
he dreams of fraternizing with the Peabodys, Hearsts, Lodges and Vanderbilts, he
winds up instead in the company of marginal types who ''had names,'' as he
rather delicately puts it, ''like Weinberg, Feinstein, Cohen. None of them had
gone to Groton.'' So, too, at Oxford, he is snubbed by the proper Anglo-Saxons,
both as American and a Jew; and he seeks consolation in the arms of an imported
ex-Jewish girl from the States, who finally runs off with a friend, also an
ex-Jew from ''home.'' Ben's alienation, however, is more total than that. Just
as he is cut off from the traditional religious culture of gentiles and Jews, he
is from the quasi-religious counterculture of his own generation.

Though like many of his age and class he did not, of course, go off to fight in
Vietnam side-by-side with the proles, black and white, he did not march - either
against that war or on behalf of civil rights. When he does wind up in jail at
one point, it is not for civil disobedience, but for drunken driving after a
quick jump in a sleazy motel.

Even when the political violence in the streets erupts in Chicago, he remains a
sightseer, a tourist at someone else's war, really moved only when he spots
Allen Ginsberg, Jean Genet and William Burroughs at the heart of a
demonstration. Politics of any sort is for Ben as dead as the Judeo-Christian
God. Not only does he tell us nothing about the Trotskyism and Stalinism that
moved the writers his father brought him up to venerate; he ignores, too, the
rise of the homosexual rights movement and the rebirth of feminism that are
occurring under his own eyes. The women in this book are, to be sure,
''liberated'' but their sexual ''freedom'' is nonideological, intended only to
bug their ''liberal,'' puritan papas. CONSEQUENTLY, at the book's conclusion Ben
is moved to observe, ''Somehow the '60s had passed me by . . . whenever I
thought back on those years, I invariably saw myself myself bent monkishly over
a table in Widener.'' Yet this is not quite the whole truth either, as Ben goes
on to confess; revealing himself not only as more post-Jewish schlemiel than
monk, but as a premature Yuppie: ''I dreamed of a job in New York . . . a
nameplate on my desk.'' Perhaps the fulfillment of that dream lies just beyond
the book's conclusion, and with it Ben's final emancipation. As far as the
narrative takes us, however, he remains, like his remote ancestors, ghettoized;
though to be sure his is a cushy, book-lined ghetto with invisible walls. This
constitutes, in any case, the last and best joke in a book which it would be
churlish not to admit kept me laughing throughout. But I laughed, as my
grandmother would have said, mit yashikes, with worms; since I was never quite
sure who the joke was on - and to tell the truth, I was afraid to find out.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DOLORES WON'T TAKE IT ANYMORE

BYLINE: By James Carroll; James Carroll's novel ''Supply of Heroes,'' will be
published in September.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1434 words


TABLE MONEY By Jimmy Breslin. 435 pp. New York: Ticknor & Fields. $17.95.

IT is impossible to approach a work by Jimmy Breslin without a preconceived
notion of it. His voice, gruff and glib at once, has been familiar now for
decades. In his newspaper columns, for which last month he won a Pulitzer Prize,
and in his books (''The Gang That Couldn't Shoot Straight,'' ''World Without
End, Amen'' and ''How the Good Guys Finally Won,'' to name his most popular), he
has chronicled the experience of his New York as deftly as Woody Allen or Louis
Auchincloss have theirs. No one speaks for ethnic American urban working people,
particularly Irish, with more authority than he does. From this dean of big-city
blue-collar columnists, we almost always get that peculiar mix of old-fashioned
Democratic liberalism, reflexive compassion for underdogs and victims, a naif's
contempt for figures of authority who abuse their trust, combined with a
worldly-wise cynicism that expects them to - all served up with savvy, offhand
spontaneity in which seriousness is sometimes sacrificed to wisecracks. We know,
in other words, what to expect from Mr. Breslin.

And that is why ''Table Money'' comes as such a surprise, such a pleasure. What
we never expected from Jimmy Breslin is what we have here - a serious literary
novel, a superior work of fiction. ''Table Money'' is set in Queens in the early
70's, and it concerns Owney Morrison and his wife Dolores, two of the most
compassionately drawn characters I have encountered in a novel this year. The
story is about their love for each other and how it promises to redeem their
circumscribed, dreary lives. But their love is crippled early by Owney's
weakness and by Dolores's strength.

At one level ''Table Money'' is about what it has come to mean to be an American
male. Owney Morrison is one of those good-looking guys we see in the beer
commercials, a denim-shirted beau ideal. He was a hero in Vietnam. He is a
faithful son, a good buddy, a natural leader revered by his co-workers on a
grueling, dangerous job - digging tunnels in the earth hundreds of feet beneath
the streets of New York. He is at his best when a physical calamity occurs. Mr.
Breslin's descriptions of men like Owney risking their lives in war or in work
or in defiance of hoodlums are gripping examples of action writing at its best.
And because we, as readers, have been moved by the sight of ordinary men
behaving heroically, we too think they deserve it when they hit the tavern after
work in their meager ritual of daily celebration. In the beginning, no one is
happier at happy hours than Owney Morrison. Everyone seems to raise a glass to
him, and one can almost hear a smooth voice over jaunty music saying, ''For all
you do this one's for you.'' And Owney, to his great regret, believes it.

If Morrison's work takes him below the surface of things so does Mr. Breslin's.
''Table Money'' looks under those beer commercials, those war stories, those
great deeds, that precious camaraderie, and what it sees is an abyss. This
hero's story, like that of many all-too-American males, becomes the painful
story of an alcoholic. Mr. Breslin tells it with an unsparing, almost cruel
detachment - sheer truthfulness - that leaves the reader wincing each time
Morrison veers into yet another friendly neighborhood bar. But at the same time,
in one of this novel's achievements, the author relates the experience of
alcoholism as if from inside it, and the reader is left in the grip of an
infinite sorrow. Instead of the snappy beer commercial music, one begins, while
reading this novel, to hear strains of ''There is a Tavern in the Town.'' But
eventually one recalls that, despite its upbeat tunefulness, that song's story -
''Fare thee well, for I must leave thee'' - is one of grief and loss.

What may be lost to Owney is the love of his wife Dolores. ''Table Money''
brings together a man increasingly at the mercy of his self-doubt and a woman
who with great courage lays claim at last to her own self-esteem. Suddenly the
survival of the marriage to which she was supposed to dedicate her life becomes
far less important than her own survival. Dolores loves Owney, but she is not
going to destroy herself for him. That becomes the given of their marriage, the
fact, the basic truth between them, and it is as hard as the bedrock through
which Owney and his fellow sandhogs tunnel. And as reliable. On New York's
bedrock the greatest city in the world has been built; and on Dolores's, perhaps
a new life for both of them can be. THUS ''Table Money'' is not the usual story
in which a woman's self-discovery comes at the expense of her prior commitment.
In an act of profound fidelity, Dolores invites Owney, in effect, to rebuild
himself on the foundation of her fierce will. Whether he can or not provides
''Table Money'' with its excruciating tension. Oh, how we want these lovers to
triumph over what would keep them apart.

But what keeps them apart is not war or work or danger, not class oppression or
absurdities of the age or the arms race. It is something buried deep in the
psyche of Owney Morrison, for he has his idea of what it is to be a man. And
that idea is what threatens to keep him, finally and ironically, from being one.

You don't have to be on a bar stool in Queens to have Morrison's problem and you
don't have to be in a failing marriage to dread his kind of loneliness. Mr.
Breslin has set this story in a world he knows better than most, and he has told
it with both eyes on its details, on the crackling talk and the gritty feel of
these streets and these rooms, which are unlike streets and rooms elsewhere in
New York or anywhere. But this particularity explodes to include everyone of our
generation and of our culture. Jimmy Breslin has written an important novel
about what it is to be men and women trying to build and rebuild lives and
meanings in America today. If we have stopped living in beer commercials, or
stopped wanting to, this one's for us.

A MAN OF STRONG WOMEN

What's this? The blue-collar bard of the Borough of Queens writing a strongly
feminist novel!

''I don't think it's very surprising at all,'' said Jimmy Breslin, the Pulitzer
Prize-winning Daily News columnist and novelist, as he sprawled in a booth in
O'Donnell's, a bar on Eighth Avenue near 43d Street, where the only things that
go thirsty are the three dusty plants in the window, and four hours of
beer-drinking can come to $16 and change.

''I was married to one very strong woman [Rosemary Dattolico] for 26 years. She
died. And now I've been married to another very strong woman [Ronnie Eldridge, a
former Cuomo administration official] for four years.''

''Table Money,'' his fifth novel, focuses on a Queens sandhog, Owney Morrison,
but it is Owney's strong-willed wife, Dolores, who - by struggling to free them
of the masculine-feminine roles assigned by a working-class heritage - becomes
the central character.

When Mr. Breslin, who is 56 years old, began the novel in Queens 10 years ago,
it centered on Owney. But ''my wife contracted an illness and I wound up for
some time taking care of the house'' - and six children - ''and getting closer
to a woman than I ever had been before - unfortunately so, in illness. I came
out of it with a lot of wreckage in my hands, but I learned from it.'' Dolores
was borrowed from both wives and the women he has interviewed over 38 years as a
newsman.

Mr. Breslin pounded out ''Table Money'' every day for the last three years and
still wrote his thrice-weekly column - abstaining from even a glass of wine. He
insists he has cut back. During his period as a househusband, he had an
epiphany.

''The oven door was broke. And somebody had shown me how to put something in the
oven, so I had a chair up against it to try and keep it closed. And then the
kids came home from school, and they're fighting, and it's that hour - like
about 5 o'clock at night where everything goes on - and I'm looking out the
window. And it was a cold, dreary day, and I say, 'Imagine now if I'm the
housewife, and I'm here with these kids and this dinner, and the guy calls me
from the office and says, ''I'm sorry, but I'm gonna be late. I've got a meeting
after work.'' And I know the meeting consists of going into a bar where he'll
have a few drinks and blow some money.' I was almost waiting for the phone call.
I say, 'Let that [expletive] call me.

I'll put his eyes out when he comes home.' ''

He laughed. ''When you get on the other side of that phone call, I think it's a
great lesson.'' - George James

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Jimmy Breslin

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'THE FIRST SPECIMEN YANKEE'

BYLINE: By Pauline Maier; Pauline Maier, a professor of history at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, writes about 18th-century America.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 39, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1202 words


FRANKLIN OF PHILADELPHIA By Esmond Wright. Illustrated. 404 pp. Cambridge: The
Belknap Press/ Harvard University Press. $25.

HAS any figure in American history been the subject of more enduring interest
than Benjamin Franklin? In the preface to ''Franklin of Philadelphia,'' Esmond
Wright says that Franklin has been ''studied exhaustively, probed in every
detail, and repeatedly chronicled.'' Why, then, still another study of a man who
is exceptionally familiar?

Because, Mr. Wright claims, ''only now, in the cynical but scholarly,
ultrasophisticated and lavishly documented perspective of our post-Vietnam,
post-Watergate and post-illusionist world,'' can we see the ''rounded'' Franklin
''as he was . . . warts and all.'' Certainly the more we know of Franklin the
harder it is to idealize him. That early expert in the art of human management
(''never contradict anyone'') seemed to manage least well those human
relationships that should have been most important to him. He married, his
autobiography suggests, in part to avoid further danger of contracting a
venereal disease. Mr. Wright says the marriage was warm as well as long, but
Franklin's wife, Deborah, spent 15 of the last 18 years of her life alone and
lonely.

With his daughter, Sally, Franklin seemed far more a follower of St. Paul's
conservative teachings than of any more enlightened creed on women. After her
marriage he advised her to be frugal and ''serviceable'' to her husband, as her
mother had been to him. And when, in the midst of the Revolutionary War, Sally
asked her father to send her some little luxuries, he instead sent advice: ''If
you wear your cambric ruffles as I do, and take care not to mend the holes, they
will come in time to be lace.'' He insisted, however, on no such austerity for
himself, his illegitimate son, William, or his illegitimate grandson by William.
In the end, however, after William sided with Britain in the revolutionary
conflict, the father-son relationship too went sour.

Even in the public sphere Franklin sometimes came near to missing the tide in
men's affairs. As his countrymen moved toward independence, he was settling ever
more comfortably into London life: only the public (and unjust) humiliation of
him by the British solicitor-general, Alexander Wedderburn, put Franklin firmly
and securely in the patriot camp. Later, in France, he again failed to see any
hint of the coming revolution that would consume so many of his friends and
benefactors.

Franklin did more than survive through changing times. He adapted, indeed
triumphed, continuing to learn and to grow throughout his long life. His final
speech to the Constitutional Convention of 1787 conveyed eloquently the wisdom
of an old statesman: he disliked parts of the proposed Constitution, he said,
but endorsed it because he saw no hope of getting a better one ''and because I
am not sure that it is not the best.'' It was time, he suggested, for the
doubtful man to ''doubt a little of his own infallibility.'' STILL, the notion
that contemporary perspectives justify or mandate a new study of Franklin is not
altogether convincing. Cynicism is hardly unique to our time. In any case, Mr.
Wright, formerly the director of the Institute of United States Studies in
London and professor of American history at London University, first became
interested in Franklin some 40 years ago, well before any post-Vietnam,
post-Watergate malaise. He thereby joined a formidable assemblage of people,
from Goethe through D. H. Lawrence, who have expressed strong opinions on
Franklin. Their comments, which Mr. Wright cites, suggest that the inventor of
the lightning rod has served, like his invention, to focus powerful convictions
about American culture, as if to know him is to know America. And to identify
his shortcomings is to list, as Charles Angoff put it in his ''Literary History
of the American People,'' ''the least praiseworthy qualities of the inhabitants
of the New World.''

Materialism is high on that list. The proverbs in ''Poor Richard's Almanac,''
Hawthorne noted, are ''all about getting money or saving it.'' To Melville,
Franklin had a bookkeeper's mind; he was one of a race of men watching for the
''main chance.'' His autobiography was the original American success manual,
advising readers - as would Horatio Alger and Booker T. Washington - how to rise
from poverty to better things through frugality, cleanliness, hard work and the
performance of socially useful tasks. It was of course also necessary to
cultivate appropriate appearances. There Franklin took his own advice so
heartily that it became almost impossible to distinguish what he was from what
he seemed to be. Some French ob-servers described him as the ''cameleon
octogenaire.'' William Cobbett wrote Franklin off as ''a crafty and lecherous
old hypocrite.'' William Carlos Williams, more kindly, as ''our wise prophet of
chicanery.''

Franklin has also been characterized as, in effect, the ultimate American
philistine, a man who had no time for philosophy, poetry or the arts. ''He
brings everything down to arithmetic, and strict reality,'' Sainte-Beuve said,
''the useful is always and preferably his measure.'' The only artistry that
interested Franklin was that of the ''useful arts.'' Like the engineers his
country would idealize in a later time, he liked to solve problems, and his
tolerance for nonutilitarian forms of knowledge was limited. If in his travels
he could find a recipe for making Parmesan cheese, he once said, that would give
him ''more satisfaction than a transcript from any inscription from any old
Stone whatever.'' ONLY once, after a trip to Versailles, did he break the
pattern of disinterest in ''old Buildings and Monuments.'' And then he commented
mostly on how ill-maintained the property was. At Versailles, as in Paris, he
found ''every kind of Elegance except that of Cleanliness, and what we call
Tidyness,'' a comment straight from the American middle class, with which
Franklin proudly identified.

If Mr. Wright has tried, like others, to come to terms with American culture
through Franklin, his judgments are in the end favorable. Franklin was for him
''the American,'' the ''new man'' of whom Hector St. John de Crevecoeur spoke in
1782; he was ''the first specimen Yankee,'' a man who preached middle-class
values that ''were transforming the eighteenth-century world.'' Those values,
Mr. Wright says, are reflected in American industry, ''its native shrewdness,
its frugality, its practicality,'' and are ''still at the vital roots of
American prosperity.'' Even Franklin's prose style predicted that of Twain, his
humor that of Lincoln.

Those are arresting assertions in an age whose cynicism has produced doubts
about the existence of anything ''characteristically American.'' There lies
perhaps the most striking contribution of Mr. Wright's thoughtful, knowledgeable
and elegantly written book. It offers abundant support for a balanced
post-illusionist portrait of Franklin, but at the same time turns against the
conclusions of cynicism, inviting us to reflect more positively on what we as a
people have been, what we in some measure are and what we are likely to remain.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: MAY 18, 1986

SECTION: Section 7; Page 40, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1277 words

                                                                     Weeks
This                                                        Last        on
Week      Fiction                                           Week      List
 1        A PERFECT SPY, by John le Carre. (Knopf,             1         4
          $18.95.) The tale of Magnus Pym, a British
          secret agent, and his father, Rick, a
          flamboyant con man.
 2        I'LL TAKE MANHATTAN, by Judith Krantz.               2         4
          (Crown, $18.95.) Rich, beautiful Maxi
          Amberville conquers the world of magazine
          publishing.
 3        THE BOURNE SUPREMACY, by Robert Ludlum.              3        11
          (Random House, $19.95.) The hero of ''The
          Bourne Identity'' foils a plot to seize Hong
          Kong.
 4        LAKE WOBEGON DAYS, by Garrison Keillor.              5        38
          (Viking, $17.95.) Yarns about life in a
          small Minnesota town.
 5        THE MAMMOTH HUNTERS, by Jean M. Auel.                4        26
          (Crown, $19.95.) Ayla continues her
          adventures in the prehistoric world.
 6        BREAK IN, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $17.95.)         6         9
          Mystery, melodrama and bitter family rivalry
          in the world of British steeplechase racing.
 7        LIE DOWN WITH LIONS, by Ken Follett.                 7        16
          (Morrow, $18.95.) An Englishwoman caught
          between the C.I.A. and the K.G.B. in
          Afghanistan.
 8        THE BOOK OF ABRAHAM, by Marek Halter. (Holt,                   1
          $19.95.) One hundred generations in the life
          of a Jewish family.
 9        THE GOOD MOTHER, by Sue Miller. (Harper &                      1
          Row, $17.95.) A woman's attachment to her
          daughter becomes a consuming passion.
10        THE HANDMAID'S TALE, by Margaret Atwood.             8        12
          (Houghton Mifflin, $16.95.) In the America
          of the future, men and women perform
          assigned services.
11        HOME FRONT, by Patti Davis with Maureen              9         8
          Strange Foster. (Crown, $15.95.) A
          semi-autobiographical novel by the daughter
          of President and Mrs. Reagan.
12*       HIGH HEARTS, by Rita Mae Brown. (Bantam,                       1
          $17.95.) The experiences of a Virginia belle
          who joins the Confederate cavalry.
13        JOANNA'S HUSBAND AND DAVID'S WIFE, by                          8
          Elizabeth Forsythe Hailey. (Delacorte,
          $17.95.) Two sides of a marriage revealed
          through diary entries.
14*       SEASONS OF THE HEART, by Cynthia Freeman.           10         8
          (Putnam, $17.95.) A businesswoman is torn
          between devotion to her husband and her
          mentor.
15        LONESOME DOVE, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon &                    21
          Schuster, $18.95.) The Old West seen larger
          than life; winner of a Pulitzer Prize.
16*       NERILKA'S STORY, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del            13         7
          Rey/Ballantine, $12.95.) While fighting a
          plague on the planet Pern, Nerilka finds a
          true love.

          Nonfiction
 1        THE TRIUMPH OF POLITICS, by David A.                 1         2
          Stockman. (Harper & Row, $21.95.) Why
          President Reagan was unable to balance the
          budget.
 2        YOU'RE ONLY OLD ONCE! by Dr. Seuss. (Random          2        10
          House, $9.95.) A checkup at the Golden Years
          Clinic in pictures and rhyme.
 3        FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Dolphin/                 9         2
          Doubleday, $14.95.) Anecdotes and
          ruminations from the television star and
          father of five.
 4        WHEN ALL YOU'VE EVER WANTED ISN'T ENOUGH, by         4         5
          Harold S. Kushner. (Summit, $16.95) A rabbi
          on ''the search for a life that matters.''
 5        BUS 9 TO PARADISE, by Leo Buscaglia. (Slack/         3        14
          Morrow, $16.95.) Another trip with the
          ebullient advocate of the virtues of love.
 6        ENTER TALKING, by Joan Rivers with Richard          16         2
          Meryman. (Delacorte, $17.95.) The talk-show
          hostess' long professional climb.
 7*       NECESSARY LOSSES, by Judith Viorst. (Simon &         7         4
          Schuster, $17.95.) Life is a series of
          losses, the author argues, and we must
          confront them to grow.
 8        BESS W. TRUMAN, by Margaret Truman.                  8         3
          (Macmillan, $19.95.) Her daughter shows that
          the former First Lady was intelligent and
          caring as well as private and austere.
 9*       THE MAN WHO MISTOOK HIS WIFE FOR A HAT, by           5         7
          Oliver Sacks. (Summit, $15.95.) Strange
          neurological disabilities.
10        IACOCCA: An Autobiography, by Lee Iacocca           11        81
          with William Novak. (Bantam, $19.95.) The
          rise of an immigrants' son to top jobs at
          Ford and Chrysler.
 11       ADRIFT, by Steven Callahan. (Houghton               13        12
          Mifflin, $15.95.) One man's survival for 76
          days on an inflatable raft in the Atlantic.
12        BLESSINGS IN DISGUISE, by Alec Guinness.             6         8
          (Knopf, $17.95.) The autobiography of the
          distinguished English actor.
13        YEAGER: An Autobiography, by Chuck Yeager           10        45
          and Leo Janos. (Bantam, $17.95.) The story
          of the first man to fly faster than sound.
14*       THE GREAT GETTY, by Robert Lenzner. (Crown,         12        11
          $18.95.) The life and loves of J. Paul
          Getty, who was the richest man in the world.
15*       GREED AND GLORY ON WALL STREET, by Ken              14        13
          Auletta. (Random House, $19.95.) The fall of
          the investment bankers Lehman Brothers Kuhn
          Loeb.
16*       JAMES HERRIOT'S DOG STORIES, by James                          1
          Herriot. (St. Martin's, $19.95.) Fifty tales
          by a Yorkshire veterinarian about his
          favorite animal.

          Advice and Self-Help
 1        FIT FOR LIFE, by Harvey Diamond and Marilyn          1        39
          Diamond. (Warner, $17.50.) A diet for weight
          loss and physical fitness.
 2        CALLANETICS, by Callan Pinckney with Sallie          2        25
          Batson. (Morrow, $17.95.) Exercises to
          enable women to look ''10 years younger in
          10 hours.''
 3        WOMEN WHO LOVE TOO MUCH, by Robin Norwood.           3        33
          (Tarcher/St. Martin's, $14.95.) Ways to
          avoid or end addictive, unhealthy
          relationships with men.
 4        THE BE (HAPPY) ATTITUDES, by Robert                  5        28
          Schuller. (Word, $12.95.) Inspiration from a
          California clergyman.
 5        THE RICE DIET REPORT, by Judy Moscovitz.             4         7
          (Putnam, $16.95.) A diet developed more than
          40 years ago at a clinic in North Carolina
          is explained by a successful user.

The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.

* An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

JOHN MAYNARD KEYNES, Volume One: Hopes Betrayed 1883-1920, by Robert Skidelsky.
(Elisabeth Sifton/Viking, $24.95.) The relevance of Keynes's public and private
persons to each other is skillfully interpreted in this account of the great
economist and establishment figure's early life and accomplishments.

VIENNA GIRL, by Ingeborg Lauterstein (Norton, $16.95) Set in Vienna at the end
of World War II, this rather cryptic novel holds a detached private life in
tension against scenes of desolation.

THE GOLDEN GATE, by Vikram Seth. (Random House, $17.95.) Life and love among the
yupper and newer classes in Northern California, rendered - including the
dialogue - with delightful facility in a novel composed entirely in stanzaic
verse.

THE COUNTRY GIRLS TRILOGY: And Epilogue, by Edna O'Brien. (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux, $18.95.) The author's first three novels, written in the 1960's, are
gathered here with a new end to the hard-luck tales of timid Kate and subversive
Baba.

LIVING DOGS AND DEAD LIONS, by R. Lanny Hunter and Victor L. Hunter. (Viking,
$16.95.) A thoughtful first novel by two authors (who are brothers) about the
dual reconstruction of a Vietnam veteran and the widow of his best battlefield
buddy.

THE WAR: A Memoir, by Marguerite Duras. (Pantheon,$13.95.) Six narratives, two
of them fictional, set in France at the end of World War II; some are better
than others, but the title story is an astonishing meditation on the horros of
the war and on the obsessive power of personal fidelity in love.

MAYDAY: Eisenhower, Khrushchev and the U-2 Affair, by Michael R. Beschloss.
(Harper & Row, $19.95.) The author painstakingly reconstructs the 1960 U-2
incident and the logic that led to the cancellation of a four-power summit and
renewal of the cold war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONNECTICUT GUIDE

BYLINE: By Eleanor Charles

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 20, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1009 words


EARLY COMPOSER'S WORK John Knowles Paine may not be a household name, even in
musical households, but he made significant contributions to the world of music,
particularly in New England. His Mass in D, which he began composing in 1859, at
the age of 20, is to be performed at 8 P.M. Thursday in the South Congregational
Church, 277 Main Street in Hartford.

Paine, according to music experts, is considered the first important American
composer and organist, the first professor of music in the United States and the
organizer of the country's first college music department, which he established
at Harvard in the 1870's. He was born in Portland, Me., in 1839.

The Mass was completed in 1866 and published by G. Schirmer in New York. The
next year it received its first performance in Berlin, conducted by the
composer. Upon his return to America, Paine obtained the assistance of James
Russell Lowell and Henry Wadsworth Longfellow in arranging a performance at the
Boston Music Hall. Although critically approved, the piece fell into oblivion
immediately thereafter and remained so until it was rediscovered in the Harvard
archives in 1972 by Gunther Schuller, the American composer-conductor. In 1978
Schuller recorded the work with the St. Louis Symphony Orchestra and Chorus, and
it has since been performed at the New England Conservatory of Music.

The South Congregational Choir and Orchestra will be conducted by Richard
Donohue. The concert is free.

EXPLORING DINOSAURS

Extinct for 65 million years, the dinosaur continues to occupy an amazingly
lively place in society as more and more clues are discovered relative to its
physical structure, variety of species, its place in the animal kingdom and the
window it opens on prehistory.

After a public reception at 2 P.M. today, John Noble Wilford, the Pulitzer
Prize-winning science reporter for The New York Times and the author of ''The
Riddle of the Dinosaur,'' will give a talk at 3 P.M. in the two-story Great Hall
of Dinosaurs at Yale's Peabody Museum of Natural History. The audience will sit
in the shadow of the 65-foot-long skeleton of a brontosaurus on permanent
exhibition.

The talk will cover the first discoveries of dinosaur remains in the 18th
century and move forward to current theories about their sudden extinction, the
possibility of their having been warmblooded and the findings of several
scientists and scholars.

To accommodate those with children, the museum, at 170 Whitney Avenue in New
Haven, will show films on natural history in a separate room during Mr.
Wilford's talk. Admission is $1 for adults, 50 cents for children from ages 5 to
15.

SILVER STATUS SYMBOLS

John Avery, a Preston farmer and clockmaker, was also a silversmith during the
last third of the 18th century, exemplifying the doubling-in- brass that many
people engaged in to make extra money by supplying a product in demand. His
three volumes of meticulously kept account books, passed along to his four sons
who continued the practice of part- time silversmithing, indicated that his
customers were not only the well-to-do, but ordinary people - anyone who craved
a token of the status that silver offered.

Until July 15 the Connecticut Historical Society in Hartford has on display 30
such items, several by Avery, some by other small-town craftsmen. In addition to
such personal articles as buttons, buckles and small pieces of jewelry, there
are silver-plated ladles, porringers, spoons and other household items that
mimicked the expensive sterling holloware imported from London for the wealthy.

A special talk and tour of the exhibit will be given by Josh Lane of the
curatorial staff at 10 A.M. Thursday. Mr. Lane made a computerized study of
Avery's account books, which are in the Historical Society collection. Admission
is $3. Call 236-5621 for reservations. Regular visiting hours are 1 to 5 P.M.
daily, and admission is free.

VIETNAM REVISITED

The story of the Vietnam War is being retold in many ways. One of the newest and
most affecting is a 225-page book of prose-poetry called ''Shallow Graves,''
written by Wendy Larsen with Tran Thi Nga, and published last month by Random
House. The two women will appear in a guest author program at noon Tuesday in
the Greenwich Public Library, 101 West Putnam Avenue.

They met in Saigon in the early 1970's when Mrs. Nga was the bookkeeper for Time
magazine's Saigon office, where Mrs. Larsen's husband was the news bureau chief.
Mrs. Nga is the daughter of a Chinese mandarin, raised in North Vietnam, married
as a girl to an elderly Chinese general and forced to flee to South Vietnam
during the war. From her protected, privileged beginnings, she was thrust into
one hostile environment after another - in China, in North and South Vietnam
and, finally, in refugee centers in the United States.

She and Mrs. Larsen decided to collaborate on the book after they became
re-acquainted in New York recently. The title draws a parallel between the
victims of the Vietnam War and an ancient Asian belief that the souls of those
buried in shallow graves can never rest.

DECORATIVE PIPES

John Bull, England's equivalent of Uncle Sam, cast in Staffordshire pottery as a
pipe, is among many figurative and decorative ceramic pipes now on display at
the United States Tobacco Museum in Greenwich. Free-standing and created as
''chimney'' or mantel ornaments in the 18th and 19th centuries, the pipes were
never meant to be smoked. Some are puzzles, constructed of yards-long coils of
clay wound to all but conceal the mouthpiece, underglazed and kiln-fired in
cheerful colors. Others are in the form of snakes and other animals.

The museum, at 100 West Putnam Avenue has a continuous exhibition of unusual and
antique pipes, cigar store Indians, snuff bottles and boxes, tobacco jars, cigar
boxes, advertising art and other accouterments of the tobacco industry. It is
open to the public free of charge from noon to 4:30 P.M. weekdays and noon to 5
P.M. weekends, closed Monday. The phone number is 869-5531.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHAPPAQUA STUDENT PURSUES A CARTOON LEGACY

BYLINE: By MICHAEL FREITAG

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 3, Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 489 words


SINCE the beginning of his freshman year at Yale, Sabin Streeter said, he has
put the drawing of a daily comic strip ahead of his course work and social life.
It is all part of what the 19-year-old sophomore describes as a determined
effort to follow in the footsteps of his idol, Garry Trudeau, who draws
''Doonesbury '' and is a Yale alumnus.

Mr. Streeter, who is from Chappaqua, is majoring in fine arts and American
studies. He said he spent at least four hours a night when school is in session
drawing his strip for The Yale Daily News, the student newspaper - putting that
assignment ahead of his studies.

From 1968 to 1970, The Daily News published Mr. Trudeau's strip ''Bull Tales.''
It was later syndicated as ''Doonesbury'' and is now published in more than 800
newspapers. Mr. Trudeau received a Pulitzer Prize in 1975.

Unlike most of the other student cartoonists who have drawn for The Daily News
since Mr. Trudeau graduated, Mr. Streeter sees his work more as a job than a
hobby. His hope, he said, is to have his own syndicated strip.

Mr. Streeter's cartoons, which are published five days a week, began appearing
in October 1984.

''He manages to poke fun at campus life in a humorous but subtle way,'' an
editor of The Daily News, Peter Dwiskin, said.

Mr. Streeter's work has begun to be noticed by the world outside. Interview
Magazine, in a recent profile, describes him as a ''comic-strip creator
extraordinaire.''

On campus, Mr. Streeter's strip is frequently compared to ''Doonesbury.'' As
with ''Doonesbury,'' Mr. Streeter's four-panel cartoons, called ''Hollenhead,''
for one of the regular characters, are serialized and rely heavily on satire and
irony.

Mr. Streeter said although Mr. Trudeau was a role model, he tried to create his
own style. During the clerical workers' strike last year, Mr. Streeter depicted
the president of the university, A. Bartlett Giamatti, and a union leader, John
Wilhelm, as fat midgets.

''I wanted them to look like two bickering children, thus expressing my sense of
frustration with the strike,'' he said.

Although Mr. Trudeau cartoon at Yale concerned such issues as coeducation, the
Vietnam War and civil rights, Mr. Streeter's focus on raising the drinking age,
the resurgence of fraternities and the growth of preprofessionalism.

Mr. Streeter said his philosophy differed considerably from that of Mr. Trudeau,
who graduated in 1970.

''He comes very much from the 1960's, and I don't know if I come from the
1980's, but I certainly come from somewhere different,'' Mr. Streeter said.

Unlike ''Doonesbury,'' Mr. Streeter's strip tends to shy away from political
messages. He said he would rather tell a good joke than make a good point.

''I like cartoons, because they let you communicate,'' Mr. Streeter said. ''I
like the idea of giving people altered perspectives of things. I'm not so much
interested in communicating a series of polemical ideas.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: cartoon

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 19, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

STUDY OF EFFECTS OF AGENT ORANGE ON VETERANS IS STALLED IN DISPUTE

BYLINE: By IVER PETERSON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1684 words

DATELINE: ALBUQUERQUE, N.M., May 12


What was to have been the country's most comprehensive study of any toxic
effects of the herbicide Agent Orange on Vietnam veterans has stalled six years
after it was authorized, and may be abandoned, because of disputes over how to
conduct the work.

The study was mandated by Congress in 1979 as part of a $70 million effort to
settle once and for all the conflicting allegations of poisonings of American
soldiers in Vietnam from the tons of herbicide that was sprayed during the war
to remove the jungle canopy that concealed enemy troop movements from the air.

Difficulty of Classification

But, partly because researchers now believe that fewer men had been exposed to
the herbicide and its toxic component dioxin than they originally thought, and
partly because of sometimes bitter bureaucratic disagreements over
responsibilities and procedures within government, the survey has now been
suspended while Federal agencies decide what to do.

The study, to be conducted by the Federal Centers for Disease Control, aims to
compare the health histories of 18,000 veterans. But Congress and Federal
agencies disagree over how to select the men for the study and how to classify
their likelihood of exposure to Agent Orange.

Doctors Wait for Orders

At the Lovelace Medical Clinic here in Albuquerque, which was contracted to
begin interviews and medical examinations of Vietnam veterans from all over the
country this February, expensive equipment, technicians and doctors are standing
idly by, waiting for orders.

And some veterans are starting to argue that the underlying reason for the
failure of the research to go forward is that the Government is afraid of being
forced to pay staggering sums in veterans' benefits if the defoliant program
proves to have permanently injured thousands of soldiers. But this is denied by
Congressional experts who are otherwise highly critical in saying the study has
been botched.

Special Panel to Decide

In a few weeks, a special panel of an interagency Agent Orange Working Group
will attempt to break the deadlock by recommending whether or not the study can
go ahead as originally designed, or will be scrapped or modified.

''Not everyone is going to be pleased regardless of what happens,'' said Dr.
Carl Keller, an epidemiologist with the National Institute of Environmental
Health, who heads the working group's science subcommittee. ''We would
desperately like to please the veterans, and at the same time we find it very
necessary to make a scientifically meaningful study or else we've wasted all our
time and money, and that does a disservice to everyone.''

The issue has implications both in the scientific world, where final proof of
the toxicity of Agent Orange exposure remains to be found, and in the
psychological and legal status of Vietnam veterans, many of whom are convinced
that they have been damaged for life by the poison but must remain without
answers to their fears and without a legally binding scientific study on which
to base any claims for compensation.

The nub of the problem is that the Centers for Disease Control has not been able
to agree with Congress or with other Federal agencies on the technical key to
the study, or research protocol.

The disagreement is over how to define measures of exposure to Agent Orange in
selecting men in three categories whose health and histories were to be
compared. The first category would consist of 6,000 men deemed ''likely'' to
have been exposed to Agent Orange in 1967 and 1968 in Vietnam, a like number
deemed ''less likely'' to have been exposed and a third group of 6,000 assumed
''not likely'' to have been exposed.

If exposure to the defoliant had had long-term health effects on soldiers, the
researchers would expect to find differing rates of illnesses among the three
groups of men.

Tracking Troop Movements

Dioxin is suspected, but has not been proven, to be the cause of various forms
of rare soft-tissue cancers in exposed humans. The substance, which is actually
an impurity left over from the manufacturing of Agent Orange, has been found to
be extremely toxic to some laboratory animals, but less so to others.

After much prodding from Congress to come up with precise enough ways to define
a likelihood of exposure, the Center finally proposed selecting the subjects by
tracking the location of 1,000-man battalions and making statistical assumptions
about how close individual men were to Agent Orange spraying areas, rather than
by tracking 200-man companies as originally agreed upon.

But the Office of Technology Assessment, the Congressional agency charged with
overseeing the study, says this would have the effect of including men over a
far wider area than expected, men nowhere near Agent Orange. Officials say men
as far as 15 miles away from a spraying operation could be classified as
''likely to be exposed.''

Congress Critical of Agency

At one point, the Centers for Disease Control declared that it would proceed
with the Agent Orange interviews and examinations here without knowing how the
data would ultimately be used. But the Senate Veterans Affairs Committee,
already displeased with the C.D.C.'s lack of progress on the study, demanded
that the research protocol be established before the field work went ahead, and
so the work was stalled.

Congress has been critical of the Centers for Disease Control, saying the
Atlanta agency, an arm of the Department of Health and Human Services, has been
dilatory and uncommunicative about the study.

Robert Diefenbach, a member of the C.D.C. Agent Orange project, defended his
group's suggestion that the study proceed without a settlement of the research
protocol because to do otherwise would threaten to waste the time and money
spent putting the Lovelace research group in place.

He declined to answer the Congressional criticism of the agency's overall
handling of the study. ''I cannot respond to that question,'' he said.

More Fundamental Problems

But key Congressional staff members concede that there may be more fundamental
roadblocks to doing the study as originally planned.

''Sometimes the C.D.C. is just impossible to work with, but that is not the real
problem,'' said Helen Gelband, the Agent Orange specialist in the Office of
Technology Assessment. ''The root of the problem is that not very many people
were exposed to Agent Orange in Vietnam.''

For a statistically reliable study of the effects, some of which are thought to
be extremely rare cancers, a great number of subjects are needed for the
research.

But the likelihood of soldiers being underneath a spraying operation in Vietnam
was lessened by the strafing runs American warplanes conducted over a spray path
to suppress enemy ground fire on the slow, low-flying herbicide tankers behind
them.

Further, the Army had a standing rule against American troops entering a spray
zone until 30 days had passed -although subsequent plottings of troop movements
and defoliation projects have shown that troops occasionally entered sprayed
areas within a day of the spraying.

'Nobody Will Believe Us'

Of what researchers now believe are the relatively low exposure rates, Miss
Gelband says: ''And why should that be a problem? Because nobody will believe
us.''

Indeed, the stories and beliefs surrounding Agent Orange in Vietnam have become
an almost daily part of many veterans' complaints about their treatment by the
Government during and after the war. Numerous veterans have blamed cancers and
birth defects on their supposed exposure to the herbicide, but, pending the
results of the Agent Orange study, the Veterans Administration has steadfastly
refused to accept such claims as proof of service-connected disability.

While the military says it takes most claims seriously, some experts say the
fears of dioxin exposure are widely exaggerated.

''Sometimes you would meet a guy who said, 'Agent orange, yeah, I was sprayed
with that stuff - we were walking through the jungle on patrol and all of a
sudden this orange stuff would be raining down on us and we'd all get sick,''
said Richard Webb, a Vietnam veteran who is administrator of the idled study
here at Lovelace.

''That's impossible,'' Mr. Webb added. ''The stuff is colorless - the orange
only refers to a marking system they used on the barrels.''

Another Study Found No Effect

In addition to Agent Orange, the Air Force's defoliant program, called Operation
Ranch Hand, also used Agents White, Pink and Purple, among others.

The Air Force has already studied the approximately 1,200 men who conducted
Operation Ranch Hand, some of whom were occasionally soaked with the herbicide
they were handling. The study found no conclusive evidence of lasting harm to
the men, in part because 1,200 was a small number of subjects in the search for
rare health effects.

Meanwhile, two other major Federal studies related to Vietnam veterans are under
way. The field work for one, the Vietnam Experience study, is now being
completed at the Lovelace Clinic here. It will compare the emotional and
physical histories of 12,000 randomly selected veterans, half of whom actually
served in Vietnam and the other half not, to determine whether or not Vietnam
service has left the psycholog ical scars that are often described as ''post-
Vietnam trauma syndrome.''

Some sources say the method of analyzing the Vietnam Experience study is, like
the Agent Orange study, still unsettled. An official of the Centers for Disease
Control at Lovelace, Tony Fowler, would say only that a final analysis of the
experience data would not be completed until September.

The third study under way is the Selected Cancers Study, which will compare the
histories of men afflicted with one of a number of rare cancers associated with
herbicide exposure with an equal number of men from the same age and social
class who are free of the cancers.

If service in Vietnam has contributed to cancers, the researchers would expect
to find more Vietnam veterans in the cancer-afflicted group than in the
non-cancer group.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of U.S. Air Force Planes spraying Agent Orange over South
Vietnamese jungle in 1966 (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 19, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

A CORNER OF THE SOUTH SEAS IS DRIFTING TO THE LEFT

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1121 words

DATELINE: SYDNEY, Australia


A new nationalism is rising in the islands of the South Pacific.

According to diplomats in the region it is a movement of Melanesian solidarity,
and it is drawing together and strengthening groups as diverse as the Kanak
independence party in French-ruled New Caledonia and the separatist guerrillas
fighting Indonesia in the New Guinean province of West Irian.

Its supporters acknowledge that Melanesia includes a lot of diverse people with
hundreds of languages and often unrelated customs. The region itself - a
3,500-mile swath of islands from New Guinea to Fiji - is an arbitrary grouping
imposed by Westerners.

But a ''Melanesian brotherhood,'' as one of its advocates described it, is
emerging, and its focus is the small nation of Vanuatu, formerly the New
Hebrides. There, Prime Minister Walter H. Lini, an Anglican priest, has been
creating a haven for regional nationalist leaders, according to the diplomats
and Melanesian activists. A South Pacific Castro?  Father Lini has also been
trying to unify their factionalized ranks, a role not unlike the one Fidel
Castro played in an effort to build strong leftist movements in the Caribbean
and Latin America.

And there are indications that he may be strengthening links to nations
supporting guerrilla movements: He recently announced that he is planning to
establish diplomatic relations with Libya.

Vanuatu, which already has a Cuban and Vietnamese presence, has refused to
accredit a United States Ambassador, saying this would threaten its proclaimed
nonalignment. Though Paul Gardner, the United States Ambassador to Papua New
Guinea, has made several trips to Vanuatu and been well received, Americans have
been told that their permanent presence would force Vanuatu, a country of no
more than 125,000 people, to allow Moscow to open a mission.

Many diplomats in the area say they do not question this reasoning, adding that
on the whole the Soviet Union, which is increasing its military power in the
Pacific, has not been welcomed diplomatically in the islands.

Divergent Views of the Future

Regional officials, diplomats and members of the Melanesian movements themselves
disagree on whether this nationalism will eventually become uniformly socialist
in ideology and anti-Western in alignment.

Some note that there is little in the diverse cultural history of the region or
in its strongly Christian populations of today to suggest that Communism would
find a welcome here.

But others warn that heightened militancy in the South Pacific offers a
temptation to the Soviet bloc and countries like Libya and North Korea. Indeed,
Moscow is already engaged in many diplomatic and economic offensives in the
region, capitalizing on local problems and grievances against the West.

China, apparently aware of the potential for Soviet influence, has opened a
large embassy in Port Moresby, the capital of Papua New Guinea.

Libya has offered aid and training to some Melanesian groups, according to many
sources, including a recent United States Government summary of Tripoli's
involvement in worldwide terrorism.

A report in April in the weekly newspaper of the Kanak Socialist National
Liberation Front, a recognized political party seeking the full independence of
New Caledonia from France, said that at an international meeting in Tripoli in
March Libya formed an alliance of Melanesian groups. But the paper added that
the interests of Libya and the Kanaks were not necessarily the same, and it
cautioned Melanesians against being used.

Struggle Against Indonesia

In West Irian, where the Free Papua Movement has been waging a 20-year battle
against incorporation by Jakarta, a new and more radical generation is rising
into leadership, according to Franzalbert Joku, the editor of The Times of Papua
New Guinea.

In an interview in Port Moresby, Mr. Joku, who was born in West Irian and
follows events there closely, said:

''The younger, better-educated people taking over the movement will naturally
look to the East Bloc. The general consensus is that the Soviet Union and its
allies should be approached for aid.''

Mr. Joku said a meeting is planned for July in Vanuatu to unite the factions of
the Free Papua Movement and consider its next moves. Involvement with the Soviet
bloc would be a very serious step for the West Irian separatists, since
Indonesia has a rigidly anti-Communist Government and military establishment.

Culture Clash in West Irian

Dr. Adolf Saweri, a West Irian physician now on the medical faculty of the
University of Papua New Guinea, said the root of the problem remained cultural.
West Irian, he said, is being overrun by the Javanese, who form the majority of
the Indonesian people, and the Javanese consider the Melanesians savages who
need civilizing. Widely quoted comments by Indonesian officials referring to
''primitive, Stone Age cultures'' support the charge.

''The Balinese, the Moslems of Aceh, they have maintained their cultural
identity within Indonesia,'' said Dr. Saweri, who has close ties to the Free
Papua Movement. ''If the Javanese could let the Irianese run their own culture
too, much of the tension would be removed.''

According to Mr. Joku, the small Free Papua Movement fights with only bows and
arrows, a few guns and some explosives. But should the guerrillas become better
organized, more numerous and better equipped, serious problems could arise not
only for Indonesia but also for neighboring Papua New Guinea, a nation of 3.2
million people whose Government cannot risk antagonizing Jakarta.

Dr. Saweri suggests that it is time for Indonesia's friends, especially the
United States, to steer Jakarta toward a more enlightened cultural and
developmental policy in West Irian.

Western Nations on Notice

In the wider Pacific region, diplomats and officials say, Western nations will
have to pay more attention to the needs of small and newly independent
countries, some of whom feel they have been neglected or, worse, the victims of
poaching by American fishing fleets that threaten to strip them of what in many
areas is the sole natural resource.

Malaysia's Deputy Foreign Minister, Abdul Kadir Sheikh Fadzir, is among those
within the Association of Southeast Asian Nations urging the Reagan
Administration to pay more attention to fast-moving developments in the Pacific.

''The U.S. has got to stop waiting until the last minute,'' Mr. Abdul Kadir said
in a recent interview in Kuala Lumpur. ''When the situation is too late, you
suddenly see the Americans.''

''If the Americans acted now, they could nip these tendencies in the bud,'' he
said. ''Just $10 million spread around the area would make some very beautiful
people very happy.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Prime Minister Walter H. Lini of Vanuatu; Photo of the flag of
Vanuatu being raised in a 1980 ceremony (AP); Map showing location of Vanuatu

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 19, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: MONDAY, MAY 19, 1986

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 868 words


International

Tensions between Israel and Syria that reflect complex, long-term changes in
their military balance of power are at a point where even a small miscalcualtion
by either side could ignite an armed conflict, ccording to Israeli, Arab and
Western military experts. The changes include a marked strengthening of the
Syrian Army since 1982 to a point where its leaders may now believe it can
challenge Israel without another Arab partner, the experts say. [Page A1, Column
6.]

Safety features at Chernobyl were more plentiful and closer to American reactor
designs than Western experts had assumed before it blew up in the Ukraine.
Although it probably would not have met United States safety standards, the
experts say, the Chernobyl plant contained enough of the advanced safety
features used in American reactors to raise questions among some experts about
the effectiveness of nuclear plant designs in the United States. [A1:4.]

Efforts to entomb the reactor and decontaminate its area of radiation has
mobilized vast Soviet resources of men and machinery. As Soviet press coverage
of the explosion of reactor No. 4 in the Ukraine has expanded, so have details
of an operation involving some of the Soviet Union's best scientists, scores of
ministries and factories, hundreds of workers and soldiers, tons of supplies and
fleets of helicopters, trucks and other heavy equipment. The operation has been
coordinated at Politburo level in Moscow. [A8:1.]

Only a few limits on European travel are now being suggested by the United
States Government because of the Chernobyl explosion. A State Department
advisory suggests no travel now to Kiev, capital of the Ukraine, or the region
within 100 miles of the Chernobyl reactor. [A6:1.]

U.S. commitment to strictly observe the terms of the 1972 anti-ballistic missile
treaty may be reconsidered by the Reagan Administration if Congress does not
support President Reagan's so-called Strategic Defense Initiative, a report to
Congress said. The warning from the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency comes at
a time when the Administration has tried to protect the Strategic Defense
Initiative, popularly known as ''Star Wars,'' from Congressional budget cuts.
[A1:5.]

A cache of Soviet-made arms in South Africa discovered by the police was
described as the largest such supply ever located in the country's 25-year war
between the white minority authorities and black nationalist guerrillas. It was
uncovered near Johannesburg. [A3:4.]

Britain spread a huge security net over its Channel ports after getting reports
of a terrorist plot to blow up a passenger ferry as it made the Channel trip
between Britain and the Continent. Word of the reported terrorist plot was
received in a tip to the British police late Friday and passed to Belgium,
France and the Netherlands by Interpol, the international police organization.
[A5:1.]

National

A study of Agent Orange's effects on Vietnam veterans who fear they were exposed
to the herbicide has been suspended because of disputes over how to conduct it.
The study was mandated by Congress in 1979 as part of a $70 million effort to
settle the conflicting allegations of poisonings of Vietnam soldiers. In
Alburquerque, where interviews and medical examinations of 12,000 Vietnam
veterans were to have begun this February, expensive equipment, technicians and
doctors are standing by, waiting for orders. [A1:2.]

A Virginia excursion train derailed, injuring scores of people, seven
critically. The 13-car train, driven by a steam engine, carried 1,000 employees
of the Norfolk & Southern Corporation and its subsidiary Norfolk & Western. It
left the rails in the Great Dismal Swamp area. [A1:1.]

Women politicians are poised to make significant gains this year in races for
governor, the Senate and other statewide offices, political analysts. Voters in
Nebraska primaries set the stage for a historic election by nominating women as
gubernatorial candidates in both major parties. In tomorrow's primary in Oregon,
former Secretary of State Norma Paulus is expected to win handily the Republican
nomination for governor. The National Women's Political Caucus estimated
recently that nearly 20 women were running for governor this year. [A1:1.]

11 million hands will link from the Battery in New York City to Long Beach Pier
in California on May 25 to support a relief program for hungry and homeless
Americans headed by a Los Angeles promoter, Len Kragen. Mr. Kragen, who
sponsored an African famine relief program, hopes with the help of 5.5 million
Americans to raise at least $50 million. [A12:2.]

Metropolitan

An Atlantic City plane crash killed two men and critically injured a woman late
Saturday. The chartered twin-engine Cessna, carrying a Long Island couple home
from a casino junket, crashed on takeoff through a chain-link fence, skidded
onto a highway and struck several cars as it broke apart and burst into flames.
An engine struck a car, killing an off-duty police officer. Michael Saal, who
was aboard the plane with his wife, was killed. His wife was critically injured.
The pilot and co-pilot were bruised. [A1:3.]

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 19, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Quotation of the Day

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 55 words


''We would desperately like to please the veterans, and at the same time we find
it very necessary to make a scientifically meaningful study or else we've wasted
all our time and money, and that does a disservice to everyone.'' - Dr. Carl
Keller of National Institute of Evnironmental Health on Agent Orange study.
[A1:3.]

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 19, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

PUBLISHING: WALDHEIM'S MEMOIRS

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 913 words


ADLER & ADLER published its first two titles four months ago, but unfortunately
for the fledgling Washington-based publishing company, one of them was ''In the
Eye of the Storm'' by Kurt Waldheim.

The book is a memoir of world events from 1972 until the author retired as
United Nations Secretary General in 1982. ''But nobody is any longer interested
in what he has to say about his U.N. career,'' said James Adler, president of
the Washington-based publishing company. ''What they care about is his early
life, and his candor about that leaves a lot to be desired.''

Mr. Adler was, of course, referring to the discrepancy between disclosures that
Mr. Waldheim served in a Germany Army command linked to war crimes and his
account in ''In the Eye of the Storm'' and in his 1977 autobiography ''The
Challenge of Peace'' - namely, that he returned to law school after having been
medically discharged from the German Army in 1941.

Mr. Adler said that despite the discomfort he and his wife, Esthy, feel about
''having such an author on our list,'' they decided not to recall the book but
to keep it available for readers who wanted to know his views on the United
Nations. Sales have been slow, however, reviews have dried up, and the expected
sale of the book to libraries has not been forthcoming.

Mr. Adler said he can understand why, but the irony, he said, is that while some
Jewish organizations long felt that Mr. Waldheim had been partial to Israel's
enemies during his United Nations tenure, he bought the American rights to the
book because it had been published last year by Weidenfeld & Nicolson in Great
Britain. 'It was reassuring to us that it had been commissioned by Lord
Weidenfeld, who is not just a leading Zionist but was a schoolmate and personal
friend of Waldheim,'' Mr. Adler said. ''From our point of view, it came to us
under the best possible auspices.''

That disaster aside, Adler & Adler is nonetheless off to an impressive start. It
has published eight books, including Senator Gary Hart's ''America Can Win: The
Case for Military Reform,'' and 11 more are scheduled for later this year,
including biographies, novels and a book about child abuse by Senator Paula
Hawkins, Republican of Florida.

Last year, the Naval Institute Press, the semiofficial publishing arm of the
United States Naval Academy, published the first original novel in its 112-year
history. It turned out to be a stroke of publishing genius. The book was Tom
Clancy's ''Hunt for Red October,'' which stayed on the best-seller list for
weeks.

Mr. Clancy has since taken his new novel, ''Red Storm Rising,'' to G. P.
Putnam's, which will publish it in August. The Naval Institute Press, meanwhile,
was ''flooded with manuscripts from some promising and not so promising
writers,'' according to Susan Artigiani, its publicity manager. But after a long
search it has settled on another novel: ''Flight of the Intruder,'' the story of
naval aviators at war over Vietnam, by Stephen Coonts, who flew combat missions
himself in Vietnam. The book, the author's first, will be published in October,
and the press is so sure it has another winner that it has scheduled a first
printing of at least 25,000 -about three times the size of the printing for the
typical first novel and almost double its 14,000 first printing of ''Red
October.''

Most best-selling books are published by the major publishers, but not ''Adult
Children of Alcoholics'' by Janet Woititz, which is on this week's New York
Times best-seller list. The trade paperback book, about the problems of
alcoholic families, was published three years ago by Health Communications Inc.
of Pompano Beach, Fla., and it has since sold some 350,000 copies. ''The fact
that it's doing so well is an indication of the attention finally being paid to
that problem,'' said Michael Miller, an editor with Health Communications, which
publishes books and magazines related to alcohol and drug abuse.

Because the company has no sales staff that calls on retail stores, Mr. Miller
added, bookstores have had to order ''Adult Children of Alcoholics'' through
such wholesalers as Ingram and Baker & Taylor. While that is ordinarily a
difficult way to make it onto the best-seller list, that hurdle did not prove
insurmountable in this case.

There have been several novels about the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan,
including Ken Follett's recent best seller, ''Lie Down With Lions.'' But Stein &
Day is publishing perhaps the only such novel written by an Afghan: ''Kara
Kush'' by Idries Shah. The book (its title means ''The Eagle'') was a best
seller in Great Britain, where Doris Lessing described it as ''the best war
novel I have read.'' But the author himself describes it as ''faction,'' saying
the story is true except that he changed the names to protect the Afghan
guerrillas.

Mario Vargas Llosa, the Peruvian novelist who lives in Lima but is a frequent
visitor to the United States, has accepted an appointment at Washington
University in St. Louis. He will be Distinguished Professor of Romance Languages
and Literatures, in which capacity he will teach and lecture for one semester
every two years, alternating with Alain Robbe-Grillet, the French novelist and
critic who accepted a similar appointment last year. Mr. Vargas Llosa, a former
president of International PEN, won the $50,000 Ritz Hemingway Prize in 1985 for
the best work of fiction published in English, ''The War of the End of the
World.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 19, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
New Start By Chicago Air's Chief

BYLINE: By Daniel F. Cuff and Calvin Sims

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 307 words


Neal F. Meehan, one of the entrepreneurial executives who has headed competitive
new airlines spawned by the industry's deregulation, is about to try his luck
with a regional carrier. ''In looking for a segment of the industry that really
could use some change and a little bit of the spirit of deregulation,'' he said,
''we thought that the regional segment was ready.''

Mr. Meehan, who is 45, has been president of two airlines that started up after
deregulation, New York Air and Midway Airlines. His new regional airline, which
is scheduled to begin operations on May 29, is called Chicago Air and will link
eight cities in Illinois, Michigan and Wisconsin with Chicago's Midway Airport.
He is president and chief executive.

Mr. Meehan, who commanded a Marine rifle company in Vietnam, was among the many
young executives who cut their competitive teeth at the Texas Air Corporation
under its chairman, Frank Lorenzo.

The deregulated skies were somewhat bumpy for Mr. Meehan's career. After
directing the 1980 startup of New York Air, he resigned in 1982 when the line
suffered continued losses. He then went to Midway, where he resigned in February
1985 after a management shakeup.

There are no hard feelings between Midway and Mr. Meehan, however. In fact, his
new regional airline will be tied in with Midway through marketing and
connecting services, he said. He has also won support from the city of Chicago
and from Illinois in the form of $1.6 million in business development loans.

Mr. Meehan said the airline raised $6.8 million through private investors, has
acquired the leases of six 46-seat Fokker turboprop planes and has plans to
obtain more aircraft.

Mr. Meehan, whose parents emigrated from Ireland, was born and grew up in
Elmhurst, Queens. He holds a B.A. and an M.B.A. from St. John's University in
Queens.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Neal F. Meehan (NYT)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 20, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Firm Western Ally Outside the Nuclear Umbrella

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 575 words


To the Editor:

Your May 6 editorial ''Forcing New Zealand to Choose'' appeared to be based on
an earlier news article (April 29) and as a consequence contained some of the
same misconceptions.

These related to the circumstances surrounding the failure of the U.S.S.
Buchanan to make port in New Zealand last year, the New Zealand attitude to the
''nuclear umbrella,'' the issue of paying premiums for protection and a
suggestion that New Zealand was trying to export its domestic antinuclear
policy.

In order to maintain a balance in the discussion, I would like to make a few key
points on behalf of New Zealanders.

The first is a flat rejection of the assertion that ''the campaign against
nuclear vessels has been relentlessly pursued by a Labor Party with cousins in
other allied nations.'' On the contrary, the Prime Minister has said repeatedly
and publicly that New Zealand is not in the business of exporting its policy.
Other nations must make their decisions according to their own needs and
political desires.

My Government remains firmly committed to Anzus and the broader Western
alliance. As one of the democratic nations that make up the Western group, we
will continue to play our part in defense of the common values we have accepted,
just as we have done in the past in World Wars I and II, Korea, Malaya, Borneo,
Vietnam and the Middle East.

We are particularly conscious of our obligation to uphold democratic values and
Western interest in our own region, which we perceive to include the Southwest
Pacific and Southeast Asia.

However it must be pointed out that Anzus is not, nor has ever been, a nuclear
alliance. There is nothing in that treaty between the United States, Australia
and New Zealand which requires us to host nuclear weapons. There can therefore
be no question of New Zealand (to use your own term) ''seceding from a nuclear
alliance.''

On the other side of that coin it should be pointed out that New Zealanders have
no intention of seeking ''to nestle under America's nuclear umbrella.'' The New
Zealand Government has stated clearly and publicly that it rejects that defense
option -that it does not expect or wish any ally to make any form of defense
commitment to New Zealand that New Zealand will not make in return.

Finally, some specific comment on the Buchanan question: It is not correct to
state that the U.S.S. Buchanan was declined port entry ''because the United
States refused to break its world-wide policy of not disclosing naval
weaponry.''

The New Zealand Government understands and accepts the United States policy of
neither confirming nor denying the presence or absence of nuclear weapons on its
naval vessels. The reason the Buchanan did not make port was that the New
Zealand Government could not at that time or from its own sources satisfy itself
that the vessel was not nuclear armed. It was faced with a public test of the
credibility of the policy on which it had been clearly elected as Government.

New Zealand remains ready to welcome allied warships, provided it can satisfy
itself that such visits will not breach the ballot-box decision of 1984, when 92
percent of New Zealanders eligible to vote exer-cised that right. Of these, a
big majority supported one of the three parties (including the present
Government) that adopted unqualified policies not to host nuclear weapons. (Rt.
Hon. Sir) WALLACE ROWLING Ambassador of New Zealand Washington, May 12, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 20, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BLACK SOLDIERS IN VIETNAM

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 546 words


YOUNG black men, we are reminded by tonight's edition of ''Frontline,'' served
in Vietnam in disproportionate numbers. Several of those who returned recall
their experiences on ''The Bloods of 'Nam,'' an hour documentary based on the
book ''Bloods,'' by Wallace Terry, who serves as interviewer and narrator, at 10
P.M. on Channel 13.

We come in on four veterans telling students at Thomas Edison High School in
Philadelphia what it was like. Fifty-four graduates of Edison, mostly black,
died in Vietnam. The men speak of their fear, their education in killing, the
discrimination they encountered, the solidarity of the foxhole.

A veteran interviewed in the Baltimore slum to which he returned tells a
horrific tale of shooting a dying American soldier who had been tied up by the
North Vietnamese and left to the sun and the insects. (Viewers may find
themselves growing a little skeptical about this story, given the man's tendency
toward self-dramatization: ''We became animals,'' he says, reporting that he
carried around with him the ears and fingers of enemy dead.) A former Navy pilot
recalls his years of captivity and months of torture as his captors attempted to
get him to make anti-American broadcasts. Clips from Vietnam are adroitly
interspersed with the interviews.

The main episode of racism discussed here occurred after Martin Luther King's
assassination in 1968, when Confederate flags appeared at some of the base huts.
When black soldiers complained, the flags were promptly taken down. There are
also recollections of close friendships with white soldiers. We witness a
reunion of the black pilot and a white Air Force veteran, who shared his prison
and succored him after his beatings.

One comes away from this compelling hour with a sense that the racial division
in Vietnam, the first war in which blacks were fully integrated into the Armed
Forces, was less significant than the class difference between the blacks and
whites who found themselves in what Mr. Terry calls ''a mean, dirty war,'' and
those who went to college or to Canada.

Mr. Terry prudently keeps to the role of middleman, allowing the veterans to
speak for themselves on such matters as the reception they received when it was
all over. People who opposed the war seemed to blame the veterans for their part
in it; people who supported the war seemed to blame the veterans for losing. One
says they found themselves being looked on as ''baby killers and drug addicts.''

There is anger at how little was done to prepare them for the transition back to
civilian life, with all its psychological and economic problems. One man speaks
of the difficulty he has had in dealing with the ''high'' he got from killing.
The man from Baltimore is back in the ghetto from which he came, whatever skills
he learned in combat apparently doing him little good in civilian life.

The hour has its share of inspiration: We meet Bob Mountain, from Millen, Ga.,
who had a leg blown off in a mortar attack, and has trained himself to become a
world champion sprinter. That kind of courage can only increase the feeling of
shame that viewers may be left with, as part of the nation that sent young men
to do its fighting and then turned away from those who were lucky enough to come
back.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 21, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. AIDES SAID TO HAVE DISCUSSED PROSECUTING NEWS ORGANIZATIONS

BYLINE: By STEPHEN ENGELBERG, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 991 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 20


In the past 25 years, Government officials have discussed numerous times whether
to prosecute news organizations for disclosing highly sensitive material,
according to former officials.

But they have always been dissuaded by various political pressures or by fears
that a court case would confirm the accuracy of a report and bring to light even
more damaging information, the officials say.

With his remarks in recent weeks, William J. Casey, the Director of Central
Intelligence, has begun publicly pushing for a new, more confrontational
approach to the publication of classified Government information.

Mr. Casey has cited the mounting attacks against Americans by terrorists as a
justification for bringing prosecutions under a 1950 law that bars publication
of classified communications intelligence. No news organization has ever been
prosecuted under this statute.

Prosecution of NBC Sought

On Monday, Mr. Casey announced that he had asked the Justice Department to
consider prosecuting the National Broadcasting Company for its report on a
secret intelligence gathering operation by the National Security Agency. The
report on the ''Today'' show Monday described Ivy Bells, a program the
Government contends was compromised by Ronald W. Pelton, a former employee of
the National Security Agency who is now on trial on espionage charges. The
network said the effort involved eavesdropping by American submarines in Soviet
harbors.

Mr. Casey has also warned The Washington Post that it would be prosecuted if it
published its report on the National Security Agency project.

The Post published an article about the Pelton case in its Wednesday issue, but
gave none of the technical details of the N.S.A. project and did not mention its
code name. The article said Benjamin C. Bradlee, the executive editor of The
Post, continued to believe that the paper's original, more detailed article
''would have revealed nothing that was already known to the Soviet Union.''

But, the article added, ''because The Post has been unable fully to judge the
validity of the national security objections of senior officials, and because of
Post lawyers' concerns, the paper has decided to print this article without a
description of the technology Pelton allegedly betrayed.''

The article reported that on May 10, ''at Casey's request, President Reagan
telephoned Katharine Graham, chairman of the board of the Washngton Post Co., to
urge that The Post not publish the article.''

It said, ''Earlier, Vice Adm. John M. Poindexter, Reagan's national security
affairs adviser, Lt. Gen. William E. Odom, director of the National Security
Agency, and other officials told The Post that publication of the article could
endanger national security.''

Description of Process

Howard Simons, the curator of the Nieman Foundation for journalists at Harvard,
said that newspapers' decisions about whether to publish national security
articles were generally made after private consultations with Government
officials. Mr. Simons was managing editor of The Washington Post from 1971 to
1984.

''It was all done very quietly,'' said Mr. Simons. ''They would call you over to
the C.I.A. or the White House. They wouldn't ask you not to publish. They would
outline what damage would be caused by a story. Then you went back and made your
own decision.''

There have been a number of incidents in which publications have published
information viewed as highly sensitive by the Government. These included reports
in the 1970's of an effort by the United States to raise a sunken Soviet
submarine from the ocean floor as well as disclosures about a host of
intelligence gathering activities.

In 1975, for instance, The New York Times printed an article about a Navy
program code-named Holystone in which specially equipped submarines eavesdropped
on the Soviet Union.

The Times article described several mishaps involving the submarines, including
two collisions with Soviet submarines, and it detailed some of the intelligence
successes in the program.

'Different Climate'

Former Government officials said that there was serious consideration given to
prosecuting Seymour M. Hersh, the Times reporter who wrote the article, but they
said the idea was eventually dropped.

''It was an altogether different climate at the time in which the idea of
prosecuting a reporter was just impossible,'' recalled James R. Schlesinger, who
served as the Director of Central Intelligence from 1973 to 1975 and was later
Secretary of Defense. ''You had the C.I.A.'s alleged involvement in Watergate.
The C.I.A.'s reputation on Capitol Hill was mixed and the people in the White
House just didn't want to get President Ford involved in prosecution of a
reporter.''

In 1971, the Nixon Administration sought to prevent The New York Times and The
Washington Post from publishing excerpts from secret documents on the origins of
United States involvement in the Vietnam War. The Supreme Court ruled 6 to 3
that the Government had failed to meet its ''heavy burden'' needed to justify
prior restraint.

Under President Carter, the Justice Department was successful in winning prior
restraint of an article prepared for The Progressive magazine that gave
technical details on how a hydrogen bomb operates. Prosecutors secured a
temporary restraining order barring publication under the Atomic Energy Act but
the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circut lifted it six months
later, shortly after a local newspaper in Wisconsin published a letter to the
editor that contained much of the disputed information.

Philip Heymann, the head of the Justice Department's criminal division under
President Carter, said he recalls no instance in which officials suggested
prosecution of a news organization. He said there were recommendations for
investigating and prosecuting Government officials who disclosed sensitive
information, but that these failed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 21, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AFTER A DECADE, AN ADVENTURE IN DINING OUT;
FROM A TO B AND MORE

BYLINE: By WILLIAM K. STEVENS

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 6; Living Desk

LENGTH: 727 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, May 20


It is not literally true that before the Great Restaurant Renaissance began here
about 1970, the dining-out possibilities in downtown Philadelphia ran the gamut
from Arthur's steakhouse to Bookbinder's seafood. There were plenty of ethnic
restaurants around town, mainly Italian and Chinese, and plenty of
steak-and-chicken family spots.

But that was about it. Many of the better restaurants were tucked away in
neighborhoods far from downtown Philadelphia. ''As far as I know, there was no
restaurant scene,'' says Georges Perrier, a French chef who arrived in 1967. Mr.
Perrier owns Le Bec-Fin, one of the country's most highly regarded dining
places.

Since the early 1970's, Philadelphia's culinary scene has changed spectacularly.
There are now about 400 better restaurants in Center City, transforming it in
one short decade of explosive growth from a stodgy-restaurant town into one
offering variety, quality and excitement.

Now a new phase is beginning, say restaurateurs and others who have studied the
phenomenon. Philadelphia's restaurant renaissance has matured and reached a
plateau of sorts. The market has become saturated, spurring competition. Eating
places are having to work harder to please a clientele whose expectations are
rising. The result, some experts say, is a new burst of creativity as the city's
chefs search for a distinctively Philadelphian cuisine.

The leading edge of restaurant growth, in terms of sheer numbers, now appears to
have moved beyond Center City into the broader Delaware Valley. More restaurants
are opening on the city's fringes as the region's economic activity becomes less
concentrated. This, too, has increased competition downtown.

''The restaurant renaissance is maturing in a way that both as a researcher and
a consumer I find immensely satisfying,'' says Jerome A. Katz, assistant
professor of management at the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School, who
has studied the situation.

Several forces in the early 1970's contributed to the restaurant phenomenon.
According to Steve Poses, a transplanted New Yorker who opened Frog in 1973 and
the Commissary in 1977, there was first ''a critical demographic change - the
generation of baby boomers was getting old enough to dine out, and parents, as
empty-nesters, had more time to do it, too.''

Two other major social and economic developments helped feed and sustain the
growth. One was an influx of affluent newcomers in the 1970's and 80's, drawn
here by a general economic resurgence and by Philadelphia's growing reputation
as a pleasant place to live. Many of them moved into block after block of
restored 18th-century town houses that helped transform both the look and the
feel of Center City. And almost all of them brought tastes developed elsewhere.

''Lots of people had traveled and were aware there was something better out
there,'' says Kathleen Mulhern, owner and operator of the Garden, one of the
city's most popular power-lunch spots. ''Young people were making more money and
were interested in dining. A lot of new people were coming into the city. We
opened in response to a demand, a change in the city.''

Philadelphia now offers menus from France, Russia, Italy, China, India, Japan,
Thailand, Korean, Hungary, Greece, Vietnam, Polynesia, Mexico, Portugal, the
Caribbean, the Middle East and Ethiopia, although the cuisines, in Mr. Poses's
words ''are not exactly sweeping the city.''

''It's not a trendy town,'' Mr. Poses said. ''What we have here is a continued
evolution'' in cuisine.

The 400 restaurants, not including fast-food places, family restaurants or
private clubs, have made the downtown area an incubator for new restaurateurs,
Dr. Katz says.

Philadelphia's Restaurant School is also credited with advancing the change. The
school, which graduates about 300 people a year, has trained some 2,500 since
opening in 1974. About two-thirds of its chefs, managers, maitres d'hotel and
owners remain in the Philadelphia area.

Not everyone is enamored of the new developments. Mrs. Mulhern, for instance,
detects what she calls an unhealthy tendency to try to ''dazzle.'' ''Somebody
asked me the other day where we were headed,'' she said, ''and I said I think
we're going down the road of hyperbole. We have a couple of 'dazzle' things on
the menu, but quality and consistency are what we strive for.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 22, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SENIORS AT ANNAPOLIS ARE TOLD THE WORLD HAS BEEN IMPROVING

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 271 words

DATELINE: ANNAPOLIS, Md., May 21


The nation's top military officer today admonished 1,015 graduates of the Naval
Academy to keep an open mind, learn to laugh at themselves and not pay too much
attention to prophets of doom.

In a speech that largely avoided references to military affairs and world
conflicts, Adm. William J. Crowe, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told
the newly commissioned officers that ''previous ages have faced more disease,
more poverty, more hunger, more corruption, more racism and more killing than
your generation.''

''The bottom line,'' he said, ''is you should direct your energies to further
improving our condition without being burdened with worrying about our decline
and fall.''

Most of the new officers will serve in the Navy or the Marine Corps, but some
will go to the Air Force.

Among those receiving diplomas and officer commissions was Jeffrey Bellistri of
Severna Park, Md. Mr. Bellistri was suspended from the Academy in March after a
urine sample taken in a surprise test of a group of midshipmen showed traces of
cocaine. He denied having knowingly taken the drug, and was reinstated a month
later by Navy Secretary John F. Lehman after an investigation.

Also among the graduates was Linh Ba Le, 23 years old, who fled Saigon, now Ho
Chi Minh City, with his mother, brother and two sisters 11 years ago just two
days before South Vietnam surrendered to the North.

There were 64 women, 33 Hispanics, 43 blacks, 49 Orientals and two Native
Americans among the 1,015 graduates. Also receiving diplomas, but not
commissions, were three foreign nationals from Panama, Chile and the Dominican
Republic.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 22, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

STIFF CHALLENGE SEEN IN PENNSYLVANIA SENATE RACE

BYLINE: By WILLIAM K. STEVENS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 28, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 612 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, May 21


By winning the Democratic nomination to the United States Senate on Tuesday,
Representative Bob Edgar has posed a strong challenge to Arlen Specter, the
Republican incumbent, politicians and political analysts said today.

Mr. Edgar, a 42-year-old liberal who has served six terms in Congress, defeated
Don Bailey, a former Congressman who is now the State Auditor General. Mr.
Bailey was considered the more conservative candidate.

Senator Specter, a Republican moderate, easily won renomination for a second
term.

LaRouche Candidate Trails

With 98 percent of the precincts reporting, the unofficial tally showed Mr.
Edgar with 426,228 votes, or 47 percent of the total, and Mr. Bailey with
405,315 votes, or 45 percent. Two other candidates trailed. One, George R. H.
Elder, was allied with the extremist Lyndon H. LaRouche Jr. Senator Specter
defeated Richard A. Stokes, a Carlisle schoolteacher who had been considered a
minor candidate. Mr. Stokes spent less than $2,500 on his campaign, but
nevertheless had polled 24 percent of the vote with 98 percent of the precincts
reporting.

In his fourth try, Robert P. Casey, a 54-year-old former State Auditor General,
won the Democratic nomination for Governor. He handily defeated Edward G.
Rendell, formerly the Philadelphia District Attorney, and will face Lieut. Gov.
William W. Scranton 3d in the fall. Mr. Scranton was unopposed in the Republican
primary.

With 98 percent of the precincts reporting, Mr. Casey had tallied 542,658 votes
to Mr. Rendell's 382,700, a margin of 56 percent to 40. A LaRouche candidate,
Steve Douglas, trailed with 38,158 votes.

Mr. Rendell's loss prompted immediate speculation that he might challenge W.
Wilson Goode, the incumbent, in next year's mayoral election in Philadelphia.
Mr. Rendell, well-known as an effective campaigner in Philadelphia, won 67
percent of the vote there.

Mr. Goode, a Democrat, supported Mr. Rendell. But he is considered vulnerable as
a result of last year's confrontation between the police and the radical group
Move, in which 11 people died.

The Specter-Edgar contest ''could be quite a fascinating race,'' said Robert
O'Connor, an associate professor of political science at Pennsylvania State
University. Democratic leaders have said that they consider the race crucial
Their party has not elected a United States Senator and has elected a Governor
only twice since 1962.

The outcome would affect the balance of party power in the Senate. Some analysts
say it will presage Pennsylvania's stance in the 1988 Presidential election.

Specter Seen as Favorite

As an incumbent whose campaign war chest has barely been tapped, Senator Specter
must be rated the favorite, said Edward Mezvinsky of Philadelphia, the state
Democratic chairman. But he said Mr. Specter might be vulnerable.

He narrowly won his seat in the Reagan landslide of 1980, the Democratic
chairman said, adding that Mr. Edgar was an aggressive campaigner and skillful
fund-raiser who had built up ''overwhelming support'' in the Philadelphia area,
the home base he and Mr. Specter share.

Other analysts say that Mr. Edgar's electoral record suggests that he will run a
strong race in the fall. A liberal Democrat, he has been elected to Congress
from normally Republican Philadelphia suburbs in Delaware County.

Mr. Edgar, a Methodist minister, was first elected to Congress in 1974, when he
ran because of his outrage over Watergate. He was an outspoken opponent of the
Vietnam War, and he opposes what he considers the Reagan Administration's
emphasis on military spending over domestic programs. He is heads the
Northeast-Midwest Congressional Coalition.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Robert Casey (UPI)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 22, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Restore World War II System for the Joint Chiefs

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 375 words


To the Editor:

I don't believe that Senator Gary Hart (in ''An Agenda for More Military
Reform,'' Op-Ed, May 13), or the rest of Congress, understands the long-term,
possibly dangerous consequences of changing the delicate balance within the
Joint Chiefs of Staff by making the chairman the single most powerful military
officer in our history.

Congress would do well to recall what Gen. Matthew B. Ridgway wrote on this
issue in ''The Korean War'': ''Improbable as it now may seem, and incompatible
as it is with our whole way of life, military dominance over our affairs could
happen here.'' This from a man who in 1954 advised President Eisenhower not to
get involved in Vietnam.

In a thoughtful Op-Ed article in June 1984, Lyman Lemnitzer, former chairman of
the Joint Chiefs, put it well when he wrote: ''The best way to give civilian
leaders balanced military advice is by using the talents and broad experience of
the military chiefs of all services: Each knows his own service; each is an
expert in his field. Our present organization provides the checks and balances
that moderate extreme views.''

What the system needs is simplicity, not more complexity. Why not go back to the
World War II system, in which the chiefs, in addition to being advisers, were in
the chain of command. The chain of command could simply be the President, the
Secretary of Defense and the Joint Chiefs both as true heads of their services
and members of the combined Joint Chiefs. This system would give us both maximum
civilian control and military effectiveness. The points of authority and
responsibility would be clear as a bell.

During World War II, Fleet Adm. Ernest J. King and Gen. of the Army George C.
Marshall were those ultimately responsible to civilian authority for the whole
military picture, including planning, preparation and execution of military
operations. This simple system worked well.

What's most important is to keep the ultimate policy-making responsibility where
it belongs - with the President, the Secretary of Defense and Congress
representing our civilian leadership. To have the chairman involved in policy
formation and military implementation is both dangerous and wrong. ROBERT
PREVIDI Manhasset, L.I., May 13, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 22, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

It Takes Two to Contadora

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 586 words


The quaintest news of the week describes the Reagan Administration as
''divided'' about the terms of peace with Nicaragua. How could anyone say
divided, the White House asks, just because the Pentagon and C.I.A. are at odds
with the President's special envoy to Central America while the State Department
disputes the Pentagon, the Pentagon disputes State, and the President and
Secretary of State are still reserving judgment?

Divided, it is true, is much too simple. The jumble of incompatible means and
ends that passes for a Nicaragua policy has been evident for years. Now that
four Latin nations are threatening to complete a treaty of peace for Central
America - the Contadora treaty - the Administration's confusion has produced
what can only be described as a bureaucratic riot. It leaves the United States
denouncing a treaty that it's been claiming to promote, and on the very day that
Nicaragua denounces it even louder.

The nuances of all the disputation are almost beyond fair summary. For sanity's
sake, think of two broad groupings. One might be called the ''war party,'' which
seeks not only to stop the Sandinistas from threatening their neighbors and
aligning with the Soviet bloc but also to loosen their hold on Nicaragua itself.
Though based in the Pentagon, the war party would make war only with a
C.I.A.-run army of Nicaraguan exiles, the contras, so that America will not be
sucked into ''another Vietnam.''

The other faction could be called the ''diplomacy detachment,'' looking to offer
the Sandinistas a deal that would grudgingly let them pursue their leftist
revolution if they send their Cuban advisers packing, reduce their army and
forswear meddling in other Central American countries. This group, based in
parts of the State Department, would use the contra army as a bargaining chip,
to be disbanded in negotiation. But it seems trapped in its own paradox; it
wants a deal but fears compromise lest that allow others to say it yielded or
''lost'' Nicaragua to Communism. This group never wants it said that America
acquiesced in ''another Cuba.''

Where then does the President stand? For ''no more Vietnams, no more Cubas.''
With a war he can't win and a negotiation he can't abide. He lets the contras
fight and the diplomats talk, to no discernible end.

The Contadora nations - Mexico, Venezuela, Colombia and Panama - propose
disbanding the contras, reducing Nicaragua's army and chasing all foreign
military advisers, American and Soviet-bloc, from the signatory countries:
Nicaragua, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Honduras and Guatemala. It would challenge
them all to become more democratic but would concentrate international
verification on the military provisions.

The war party says the Sandinistas are sure to cheat, leaving a contra-less
United States to choose between defeat and a Vietnam-style intervention. The
diplomacy faction wants a treaty promise that the Sandinistas will let the
contras back into Nicaraguan politics. Philip Habib, the President's special
envoy, wants to pursue the Contadora military de-escalation. He may think that's
the best deal pressure and diplomacy can achieve, and if the Sandinistas persist
in resisting, also the best way to get Congress to vote more aid for the
contras.

Contadora remains, in our view, the wisest way out and the best of a bad deal,
if anyone still cares, for the suffering people of Nicaragua. Does President
Reagan favor such a deal? If he does, he'll never get it until he takes charge
of his policy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 22, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WAR'S SAD TOLL: THE DIVIDED HOUSES OF NICARAGUA

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1085 words

DATELINE: MANAGUA, Nicaragua


On warm summer weekends 25 years ago, Arturo Jose Cruz would pack up his young
nieces and nephews and take them for overnight outings to the family ranch in
the rural province of Carazo.

''Naturally, I remember those trips very pleasantly,'' said one of the nephews,
Luis Carrion Cruz, one of the nine ''comandantes'' of the ruling Sandinista
front. ''But I don't consider Arturo a relative any more. What he is doing is
bringing war, death and destruction to this country.''

Arturo Jose Cruz is now a leader of the rebel coalition that seeks to depose the
Sandinista Government. And this uncle who once doted on his nephew now returns
the coldness in similar terms.

''Luis is brilliant and very sincere, but because of his attitude toward me,
saying I am an imperialist agent or a C.I.A. mercenary, I don't consider him a
relative,'' Mr. Cruz said in a telephone interview from Costa Rica. ''He may be
my sister's son, but he is not a relative to me.''

Families Are Divided

Such conflicts have divided an untold number of Nicaraguan families. Two
brothers edit newspapers in Managua that are ideologically at war. The chief
spokesman for the Nicaraguan Army, Capt. Rosa Pasos, is the sister of the chief
spokesman in Miami for the rebel Nicaraguan Democratic Force, Marta Sacasa.

For Mr. Carrion Cruz's wealthy parents in the early 1960's, there was every
reason to expect that their son would fulfill their aspirations and enter
Nicaragua's ruling elite. When he was not spending weekends at the ranch with
his uncle Arturo, the young Luis Carrion Cruz was compiling an outstanding
academic record.

He was named the outstanding sixth-grade student in the country in 1964, and
later he compiled the best record in his class at the rigorous Roman Catholic
high school he attended in Managua.

He spent a year at Phillips Exeter Academy in New Hampshire preparing for
college, making the honor roll each term, and then enrolled at Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute in Troy, N.Y.

Drops Out of School

But although Mr. Carrion Cruz eventually became one of Nicaragua's most
important leaders, he did not reach power the way his parents had expected.

He did not earn a college degree, open a business and rise through the political
ranks. Instead, he dropped out of school, returned to Nicaragua against his
parents' will, and joined a radical Catholic group in a Managua slum.

Later, he stole his father's hunting rifles and fled to the hills to become a
revolutionary guerrilla.

''He left me a note reminding me that I had always told him to be the best at
whatever he did,'' said his father, Luis Carrion Montoya, who was then one of
the country's most prominent financiers. ''He said he was going to try to be the
best at makng revolution.''

Mr. Carrion Cruz is among more than a dozen senior Sandinista leaders who came
to the movement through their exposure to radical Catholicism. Like many of
them, he lost much of his youthful religious faith as his commitment to Marxism
grew. The Sandinista Minister of Education, the Rev. Fernando Cardenal, is a
Jesuit priest who was among those who encouraged Catholic radicals like Mr.
Carrion Cruz to grow into political revolutionaries.

'Profound Values' Noted

''From motivations rooted in true Christian faith, we made the youngsters step
forward to a commitment to work for justice and the people,'' said Father
Cardenal in a published interview. ''This led to a second stage, where they
ended up committing themselves to the Sandinista front. In this second stage
many of them abandoned the Christian faith, but not the profound values that
motivated them.'

More than once, President Anastasio Somoza Debayle singled out Mr. Carrion Cruz
and his brother Carlos, also a Sandinista activist, as examples of young people
led astray by leftist clerics.

''Young men like the Carrion Cruz boys,'' he wrote in his memoirs, ''became
avowed Communists, and they had received their training from Jesuit priests.''

Mr. Carrion Cruz rose to top leadership in the Sandinista underground more
quickly than anyone had before him. Today, he is First Deputy Minister of the
Interior, with principal responsibility for counterintelligence.

Youngest of 'Comandantes'

At 33 years of age, he is the youngest of the nine men who have held ultimate
power in Nicaragua since the 1979 revolution. Some diplomats and others who have
watched the Sandinistas believe he may be the smartest of the nine.

At one point, after Mr. Carrion Cruz had announced his intention to leave
school, his father threatened never to speak to him again.

''Once, when my father first realized that I was secretly involved with the
Sandinistas, he told me that if a war came, he would be with one side and I
would be with the other,'' he said. ''Fortunately, it never came to that.'' Mr.
Carrion Montoya did not carry out his threat to cut himself off from his son. He
said the years when his son was underground were ''a very difficult time for me
and for my wife, since we never knew when Luis might be captured or killed.''
But today he is generally sympathetic toward the Sandinistas.

''You can't escape being influenced by those you love,'' said Mr. Carrion
Montoya, whose banking conglomerate was confiscated by the Sandinista
Government. His business holdings have been reduced to a filling station
franchise and part ownership of a Managua restaurant. How They View the U.S.
Mr. Carrion Cruz and his uncle, Arturo Jose Cruz, absorbed very different views
of the United States while they lived there. Mr. Carrion Cruz took part in
college protests against the Vietnam War and recalls seeing ''many strong
episodes of racism.''

''When I lived in the United States, I saw the great contradictions of life
there,'' Mr. Carrion Cruz said. ''I saw that the relative luxury of a few
countries had its necessary counterpoint in the misery and suffering of
countries like Nicaragua. Individualism was taken to the extreme of people
trying to climb over each other to get ahead.''

''Capitalism failed in Nicaragua,'' he said. ''It was obvious to me that
something else was needed.''

Mr. Carrion Cruz's uncle Arturo has lived in the United States during more
tranquil periods, beginning in the 1950's. ''I concluded that despite its
negative features and all its imperialism, the United States has much good to
offer the world,'' the uncle said. ''It is over differences of opinions on
questions like that one that so many Nicaraguan families have split apart.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Luis Carrion Cruz and Arturo Jose Cruz (NYT; Agence
France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 22, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING;
Veterans to Get Charter

BYLINE: By Wayne King and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 210 words


Sometime over the forthcoming Memorial Day weekend, President Reagan will sign
the grant of a Federal charter to the Vietnam Veterans of America.

The charter will put the veterans' group on the same institutional footing as
the Veterans of Foreign Wars, the Disabled American Veterans, the AmVets and the
American Legion.

Although Vietnam veterans are eligible for membership in the older
organizations, Vietnam Veterans of America, which has 32,000 Vietnam-era
members, says the problems and concerns confronting veterans of that unpopular
war are different.

Although the charter affords the organization certain practical benefits -
access to office space in Veterans Administration buildings and the legal right
to represent veterans with grievances, among others - its organizers say the
most important benefit is symbolic.

''The document symbolizes an acceptance of a whole generation of veterans as a
significant element of American society,'' said the group's president, Robert
Muller.

Meantime, the House subcommittee on coinage will meet today to consider
legislation authorizing the minting of gold medals to honor Jan Scruggs, Robert
Doubek and Jack Wheeler, the Vietnam veterans responsible for creation of the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 23, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

HISTORY OF MILITARY MAKING COMEBACK ON U.S. CAMPUSES

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1420 words


Military history is growing intellectually fashionable again on American
campuses. Such a development would have been unthinkable during the Vietnam War,
and it has evidently surprised many historians even in the relatively
conservative atmosphere of the past few years.

Professorships and endowed chairs in military history are being established or
considered at some of the top universities, including Yale, Princeton and
Harvard. The number of specialists in the field is growing at perhaps three
times the rate of a decade ago, and there is evidence of sharp undergraduate
interest in the subject.

Nadir in Vietnam War

Military history languished at American universities after World War II and
probably reached its nadir in the Vietnam War for a combination of intellectual
and political reasons. Accounts of battles and strategies, often written by
retired officers, struck many scholars as only marginally related to the main
themes of history. Some military historians were politically conservative as
well, and their views and work ran against the prevailing antiwar mood on
campuses.

The reasons for the turnaround, scholars say, include the growing political
acceptability of military force in international affairs, and the emergence of
subtle new blends of military, diplomatic, economic and social history. Whatever
the reasons, signs of change abound.

New journals devoted to military history have appeared, and there is no shortage
of new contributors. Prof. Robin Higham of Kansas State University, editor of
the journal Military Affairs, says the number of completed doctoral
dissertations in military history has jumped to about 300 a year from about 100
a year in the mid-70's.

A new prize in European military and strategic history will be awarded for the
first time next December by the American Historical Association, the nation's
foremost group of professional historians. Moreover, some distinguished
historians in other fields, including Prof. William H. McNeill of the University
of Chicago, who is president of the American Historical Association and is best
known for such syntheses as ''The Rise of the West,'' have turned their
attention in recent years to the long, curious history of force.

Prof. Paul Kennedy, one of several military historians hired away from British
universities by American schools, said he noticed in a visit to the United
States in 1979 that ''the atmosphere of the students not having anything to do
with the Vietnam War was already evaporating.'' Since then, ''the whole field
has just taken off,'' he said. ''And it's not just a revival of military
history. It's an explosion of interest in the historical and military-historical
dimensions of politics.''

Professor Kennedy, now at Yale, said that while it was hard to determine just
what accounted for the trend, the nation's campuses had become relatively
conservative and evidently there were more academics who viewed military action
as a potentially reasonable means of pursuing national interests. He and other
scholars also speculated that, as experiences of war grew more distant,
historical and intellectual interest was bound to increase.

Professor Kennedy said he also suspected that there was an element of romantic
patriotism or nostalgia for great military victories, a phenomenon that has made
patriotic war movies very popular. He said he worried if ''military history is
in because power is in.''

Perceptions in the 60's

In the 1960's, several historians said, diplomatic and military history came to
be widely regarded as old-fashioned and elitist. Social history came to be
viewed as the history of powerless civilians, and has since become extremely
popular among scholars.

Most recently, some historians have focused on the social and economic aspects
of war. More and more military-historical scholarship has been devoted to such
matters as wartime food supplies, administration, women in war and wartime
economies rather than to armies on the battlefield.

One often-cited 1977 study along these lines was ''Supplying War: Logistics from
Wallenstein to Patton,'' by Martin van Creveld. Another, in 1980, was ''The Air
War 1939-1945,'' by R. Avery. The Avery volume, which includes chapters on
aircraft production and the economic and administrative background to the air
combat of World War II, represents ''the first attempt to cover this very
important field in a comprehensive rather than a fragmentary or an anecdotal
manner,'' Mr. van Creveld, a historian at the Hebrew University in Jerusalem,
wrote in The Washington Quarterly last year.

Student interest in military history is also picking up. At Princeton, the
history department recently announced an undergraduate seminar for next fall on
the Vietnam War. Enrollment was to be limited to 25. But Prof. Robert L. Tignor,
the chairman, said 50 students had tried to enroll and others would have done
the same if the sign-up sheet had not been taken down.

Professor Tignor said the department had recently approached a person who gave
Princeton money in the past and asked him to finance a new chair in military
history.

Princeton already has a popular history course on ''War and Society in the
Modern World,'' but the pressures for more are noticeable. ''I'm a little
amazed,'' Professor Tignor said. He and other scholars said the size and speed
of the shift toward military history had caught them by surprise.

New Moves at Yale

Last year Yale announced the establishment of the new Robert A. Lovett
Professorship in Military and Naval History and is seeking money to finance the
new chair.

Professor Kennedy and others attracted large audiences last fall for the Yale
University Lectures on Military History, which were broadcast over a New Haven
radio station. Topics ranged from ''The Grand Strategy of the Roman Empire'' to
the lessons of World War II. Next fall's lectures will focus on the history and
theory of sea power.

Departments of political science and campus centers of strategic studies are
also showing a new interest in military history. At Harvard, the Center for
International Affairs is said to be looking for a scholar to fill a newly
endowed chair combining military history with contemporary strategic studies.

The Defense Department has influenced such trends in several ways. In the late
1970's, the Army decided it would be cheaper, more scholarly and less biased if
reserve officer candidates took their courses in military history from their
regular college history professors rather than from military officers, who had
taught the courses till then. Many history departments obliged. According to
Professor Higham, perhaps 25 history departments offered courses in military
history a decade ago, whereas today 400 history departments offer such courses.

Modifications at War College

At the United States Naval War College in Newport, R.I., the course in policy
and strategy has become less technical and more historical. The course is
currently taught by a classical historian, A. H. Bernstein, who was educated at
Cornell and Oxford.

The technical and managerial approach to war, Professor Bernstein said, took a
beating as a result of the perceived failures of Vietnam, and when Adm.
Stansfield Turner headed the Naval War College in the early 1970's he
reintroduced a more classical, historical approach to strategy. The college's
strategy course has become even less technical and more ''humanistic'' in the
1980's, Professor Bernstein said.

Professor McNeill, the influential president of the American Historical
Association, said the reawakened interest in military history was so new that he
was not sure it was yet a trend. But he added that his book, ''The Pursuit of
Power: Technology, Armed Force, and Society since A.D. 1000,'' had been well
received since its publication in 1981.

He said economic and social historians tended to be strongly prejudiced against
military history, while military historians had traditionally slighted the lives
of civilians. ''Neither read the other's books,'' he said from England, where he
has been researching the life of Arnold Toynbee.

There was something else. ''Democracies were supposed to be pacific,'' Professor
McNeill said. They were not supposed to like war. Warfare was viewed as an
aberration. But Professor McNeill came to believe that warfare was inseparable
from history and that the transformations he saw around him were ''all connected
with the militarization of American society.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 23, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ENDOWMENT INQUIRY SOUGHT

BYLINE: By DAVID K. SHIPLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 613 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 22


A Republican Representative from Colorado asked the Justice Department today to
look into possible conflicts of interest by two registered foreign agents who
have participated in deciding how to spend millions of dollars in Federal funds
to promote democracy overseas.

At a news conference here, Representative Hank Brown produced registration forms
showing that the law firm of Charles T. Manatt, a member of the board of the
federally financed National Endowment for Democracy, was registered as an agent
for the Governments of Cyprus and Jamaica and for the Jamaica Broadcasting
Corporation. Mr. Manatt, a former Democratic national chairman, is also chairman
of the National Democratic Institute for International Affairs, which receives
money through the endowment to hold conferences for foreign politicians.

Mr. Brown also named Peter G. Kelly, treasurer of the Democratic Institute,
whose public relations firm, Black, Manafort, Stone & Kelly, was registered as
an agent for the Chamber of Philippine Manufacturers, Export and Tourism
Associations before the downfall of President Ferdinand E. Marcos.

''Activities in the Philippines have received more N.E.D. funds than in any
other country,'' Mr. Brown said. He did not mention that a major activity was
the monitoring of the Philippine election last February and the documentation of
fraud and intimidation that contributed to the downfall of Mr. Marcos.

Meese Asked to Investigate

Mr. Brown, a longtime critic of the National Endowment, said he was not charging
any conflict of interest. But he said the fact that Mr. Manatt and Mr. Kelly
were registered as foreign agents raised questions that should be investigated,
and sent a letter to Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d requesting an
investigation.

Mr. Brown told reporters, ''Someone who is a registered agent for a foreign
government should not have discretion in deciding which country U.S. funds are
allocated to.''

Mr. Manatt denied any conflict of interest and said the Jamaica and Cyprus
matters were handled by another attorney in his firm, Manatt, Phelps,
Rothenberg, Tunney & Evans. He also said the National Democratic Institute had
adopted a strict code of ethics barring board members from profiting from their
decisions.

''We try to be 100 percent watchful of anything like this,'' he said. ''You try
to be above reproach.''

Mr. Kelly said that as soon as he learned that his firm represented the
Philippine business group he informed the National Democratic Institute ''and
indicated I would not participate in any actions of N.D.I. relative to the
Philippines, and in fact didn't, religiously didn't.'' He added, ''In terms of
conduct there was no conflict.''

Conduit for Governent Money

In the last three years $53.7 million has been funneled through National
Endowment to foreign political parties, labor unions and other institutions
deemed important in promoting democracy in developing countries.

National Endowment was created in 1983 as a conduit for Government money. Its
board of directors includes prominent Americans with experience in foreign
affairs, including former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger and former Vice
President Walter F. Mondale.

Among the projects it has financed are the Solidarity free trade union in
Poland, publication of textbooks for rebel-held areas of Afghanistan and a
Paris-based organization of Vietnamese exiles who publish newsletters on human
rights violations by Vietnam.

''I don't believe that there's a conflict,'' said Carl Gershman, president of
the National Endowment. ''We never had anything where this issue would have been
relevant. I think it's a phony issue.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 23, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: FRIDAY, MAY 23, 1986

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 688 words


International NATO backed chemical-weapons production by the United States.
Several countries were sharply critical, but defense ministers approved a list
of American goals that include an end to a 17-year ban on production of the
weapons. [Page A1, Column 3.] Nicaraguan rebels are debating how to broaden the
appeal of their movement and to assure civilian control of military guerrilla
units, according to rebel and Congressional sources. The debate is spurred by
the perception that the main rebel army is dominated by former soldiers of the
country's deposed dictator, Anastasio Somoza Debayle. [A1:5.] A former Libyan
diplomat died in a slaying this month in an East Berlin park, officials in Bonn
said. There were unconfirmed reports that the man was acting as an informer for
the authorities investigating terrorist attacks in West Berlin. [A1:4-6.]
Artillery duels raged in Beirut for the second straight day. Officials said the
clashes between Moslem and Christian gunners brought casualties to 40 killed and
110 wounded since the fighting, termed the worst civil warfare in the city in
months, erupted Wednesday afternoon. [A9:1.] Egypt and Jordan leaders discussed
the Gaza strip in a recent meeting, according to Arab and Israeli officials.
They said the countries' chiefs studied a proposal for Egyptian-backed
Palestinian self-rule in the occupied territory. [A3:1-3.] National The House
voted to revise trade laws despite President Reagan's opposition. The bill,
passed by a vote of 295 to 115, would require the President to take more
vigorous actions against trading partners that subsidize imports to this country
or prevent American goods from entering their own markets. [A1:6.] A court
ruling voids hiring goals used by many Government contractors, the Justice
Department asserted. A key offical said a new Supreme Court decision requiring
''convincing evidence'' of prior discrimination will necessitate the repeal of
portions of an executive order on numerical goals for hiring blacks, women and
Hispanic people. [A1:4.] Military history is fashionable again on American
campuses. The discipline lagged after World War II and especially during the
Vietnam War, but now there is sharp undergraduate interest and the number of
specialists is growing. [A1:1.] Officials urged no-smoking areas in 6,800
Federal buildings around the nation. The rules proposed by the General Services
Administration would ban smoking in most parts of the buildings, including
general offices, auditoriums, conference rooms, lobbies and restrooms. They
would affect the vast majority of civilian Federal employees. [A14:2-3.]
Officials rated nuclear power plants in the U.S. and said the differences in
quality were mainly a result of management, not equipment or design. ''We don't
regulate management very well,'' said a member of the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission, which offered a list of the best and worst plants in the country.
[A10:1-5.] The top science official will resign his White House post, continuing
an exodus of key advisors to the President and his senior staff on technical
issues. Dr. John P. McTague will leave to become the executive director of
research at the Ford Motor Company. [A13:1.] Metropolitan Summer auto traffic
will be up significantly in the region this year, officials said, citing low
gasoline prices and a boom in domestic tourism. ''This will probably be the
busiest summer we have seen since gas was 30 cents a gallon,'' said one. Road
construction in some places will add to the congestion. [A1:1-2.] Donald Manes
extracted bribes from city contractors in a multi-million-dollar scheme, Federal
prosecutors said for the first time. They charged the late Queens politician
with using Michael J. Lazar and Stanley M. Friedman as ''bribery brokers.''
Defense lawyers said that different corruption accusations required separate
trials. [B1:5-6.] 2 jewelers said they gave $1 million in gold and diamonds to
kidnappers who blindfolded them, held them at gunpoint and threatened to harm
their families. Detectives have not corroborated the account. [B1:1-2.]

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 24, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Shanties and Countershanties

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 359 words


Shanties: on many American campuses, they are the symbol of the school year now
coming to a close. These makeshift structures are meant to symbolize the cruelty
of apartheid and the poverty inflicted on South African blacks. They also
challenge the stereotype of college students as self-absorbed and pragmatic.
With commencement visitors at hand, college administrators seem to regard the
shanties as points of embarrassment; points of pride would be more like it.

The appearance of shanties on campus sparked a dramatic clash among students at
Dartmouth and a controversy at the University of California at Berkeley.
Administrators at Berkeley first ordered some of them removed as fire hazards,
but then agreed to let a half-dozen stand till the end of the semester. Yale
ordered shanties torn down but then allowed them to be rebuilt.

University administrators understandably want to get rid of these unsightly
constructions but know, finally, that some things are more important than a tidy
quadrangle. Freedom of expression, for one; students expressing themselves, for
another. South Africa is the biggest issue on campus since Vietnam. Abhorrence
of apartheid has become the cause among students of a generation perceived as
otherwise singularly career-minded. The plywood and cardboard shanties dramatize
racism and poverty and reinforce demands that universities divest their holdings
in companies that do business in South Africa.

Legally, such structures are more vulnerable to regulation than ordinary speech.
The Supreme Court refused in 1984 to let demonstrators express concern for the
homeless by sleeping in tents in Lafayette Park across from the White House. The
Court majority held that the protest was subject to reasonable Government
regulations that prohibit camping in certain parks.

Universities can similarly regulate shanties, if they have to, but why not do so
in a way that shows respect for speech? Some have done that by also permitting
counterdemonstrators to erect ''countershanties.'' That may be an untidy
response to an untidy problem, but free expression isn't always tidy. Neither is
the academic experience.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 25, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

INDICTMENT OF F.B.I. AGENT RAISES QUESTIONS

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 21, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 636 words

DATELINE: CLEVELAND, May 19


One morning last August, Robert Friedrick, an agent of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, met with Justice Department officials to answer questions about
the bureau's relationship with Jackie Presser, the teamsters' president.

Mr. Friedrick, a former marine who won a Purple Heart in Vietnam, headed the
F.B.I.'s organized crime squad in Cleveland. He is said to have used Mr. Presser
as an informer who had access to Cleveland's underworld bosses.

The Government contends that at the meeting with the Justice Department
officials, Mr. Friedrick made false statements that undermined a politically
sensitive Labor Department investigation of payroll padding in Mr. Presser's
local.

After the meeting, the Justice Department announced that it was closing out the
Presser inquiry without seeking any indictments. But it reopened the case
several months ago, and last week Mr. Presser was indicted by a Federal grand
jury here on charges of racketeering and embezzlement.

At the same time, Mr. Friedrick was indicted by a Federal grand jury in
Washington on charges of making false statements under Title 18 of the United
States Code. If convicted, he faces a maximum of 25 years in prison and a
$50,000 fine.

The Friedrick indictment did not address the question of why he would have lied
to protect Mr. Presser, who retained his post as the secretary-treasurer of
Local 507 after he began his rise in the International Brotherhood of Teamsters.

Lieut. James Veres of the Cuyahoga County Sheriff's Department said he thought
Mr. Friedrick was ''taking a fall'' in the case. ''From the times I've worked
with that squad, he wouldn't do something on a case like Presser without
checking with the higher-ups,'' the lieutenant said.

Mr. Friedrick's attorney, William D. Beyer, describes the 42-year-old F.B.I.
agent as ''a casualty in a turf battle over the separate responsibilities of the
Justice Department, the F.B.I. and the Labor Department.''

Personal Gain Not an Issue

''As I understand the Justice Department's position,'' Mr. Beyer said, ''Special
Agent Friedrick, without personal benefit, but rather in an effort to fight
organized crime, frustrated the goals of another agency which was investigating
Presser's conduct.''

Mr. Friedrick would not discuss the charges. But a Senate subcommittee that
reviewed the Presser case said relations between the F.B.I. and Labor Department
investigators in Cleveland ''have been strained for years.'' The subcommittee
called the F.B.I.'s position ''contrary to the intent of Congress.''

Mr. Friedrick's indictment also raised questions about the F.B.I.'s supervision
of its agents. Mr. Beyer refused to discuss whether Mr. Friedrick was following
orders when he met with Mr. Presser or Anthony Hughes, another Local 507
official who was indicted last week. The Justice Department says its
investigation is continuing.

The indictment charged that Mr. Friedrick lied when he told Justice Department
officials that F.B.I. agents had authorized Mr. Presser and Mr. Hughes to put
Mr. Presser's uncle, Allen Friedman, on the union's payroll.

Mr. Friedrick joined the F.B.I. in 1973 and has spent his entire career in
Cleveland.

In 1977, Mr. Friedrick was assigned to investigate the murder of Daniel J.
Greene, a Cleveland underworld leader who was attempting to gain control of
northern Ohio rackets. The case led to the conviction of top crime leaders in
Cleveland, as well as an F.B.I. clerk who was selling confidential documents to
defendants in the case.

A Federal investigator familiar with the Presser investigation said of Mr.
Friedrick: ''He did a good job. He believed in the bureau, and local
law-enforcement types hated him because he was a typical bureau agent. But
nobody really knew Bob Friedrick. He was a tough guy to talk to.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 25, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Statue Would Honor Women's War Role

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 32, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 168 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 24


A group of women who are veterans of the war in Indochina has announced plans to
place a bronze statue of an American military nurse on the grounds of the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial on the Mall.

Eight women's names are among the 58,132 Vietnam war dead on the monument's
long, panels of black granite. About 3 million American military men and 7,000
to 10,000 women, most of them nurses or other medical service workers, served in
Vietnam.

The proposed statue has gained widespread support ''because there were so many
woman in Vietnam and because the suffering and contributions of women have too
often been overlooked in American life,'' said John Wheeler, chairman of the
memorial fund, at a news conference Friday. The conference was called to
announce a $1 million fund drive for the women's memorial.

Roger M. Brodin of Minneapolis has sculpted a two-foot model of the proposed
statue showing a young woman in fatigues and combat boots with a stethoscope
around her neck and a helmet in her hands.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 25, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

OUR TOWNS;
OUT OF STEP WITH PROSPERITY, VETERANS SEEK JOBS

BYLINE: By Michael Winerip, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 40, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 955 words

DATELINE: BLACKWOOD, N.J.


There are powerful economic currents swirling around America today, set loose by
investment wizards who plot corporate takeovers and mergers.

For 13 years, untouched by all this free-market excitement, Richard Baldwin and
Charles Norris worked quietly for the Minnesota, Mining and Manufacturing
Company in Pennsauken, N.J., coordinating repair work for copier machines. They
each made $20,000 a year and liked their jobs.

Mr. Baldwin played on the office softball team. Mr. Norris could not play - he
had polio as a young man and has had a leg amputated - so he coached the team.
Evenings, to improve himself, Mr. Norris took computer and management courses.

Then one day during the current economic swirl, Minnesota Mining -ranked 47th in
the Fortune 500 - combined copier operations with the Harris Corporation -
ranked 163d. About 200 people were laid off, including Mr. Baldwin and Mr.
Norris. They asked for other jobs, but according to Dale Lynch, a company
spokesman, there were none.

So, since Feb. 1, the two have been looking for work, which is particularly
difficult for a 58-year-old man like Mr. Norris, who uses a wheelchair. He feels
lucky that his friend, Mr. Baldwin, has stuck by him.

When Mr. Baldwin heard about a job fair for veterans, he phoned Mr. Norris. And
one day last week, Mr. Baldwin, a Vietnam veteran, loaded Mr. Norris into a van,
and the two drove to Camden County College to hunt work.

These exciting economic times are not for everyone. New Jersey's unemployment
rate is 5.2 percent, the lowest in years, and yet, in the first three weeks of
May, 20 plant shutdowns were reported statewide. Twenty years ago New Jersey had
880,000 manufacturing jobs; today there are 720,000.

Often middle-aged workers laid off from middle-income jobs find they do not have
the training for the expanding high-tech field, and they cannot support families
on the $4 to $5 an hour paid in the expanding service sector for security guards
and similar jobs. ''We have a whole raft of people caught in the middle,'' said
Ruth Lenhart, an employment supervisor for the state, which sponsored the job
fair along with Representative James J. Florio, Democrat of New Jersey.

To help veterans, Congress has created a program to pay employers up to $10,000
for each Vietnam- and Korea-era veteran hired. Hundreds came to the job fair,
looking for work or better jobs.

John Ausevich took a personal day off from his $4-an-hour job. Jim Penrose came
after he got off work at the shipyard - he works the midnight shift because it
pays 90 cents more an hour. Adam Tait, 49, a Philadelphia Bulletin editor for 10
years until the paper folded, came carrying a briefcase. He has been unemployed
nearly a year.

All day long, announcers called out jobs: ''We have an employer who's looking
for someone to install gutters. Anyone interested in installing gutters?''

The veterans had a sense of urgency, a need to capitalize. ''I don't mean to be
rude,'' one said to a reporter. ''I'd talk to you if you could help me find a
job.''

Mr. Penrose told an Atlantic Electric representative, ''I'd even be interested
in cleaning up PCB's.'' Mr. Baldwin felt the same way; he applied to a company
that cleans toxic spills. ''You put on a suit and handle hazardous chemicals
with unknown danger,'' he said. ''Oh yeah, to make a living, I'll do that.''

Mr. Penrose later explained, ''the thing is, get your foot in the door.'' He
mentioned his mountain-climbing experience in the Army because he knows the
electric company needs people to go up poles. ''I was making the point I wasn't
afraid of heights,'' he said. ''That's what I was playing up.''

The announcer said, ''If you want to sell meat wholesale, please come to the
back of the audience.''

Bruce Sharp, who works as a security guard, told state workers he would be glad
to take a vocational aptitude test. ''Maybe they'll find something I don't know
about,'' he said.

When Mr. Baldwin was laid off by Minnesota Mining, he hoped to get work that
paid the same, $11 an hour. Now his goal is $8. ''By June, I'll have to consider
throwing another $1 off and make it $7,'' he said.

Since last summer, Mr. Tait has sent out 165 resumes, but less than 10 percent
of the companies responded. ''That's a darned good resume and friends who see it
say wow,'' Mr. Tait said. He had it done on light blue paper, so it would stick
out.

''I've often heard it said that personal contact is better than job fairs,'' he
said, ''But I'm afraid of making a pest of myself with friends.''

The announcer said, ''We have an employer here who is interested in someone to
repair survey equipment.''

Henry Miller is supposed to hear in June about selling potato chips. Mr. Sharp
has an interview Wednesday for an admissions job at a technical school. ''It
sounds pretty good for me, unless someone has better qualifications,'' he said.

The announcer said, ''Any veterans here, you want to come up, there's still a
lot of jobs in this room.''

In late afternoon Mr. Baldwin loaded Mr. Norris back into the van. ''You want a
guy who'll get to work if there's five inches of snow - he'll get there,'' said
Mr. Baldwin, pointing to his friend in the wheelchair.

Mr. Norris said the four years before he was laid off, he did not miss a day.
''I only had one significant absence in 13 years,'' he said, ''for a month, to
have my leg amputated.''

The two men had possibilities but nothing definite. One company told Mr. Norris
it was interested but did not have wheelchair facilities. Mr. Baldwin is one of
seven finalists for three jobs at a chemical company.

It will be weeks before state officials know how it went. At a similar job fair
last year, 50 of the 750 veterans got jobs.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 25, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TEST OF WILLS;
CONGRESS IS TAKING EXCEPTION TO REAGAN'S FOREIGN POLICY AGENDA

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1114 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


DURING his first term, President Reagan used his considerable political skills
to have his way generally on foreign policy, and Congress went along with the
dispatch of American troops to Beirut and the sale of advanced radar planes to
Saudi Arabia. But in recent months, Mr. Reagan has had more trouble getting what
he wants from Congress on foreign issues. And last week, the struggle between
the White House and the Congress over control of the nation's foreign policy
intensified as Mr. Reagan's policies in several areas were challenged on Capitol
Hill.

In the face of an almost certain defeat, Mr. Reagan reluctantly modified the
terms of an arms sale to Saudi Arabia; but even after that concession, Senate
opposition remained strong and the final showdown on the issue was postponed.

The House voted decisively in favor of a sweeping revision of the nation's trade
laws, ignoring the President's prediction that the bill could trigger an
international trade war.

In mid-June, Congress will again consider Mr. Reagan's long-stymied request for
$100 million in military aid to the Nicaraguan rebels. Another bill ready for
House action would effectively bar secret shipments of weapons, including
Stinger antiaircraft missiles, to insurgents in Angola.

As these events indicate, Congress is demonstrating a new assertiveness in
foreign affairs, and confronting the Administration on a broad range of issues.
Mr. Reagan remains a highly popular figure, but these clashes reveal some
fundamental disagreements between the legislative and executive branches.

To Administration critics, the renewed willingness of Congress to take on the
White House is a healthy development and marks a return to ''the natural mode of
behavior'' on Capitol Hill, as Representative Gerry E. Studds, a Massachusetts
Democrat, put it. Administration supporters, however, express alarm at the trend
and agree with Representative Dick Cheney of Wyoming, the third-ranking
Republican in the House, who said, ''You can't have foreign policy carried out
by 435 House members and 100 Senators. There are times when the President needs
strong support, and debate has to stop at the water's edge.''

In fact, the proper relationship between Capitol Hill and the White House over
foreign policy has been debated since the earliest days of the Republic. Kenneth
W. Thompson, writing in a book called ''The President, The Congress, and Foreign
Policy,''noted: ''The Founders were ambivalent and uncertain about who should
make foreign policy and their uncertainty is reflected in the Constitution.''

The President was made both chief diplomat and commander of the armed forces.
Congress received the power to ratify treaties, approve ambassadors, declare war
and control finances. The result has been a ''sharing of responsibility,'' Mr.
Thompson wrote, and, at times, that overlap has been ''an invitation to
struggle.''

After World War II, the nation was largely united, and the President enjoyed
wide discretion. But that was shattered by Vietnam, which revived Congressional
aggressiveness and spawned such restrictive measures as the War Powers
Resolution.

Unpopular Policies

One reason for this is politics.

On issues like foreign trade, and aid to the Nicaraguan rebels, he has been
pushing policies that are distinctly unpopular with many voters.

And as Representative Cheney put it, ''in a campaign year, it's tough to get
members to vote for the President's wishes if it puts them at odds with key
constituent groups back home.''

Representative Les Aspin of

Wisconsin, the Democratic chairman of the Armed Services Committees, said, ''I
think we're seeing a little lame-duckism.'' Representative John McCain, the
Republican Senate candidate in Arizona, agreed.

Mr. McCain, a member of the Foreign Affairs Committee, said ''Ronald Reagan is
not going to be at the top of the ticket, and people are striking out on their
own. I don't think anybody wants to be perceived as a Reagan robot.''

Mr. Reagan's political clout has been further eroded by a relatively new White
House staff that receives decidedly negative reviews on Capitol Hill.
Representative Trent Lott, the Republican whip, said the Administration has been
particularly insensitive to the political impact of issues like international
trade, which means lost jobs to thousands of workers.

''I've been telling them for two years about the trade issue - it's coming, it's
coming,'' said the irritated Republican leader. ''Now it's here, and they could
be set up for a veto override if they don't get their act together.''

Senator Dave Durenberger, the Minnesota Republican who heads the Intelligence
Committee, said ''right-wing Senators,'' having rejected the President as a
leader on some foreign issues, have forced Administration policy outside of the
Congressional consensus as in the case of aid for the Angolan rebels.

But the heart of Mr. Reagan's problem is a basic disagreement over policy. Since
the 1984 election, the President and his advisers have been arguing that the
''post-Vietnam syndrome'' in American politics is now dead, that the country is
ready to support a more vigorous use of American power to root out terrorists
and topple left-wing governments around the world. And in certain cases, such as
the air raid against Libya, popular and Congressional opinion have generally
backed the President.

But in other areas, such as the campaign against the Sandinista Government in
Nicaragua, the activism of the Administration has triggered a negative reaction
on Capitol Hill. Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana, the Republican chairman of
the Foreign Relations Committee, said this was normal, adding: ''This
Administration is in a very active mode.'' As the White House proceeds with new
initiatives, Mr. Lugar said, ''you're going to get into many more battles.''

Critics of the Administration, however, argue that the ''post-Vietnam syndrome''
lingers on, and that Congress is reflecting fears about foreign military
adventures that remain seared into the national consciousness. ''I don't think
we've gotten over the post-Vietnam syndrome entirely,'' said Representative
David E. Bonior, a Michigan Democrat and a veteran of the war. ''That experience
was so intrusive into the lives of our generation that it will be with us for
ever and ever.''

If Americans are willing to support swift assaults, such as the Libya and
Grenada raids, they remain deeply suspicious of any open-ended commitment to a
wasting war. And that is why many lawmakers keep pressing the Administration to
explain its long-term goals and strategies in such regions as Central America
and the Middle East.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 25, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICA IN THE MIND OF ISRAEL

BYLINE: By Thomas L. Friedman; Thomas L. Friedman is chief of the Jerusalem
bureau of The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 22, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5265 words


FOR ISRAEL'S FOUND-ing fathers, America was supposed to be a benign distant
giant, and the Jewish state was supposed to become self-sufficient, independent
and so attractive that Jews from all over the world, including the United
States, would flock there. Israel was going to be the center of the world, with
its own original Hebrew culture, and America, in the mind of Israel, was going
to be little more than an afterthought. But now, as a recent hit song in Israel
puts it, ''Everyone is dreaming about America.''

Like most pop lyrics, they are a gross exaggeration, but they reflect the
remarkable transformation that has taken place in the American-Israeli
relationship since 1967. Israel was founded on the radical thesis that the
Diaspora - Jewish communal life outside Israel - was not a viable solution for
Jewish existence, that Jews could not survive in the Diaspora for long either
culturally or physically and hence had to have a homeland of their own. For
Israel's pioneer settlers coming from the ghettos of Eastern Europe, that was
true. But America, with its bounty, pluralism and endless opportunities for Jews
and other minorities, calls into question that thesis. America, in a way, has
become the biggest challenge - some Israelis would even say threat - to Zionism,
and as powerful a magnet for Jews as is Israel. Israel and America have been
quietly competing for years over Jews who leave the Soviet Union, Argentina or
South Africa, and now they are competing for Israelis themselves. As some
Israelis have put it, if Scarsdale exists, who needs Tel Aviv?

''The Zionist vision of history was that Israel would become so attractive a
place to live, and the rest of the world so frightening for Jews, that they
would all want to come live here,'' says Daniel J. Elazar, an Israeli political
scientist. ''What happened, though, was that America became so attractive to the
largest segment of world Jewry - the American Jewish community - that they don't
want to come here, and now some Israelis want to go there. What's worse, America
defies all the rules of the game; it is actually a nice place for Jews to
live.''

To be sure, the great majority of Israelis continue to resist the attractions of
America, both out of a refusal to live as a minority and out of a conviction
that Israel remains the best place to fulfill their identity as members of a
Jewish nation. Nonetheless, for a state based on the notion of ''ingathering''
Jews from all over the world, some recent statistics are troubling. About
170,000 of the 3.5 million Israeli Jews have moved to the United States on a
permanent or semi-permanent basis, most of them in the last 20 years, according
to the official estimates of Israel's Ministry of Immigrant Absorption. The
unofficial estimates are 300,000 and above. This compares with the fact that
only 50,000 American Jews have moved to Israel since the Jewish state was
founded in 1948, and only 25 percent of American Jews have visited Israel even
once, according to the Minister of Immigrant Absorption, Ya'acov Tzur.

In the decade of the 1970's, said Mr. Tzur, 265,000 Jews left the Soviet Union.
Of those, 165,000 went to Israel and 100,000 to the United States and Canada.
The percentage of those going to North America has risen so sharply in recent
years that some Israeli officials have demanded that they be forced to come to
Israel first.

''Let me put it to you bluntly,'' said one senior Is-raeli official, who deals
with Jews abroad. ''There are two Jewish homelands today. There is the Zionist
Jewish homeland in Israel and the emancipated Jewish homeland in America.''

Through another process unanticipated in earlier days, Israel has become so
dependent on the United States for military, economic and political support that
it has become legitimate among some Israelis to wonder aloud whether the end of
the Zionist revolution will not be as the 51st state. Just a few weeks ago,
Israel's Defense Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, was in Washington to sign up Israel as
the third country in the world (after Britain and West Germany) to join the
Strategic Defense Initiative. The move was made without even a Cabinet or
Parliamentary debate. Uncle Sam is no longer a metaphor for Israe-lis, but a
reality. And with that reality of dependence has also come a love-hate
relationship from the Israeli side, which for now is much more love than hate.
Or, as the late Israeli Prime Minister Golda Meir once quipped, ''Israel is the
only country in the world that loves America despite the fact that it gives it
military and economic aid.''

Still, neither Israelis nor Americans could be said to be happy with the
challenges being posed to Israel by America and the dependency relationship that
has developed. Many Israelis recognize the inherent long-term dangers in the
situation and now seem to be discussing it more openly than ever before from all
ends of the political spectrum.

The America-Israel relationship that exists to-day, with the United States
providing almost $4 bil-lion in military and economic assistance last year,
about a third of the Israeli Government's disposable budget, is actually of very
recent vintage. Until 1966, the United States did not supply weapons to Israel,
and economic aid was limited to small loans. Within Israel's ruling Labor Party
there was much talk in the early 1950's about bipolarity and the importance of
balancing between the United States and the Soviet Union, which was still
referred to by many Zionist-Socialists as HaMoledet Hashniya, the second
homeland.

''I may be married to a nice Jewish girl from Brooklyn today,'' remarked an
Israeli friend with roots in the Labor Party, ''but when I am in the shower in
the morning, I still sing all of the Russian Red Army songs I learned in my
youth group in the 50's.''

It was only after Stalin turned openly anti-Semitic and Israel gave open support
for America in the Korean War that the Soviet Union faded as a potential ally.
Israel then began its love affair with Charles de Gaulle's France, which became
the Jewish state's main arms supplier. French culture was all the rage; the
Israeli elite vacationed in Paris, and French singers such as the Compagnons de
la Chanson dominated the airwaves. Elvis was a distant echo. Few Israelis could
afford to travel beyond Europe, and since television was not introduced in
Israel until 1968, popular American culture was less well known. What Israelis
did know of American culture was often consciously rejected out of the feeling
of pioneer moral superiority that prevailed then.

''When I emigrated to Israel in the 1960's,'' said the Israeli author Ze'ev
Chafetz, ''I wouldn't say that people pitied me for being an American, but there
was no great attraction. America was seen as being in eclipse - race riots,
drugs, Vietnam, hippies. Israelis laughed at Coca-Cola and women who shaved
their legs, and weird things like underarm deodorant.''

ISRAEL'S SWEEPING VICTORY IN the Six Day War in 1967 changed all of this. It
injected a new spirit of grandiosity, of manifest destiny, into the country,
creating new needs and new aspirations. It ushered out the pioneer era of
simplicity in Israeli life and ushered in an era of consumerism, stock
speculation, dollar accounts, credit cards and living beyond one's means, an era
that peaked in the 1970's when Israel almost spent itself into bankruptcy.

The material riches offered by America suddenly gained a new appeal for
Israelis. Popular American culture cascaded in through television, movies and
advertisements.

''I saw a Hebrew advertisement the other day for contact lenses,'' remarked Udi
Eiran, an 11th-grader living in Herzliya, near Tel Aviv. ''It said on it,
'American contact lenses,' and there was a big American flag. It really
irritates me when we chase after everything 'American.' What does being
'American' have to do with contact lenses? What's wrong with Israeli contact
lenses? I know the spread of American culture is a worldwide phenomenon. But
Israeli society is not like Japan. Israel set out to consciously create
something different.''

In the old days, when you lived ''American style'' in Israel, it meant you stood
out like a sore thumb. Now you stand out if you don't. Israelis eat hamburgers
at MacDavid, shop at American-style supermarkets, count their wealth in dollars,
not shekels, and are as likely to dress up as Rambo on the Halloween-like Purim
festival as they are Haman or Esther. Americans who emigrated to Israel after
1967, attracted to the simple and fairly primitive ways of Israeli life, now
complain that Israel is turning into precisely what they were trying to escape.
Israel's victory in the Six Day War reshaped not only how Israelis looked at
themselves but also how American Jews looked at Israel. ''It was as though
American Jews had found a long-lost member of their family,'' said the Israeli
philosopher Rabbi David Hartman, director of the Shalom Hartman Institute for
Advanced Judaic Studies. ''The Israeli Jew was not frightened, he was not timid.
He was heroic. Look at how he knocked off three Arab armies at once. American
Jews suddenly started visiting Israel in droves and identifying with it like
never before. It made them feel proud. And so Israel sent America its war
heroes. Yitzhak Rabin, the Chief of Staff during the Six Day War, was sent as
Ambassador to Washington, and then more generals, and then the Israeli kids went
and America wined and dined and spoiled them all.'' During this post-1967
period, the Jewish Agency started sending scores of shlichim, or envoys, to
America to attract American Jews to Israel. While no one in Israel likes to talk
about it, a number of those shlichim ended up staying in America.

''Israelis looked at America like Americans looked at Las Vegas,'' remarked Mr.
Elazar. ''People described it in the same terms they used in ancient Israel to
describe ancient Egypt, Sir Habasar, the fleshpot. It wasn't seen as a serious
place, just a wonderful place.''

Visiting America at least once became a rite of passage for many Israeli youths
between finishing high school or the Army and starting a job.

It was during this post-1967 period that America began to pose a serious
existential challenge to the Zionist revolution. As Israel became a more
''normal'' society and more like America, it lost some of its distinct identity.
And as America - even with continuing pockets of anti-Semitism - became a nicer
place for Jews, ''the terms of trade'' began to change. Some Israelis began
asking themselves: Why put up with an ersatz American life style when you can
have the real thing? Why live in a narrow framework, when the expanses of
America are open for your creative energies?

This questioning was intensified after the 1973 Yom Kippur war, when the
self-image of an invin-cible Israel also began to change as Syria and Egypt
mounted a successful surprise attack. The grandiosity of '67 gave way, to be
replaced eventually by the sobriety and economic retrenchment that has
characterized the post-Lebanon-invasion era.

''I think the Israeli self-image has deteriorated, and this has affected
people's perceptions of America,'' argued the Harvard-trained Israeli economist
Yoram Ben-Porath. ''When I was much younger, Israel was at the takeoff of
enormous achievement, growth, absorption of Jews and turning the deserts green,
with all the macho pioneer spirit that went with it. We had a certain supremacy
complex toward American Jews. There was no doubt that we were in the right place
for Jews. With our maturity, we lost some of these elements. The society became
more normal; it became clear after the 1973 war that the fight for survival was
not a one-shot affair, but a never-ending struggle. It wasn't so patently
obvious that this was the safest or most exciting place for Jews. The sense of
absolute moral superiority began to disappear.'' And so, too, did the
willingness of some Israelis to put up with the extraordinary pressures of
everyday life, from Army service to the increasing inroads of religious
extremism.

TONI RABIN IS AN American Jewish woman in her 20's who just emigrated after
having lived in Israel for several years when she was younger. ''Up until a few
years ago,'' she said, ''whenever I came for a visit Israelis would always say
to me: 'Why are you going back to America? This is your home. What kind of life
do you even have in America?' Now, I find people saying to me: 'Why on earth did
you leave America?' They act like I am some kind of freak.'' It used to be a
stigma to leave Israel. No one ever left for good, only for ''visits,'' or, as
one Israeli teacher remarked, ''My sister went to New York for one year - 15
years ago.'' But that is no longer true. The epithet of the yored, someone who
leaves Israel, has been undergoing a transformation in recent years from a label
of denigration (''the refuse of society,'' Mr. Rabin once called them) to a
neutral technical term.

Twenty years ago, noted Nahum Barnea, editor of the political weekly Koteret
Rasheet, famous Israeli emigrants to America like the businessman Meshulam
Riklis or the film producer Menachem Golan would be a little ashamed to show
their faces in Israel, and if the Israeli press wrote about them it was in the
negative. ''Today, a day rarely goes by without a story about Menachem Golan in
the Israeli newspapers,'' said Mr. Barnea. ''Now he is a role model. The Israeli
who made it in America. He is the ultimate Israeli man. The press no longer
refers to them as yordim but as 'Israeli Americans.' ''

An Israeli acquaintance confides that several of her friends were careful to
give their babies names that would be easily pronounceable and understandable in
English, just in case they should move to America. Mr. Chafetz noted that his
Israeli friends were absolutely baffled by the fact that he was not bringing up
his son to speak both Hebrew and English, but only Hebrew. ''They consider it a
crime on the order of childbeating,'' he remarked.

With so many Israelis now living in America, noted Mr. Tzur, ''we are for the
first time facing the problem of a large expatriate community abroad. There are
something like Israeli Chinatowns in New York and Los Angeles. They have their
own Hebrew newspapers, a television station and radio stations. The figures have
become so large we have to ask ourselves: 'How do we deal with them? Do we
condemn them?' We have decided not to give them any ideological approval, but
also not to ban them. We set up an office to try to get them back.'' JUST AS THE
1967 WAR INITIATED AN ERA OF materialism that hooked individual Israelis on
America, so it also made Israel into a regional superpower, occupying 24,700
square miles of Arab territory. Paradoxically, the more powerful the Israeli
state grew, the more it became dependent on the United States.

De Gaulle's honeymoon with Israel ended with the Six Day War, forcing Israel to
look increasingly to Washington. The United States was cautious at first about
becoming Israel's patron. However, after 1970, when the Russians deepened their
direct involvement with Egypt and backed a Syrian attempt to destabilize Jordan,
the Nixon Administration shucked off its ''even-handed approach'' and began to
view Israel as something of a strategic asset in East-West terms. It was only
then that the floodgates of economic and military aid were opened. After the
1973 Yom Kippur war, when Israel's defense costs soared astronomically, American
aid became a matter of economic and military life or death.

A story is told about a group of Israeli farmers from the Negev who came to
visit the late Israeli Prime Minister Levi Eshkol in his office one day. ''Mr.
Prime Minister,'' the farmers said, ''we have a terrible problem. There has been
a drought.'' A concerned Mr. Eshkol exclaimed, ''A drought! Oh, my God, where?''
The farmers answered, ''Why, in the Negev of course.'' Mr. Eshkol looked
relieved. ''If it's in the Negev, O.K.,'' he said. ''Just as long as there is no
drought in America.''

Indeed, the figures supported Mr. Eshkol. Since 1948, Israel has received more
than $30 billion in grants and loans from the United States.

Undoubtedly, the Jewish vote in America and Israel's role in America's global
defense go a long way toward explaining this extraordinary level of aid. But
they do not tell the whole story. The aid is too out of proportion. It is clear
that Israel also touches something very deep in the American consciousness.

''Israel evokes the pioneer spirit of American democracy,'' remarked Rabbi
Hartman. ''It also touches a deep spiritualism in America and its biblical
roots. The United States may need Saudi Arabia, but Saudi Arabia doesn't touch
America's soul, or its sentimentality about the American dream. I don't view
Israel's dependency on America as something that has gone wrong, or is sick. It
derives from the fact that this nation is mirroring something very deep in
America.''

Some Israelis, however, find Israel's unusual level of economic dependence on
America more worrisome - no matter what its roots. Virtually all American
economic aid to foreign countries is given in the form of ''project''
assistance, whereby the recipient country has to meet stringent criteria about
how every penny is spent, and American officials oversee the dispersal of funds,
with all of the friction that can entail.

Not so with Israel. American economic aid to Israel goes directly into the state
treasury, and the Israeli Cabinet alone decides how to spend it -whether on West
Bank settlements, erecting low-income housing or running a ministry. At the end
of the year, Israel has only to give an accounting of how the money was spent,
and it can and does put on that account sheet virtually anything it wants.

Said one American official who has dealt exten-sively with Israel: ''Of course
there's no friction. All the U.S. does is sign a check and hand it over. But
that is also the weakness of the arrangement. Because it is so easy for Israel
to live under, it tends to be self-perpetuating. It becomes an Amer-ican
subsidization of current policies, which puts off the day when Israel has to
bite the bullet.''

American aid has deeply affected the entire fabric of Israeli economic life. It
has enabled successive Israeli Governments to sustain economic growth and an
ever-increasing public sector, which were badly needed to attract and hold
immigrants, despite the huge defense budgets. But the aid also became a crutch,
and the Israeli Government probably never would have grown to the bulbous size
that it has, with about a third of the work force on the government payroll, if
it had been forced to raise additional taxes rather than turn to America.

The absence of self-sufficiency in the Israeli economy today is also partly
traceable to the fact that everyone in Israel knows there is a lender of last
resort, said the economist Professor Ben-Po-rath. ''The private sector grew
under the protective canopy of the Government, and the Government grew under the
protective canopy of another Government.'' All of this, he added, has brought
Israel a long way from the original Zionist concept of economic self-reliance.

There are more than a few businessmen and economists who feel that Israel would
be better off today with a less generous Uncle Sam. As one of Israel's leading
industrialists, Stef Wertheimer, told the newspaper Davar recently: ''The key is
the American money. If we get rid of it, we will really be free, and I will
throw a big party. Because without that money we will have to work more and
harder. We must tell the Americans: Give us money only as loans to private
industry, also to kibbutzim and agriculture - but directly. Whoever gets the
money is responsible for paying it back.''

Israeli officials concede that there is no question that Israel's economic
dependence on America has meant a loss of political independence. Some Israelis
try to cover up this reality with the kind of cockiness reflected in a T-shirt
now being sold in Jerusalem. It is emblazoned with an Israeli F-16
fighter-bomber and the words: ''America don't worry. Israel is behind you.''
T-shirts aside, notes Amos Eiran, a former director general of the Prime
Minister's office, ''The dependency relationship affects our ability to take a
different line, even when we disagree.''

''One kind of dependency is when you are told what to do,'' explained a senior
Israeli policy maker. ''That rarely happens with the United States. The other
form of dependency is when you act on the basis of anticipated reactions. That
happens all the time. It is now a built-in feature of daily policy making here
that we ask ourselves: 'What will the Americans say if we do this, what will
they say if we do that?'''

By and large, America and Israel do think alike on most issues, and Israelis
almost universally admire America's values and democratic way of life. There is
virtually no anti-Americanism in Israel, even on the left. In fact, the left in
Israel is far more pro-American than the right. The most pro-American Israeli
newspaper is the far left Al-Hamishmar, which often appeals to America to get
more involved in saving the Israeli Government from itself or, more precisely,
from taking extreme steps, such as invading Lebanon, which the left doesn't have
the political strength to prevent.

Traditionally, however, American officials have been reluctant to use their
leverage on Israel, because of the domestic political ramifications it could
have with American Jews and other supporters of Israel and out of a belief,
which some Israelis feel is debatable, that it would be counterproductive.

At times, Israel has taken advantage of this forbearance. The recent case of a
senior Israeli official, Rafael Eitan, who was allegedly running a spy operation
in Washington is one example. So is the fact that Israel has been settling
Ethiopian Jews on the West Bank with American money, despite having promised not
to.

The dependency relationship that now exists between Israel and the United States
has complicated the relationship between Israeli Jews and American Jews.

On the one hand, one finds in Israel a sincere admiration for American Jews,
both for what they have accomplished in America and what they have contributed
to Israel. Project Renewal, for example, a program in which individual American
Jewish communities sponsor urban renewal and education projects in ''sister
cities,'' has had a real impact in improving the quality of life in towns all
across Israel.

But, on the other hand, there is a hint of resentment among Israelis over being
someone else's vicarious symbol of courage. Maybe the best way to describe the
relationship, remarked Ze'ev Chafetz, is to compare it to that between ''players
and fans.''

''They think we are all heroes,'' said Mr. Chafetz, ''and like good fans they
won't tolerate a negative word about us. They go to the off-season banquets and
hear the coaches and quarterbacks - the generals and politicians - tell them
what it is like down on the field. They follow us every morning in the
newspapers. They even send their kids to the little leagues here - the summer
camps. But, ultimately, they see us as a bunch of dumb jocks. Like all players,
we enjoy the adoration, but when it's you getting your head bashed in every day
on the field, when it's your son going off to Lebanon, then it's hard not to
look on the fan with a little bit of contempt.''

This resentment, however, does not find official expression. It is no secret to
Israeli officials that Washington gives the extraordinary amounts of aid it does
both because Israel is a strategic and ideological ally and because of the
efforts of the American Jewish community to preserve the Jewish state; not only
American Jews' lobbying of Congress, but also their lobbying of the American
public at large, the way in which they keep Israel on the American agenda and
reiterate its affinity with American values. ''Pull the American Jews out of the
relationship,'' remarked Zvi Rafiah, a former congressional liaison of Israel's
Embassy in Washington, ''and the whole thing will start to shake.''

In other words, Israel's future security depends, in part, on a vibrant American
Jewish community that does not move to Israel. Therein lies Israel's dilemma: It
has to help strengthen and perpetuate the American Jewish community for its own
security, but in doing so, it encourages a viable alternative to Zionism. Worse,
Israelis know that in many ways American Jewry came of age in terms of fund
raising, institutional life, pride and self-confidence through a collective
identification with Israel.

No wonder Israelis are slightly ambivalent toward American Jewry: They have
nurtured and given vitality to a community with which they are now in
competition and which undermines their own centrality.

To avoid confronting this situation head on, Israeli and American Jewish leaders
play out something of a charade. When American Jewish leaders come to Israel for
a visit they are constantly asked to intone that they are committed to the
''centrality of Israel,'' and they might even drop in a line about how their
''grandchildren will come on aliyah,'' or immigration, but not themselves. It is
not surprising that Israelis often quip that an ''American Zionist is someone
who tells someone else to go to Israel.''

Still, the relatively small numbers of American Jews who have settled here have
not been without influence, observed Charles Liebman, an expert on
Israel-Diaspora relations at Bar-Ilan University. In the past, American Jewish
immigrants, and the links between America and Israel, have helped buttress
trends toward liberalism in Israel and provide a counterweight to the pressures
to become a more fanatical and closed society. Israel's feminist, civil-rights
and peace movements are all top-heavy with immigrants from America.

The problem, some Israelis contend, is that even the small numbers of American
and European immigrants imbued with liberal Western values have stopped coming,
and without their voting weight the more right-wing fundamentalist elements in
the society are gaining strength. The few American immigrants coming to Israel
today are largely ultra-Orthodox messianic Jews or right-wing extremists, such
as Rabbi Meir Kahane. ''The Americans used to send us at least a few of their
best and brightest,'' remarked Mr. Barnea, the journalist. ''That is no longer
the case.''

At the same time, some American Jews are playing a less obvious, but, to some, a
possibly more ominous, role in Israel. American Jews, fearing growing
assimilation among their own youth, frequently give financial support to
ultra-Orthodox religious schools or movements in Israel, believing that this
will somehow strengthen Judaism, or ''save Jewish souls'' from assimilation.

While these Israeli religious parties and yeshivas present themselves abroad as
people saving Jews from assimilation, within Israel they have become political
activists with their own agendas. Many of these institutions are essentially
antidemocratic, antipluralistic and non-Zionist, opposing everything from a bill
outlawing racism to daylight saving time to contacts between Jews and Arabs or
between religious Jews and secular Jews. Through their contributions, some
American Jews may be unwittingly helping to create an Israeli society in which
they themselves -not to mention many Israelis - could never live.

This is only one reason why in the coming years Israel could become religiously,
and maybe politically, unrecognizable to many American Jews. The Orthodox stream
of Judaism, which is the only stream recognized in Israel, has been trying for
several years to pass a law in the Knesset, the ''who is a Jew'' amend-ment,
which would in effect undercut the legitimacy of Reform or Conservative rabbis
by stipulating that anyone converted to Judaism by them would not be considered
Jewish, and would be ineligible for automatic Israeli citizenship. The vast
majority of affiliated American Jews are associated with either the Reform or
Conservative movements.

''There is a danger of a real religious schism,'' said Rabbi Richard G. Hirsch,
who represents the Reform movement in Israel. ''We are creating two Judaisms,
one for Israel and one for America and the rest of the world. If the 'who is a
Jew' amendment passes, there is no question that a lot of American Jews are
going to be turned off to Israel.'' The Rabbinical Assembly of Conservative
rabbis in America has already passed a resolution banning from speaking in its
synagogues any Knesset member who voted in favor of the ''who is a Jew''
amendment. The ban includes representatives of religious parties as well as most
members of the Likud Party.

There is astonishingly little awareness on a popular level in Israel of just how
serious the situation might become. The majority of Israelis are nonobservant
Jews who express their Judaism through living in a Jewish state, not by praying.
But when Israelis do think of religion, they think of the Orthodox Jews who have
monopolized religious life in their country. American-style Reform and
Conservative Judaism are totally alien to them.

Before the who-is-a-Jew amendment came to a vote last year (it was narrowly
defeated), a delegation of American Reform and Conservative rabbis went to lobby
(vainly) Yitzhak Shamir, Israel's Foreign Minister, against voting in its favor.
Mr. Shamir began the meeting by asking the delegation, ''Is it true that in
America you can get a conversion to Judaism over the telephone?''

In a way, the 71-year-old Mr. Shamir's question was highly revealing of his
generation's belief that the Diaspora does not really count and that Jewish life
outside Israel is not authentic. After all, for the founding fathers of Israel,
so many of whom came out of the ghettos of Eastern Europe, it is difficult to
accept that American pluralism and tolerance will prove real or lasting.

But for many younger Israelis, who are attracted to America or moving to
America, this attitude no longer holds true. The emigration statistics make that
quite clear. It is for them in particular that America now poses a serious
ideological challenge. Zionism essentially set out to provide a safe haven for
the Jews and at the same time to widen the range of experiences and occupations
available to them - to make them ''normal,'' so to speak, and a nation like all
others. But, as some Israelis ask, what is the meaning of this ideal when there
is an America over the horizon where a Jew can be as safe, if not safer, and as
normal, if not more normal - with almost the full range of human opportunities
open to them.

''When the early Zionists spoke of life in the Diaspora,'' argued Rabbi Hartman,
''they never had America in mind, with such a vibrant Jewish community and such
a vibrant American community. What this means is that Israel can't anymore
simply say to American Jews, 'Come because you are either going to assimilate or
suffer a pogrom.' That isn't sufficient, especially when Israel's own future
depends in a way on there being a vital American Jewish community. No, the
challenge of America to Israel is to revitalize itself, to build a society that
will be compelling, meaningful and attractive and make living here as a Jew
significant and exciting. It is not enough anymore for Israel to proclaim its
'centrality.' With America out there, it is going to have to prove it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of pro-Israel demonstration in New York (Ricki Rosen/SIPA-Special
Features); Photo of Israeli cab driver in New York (page 24); Photo of softball
game in Tel Aviv (Alon Reininger/Contact) (page 25); Photo of Israeli Navy
hydrofoil (Sven Nackstrand/Gamma-Liaison) (page 26); Photo Caspar Weinberger and
Israeli Defense Min. Yitzhak Rabin (Dennis Brack/Black Star) (page 27); Photo of
Rabbi

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 25, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The Victorious Personality

SECTION: Section 6; Page 78, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 157 words


I came to the United States in 1975, at the age of 14, as a political refugee
from South Vietnam. I quickly learned to speak English and graduated from high
school in three years, receiving awards for outstanding senior in math and
sciences. I enrolled in Syracuse University and received a B.S. in 1982 and have
recently been accepted at medical school.

Of necessity, I have been supporting myself financially since the age of 16 (I
can recall working three part-time jobs simultaneously at college and sleeping
stealthily in one academic building only to walk across the main quad at 5
o'clock in the morning to resume my sleep in the school's chapel, for that was
the time when security personnel would unlock the doors to that building.)
Although I was independent in many respects, I constantly sought out polestars
for guidance.

When I read Gail Sheehy's article, I felt as if she were describing my own life.
SEAN CAO Buffalo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 25, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MOHM PAT IN AMERICA

BYLINE: By Eden Ross Lipson: Eden Ross Lipson is an editor of The Book Review.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 16, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 964 words


SPIRIT OF SURVIVAL By Gail Sheehy. Illustrated. 400 pp. New York: William Morrow
& Company. $17.95. IN her wildly successful book, ''Passages,'' Gail Sheehy, a
New York journalist, seemed to capture a fragment of the self-interested,
self-absorbed 1970's and make stages of personal growth understandable to
readers who found their lives in flux. Her new book, ''Spirit of Survival,'' is
a far less structured and very personal account of lives in crisis that may even
baffle Miss Sheehy's most faithful admirers.

The author says she intends a meditation on ''an examined life,'' principally
meaning the horribly eventful experiences of her adopted Cambodian daughter,
Mohm Pat. The book is a pastiche of recent histories -a report on political
events in Cambodia, a first-person narrative by the child who survived the Khmer
Rouge and who at age 12 became the author's daughter, as well as accounts of
Miss Sheehy's own crises and, to a lesser but intrusive degree, those of her
natural daughter, a college student, and Clay Felker, a New York editor, now her
husband. There is also some theoretical glue about the kinds of personalities
that survive against the odds. Unfortunately, the journalistic design that was
meant to yield counterpoint often yields cacophony.

Miss Sheehy met Mohm in the Sakeo II refugee camp in Thailand in December 1981,
when the journalist interrupted a holiday in Bangkok to visit the refugees. Mohm
arrived in New York to live with Miss Sheehy in September of the following year,
a few weeks after her daughter, Maura, left for college. Miss Sheehy writes with
artless candor about the confusion of her personal life at the time - her
relationship with her departing daughter and with Mr. Felker, her longtime
companion. There is also awkward pillow talk about Mr. Felker and the author
having a child together. But the complex issues involved in adoption - in this
case, cross-cultural and interracial single-parent adoption of an older child -
are simply not addressed.

Miss Sheehy wants the reader to concentrate on Mohm, on the story of how the
enchanting daughter of a bourgeois military officer living in a suburb of Phnom
Penh fled into the countryside with her family in 1975, at the beginning of the
''Pol Pot Days'' - the four-year period in which fully a quarter of the
Cambodian population was slaughtered. Her parents and grandmother were killed,
her older brother took their mortally ill little brother and sister to a
hospital where they died. The children were then separated. Mohm endured,
reaching the refugee camp inside the Thai border in December 1979; there,
against the odds, she developed fastidious personal habits, grew healthier and
learned to read.

These pages, filled with memorable detail, and others describing her life in New
York - finding a school, going to summer camp - are written in broken English.
They are based on tape-recorded domestic conversations as well as formal
interviews Miss Sheehy had with Mohm. Miss Sheehy intends the prose to be
''faithful to [Mohm's] groping English,'' which she learned very quickly after
her arrival. While Mohm may have ''an innate storytelling ability,'' it is a
disservice to that still immature ability - the teller is even now only a
16-year-old schoolgirl - to impose handicaps on the reader. Perhaps it is also
the case that no mother, but only Mohm Pat herself, as an adult, can truly tell
the story well.

It is understandable that one can fall in love with a beautiful, wide-eyed child
glimpsed briefly in a refugee camp and act on the impulse to save and nurture.
But for all the love offered to this child and the intimacies shared with the
reader, the absence of reasoned introspection in Miss Sheehy's account of her
motives is odd. Surely the author of ''Passages'' and ''Pathfinders,'' with her
ability to research and mine the social sciences, wanted to know something about
the broader experience of adoption. There is substantial literature. The
experiences of refugee children brought to the United States before and since
World War II from Eastern Europe, Japan, Korea, Vietnam and more recently
Central America are all relevant. THE answered and unanswerable questions of
nature versus nurture, which every adoptive family addresses daily, are not
obviated by the sheer power of children to survive, as she suggests. Blinded by
enthusiasm, she leaps over questions of difference between parent and child, of
otherness, of racial prejudice in the United States. On Mohm's fourth day in
America Miss Sheehy took her to Miami, where the author was to make a speech:
''This child - who made friends with monkeys so she could share their fruit,
whose only eating implement for the past six years had been a tin spoon - now
stood balancing a plate of hors d'oeuvres with one hand and spearing Swedish
meatballs with the other. She had figured out how to handle herself at a
cocktail party, because she had to.''

In adopting Mohm and the cause of the Cambodian people, Miss Sheehy resolved
some of her midlife turmoil. Perhaps the clearest explanation she offers is a
comment about her mother, who ''not a few times had . . . pulled me out of my
anomie'' and now approves of her dramatic action. Her mother reshaped her own
life and career after a divorce in her 40's with great success. Miss Sheehy's
comment speaks to life cycles, to models and to the impact of behavior within
the family, to the ways the deeds of parents are absorbed and sometimes
unconsciously imitated by children at similar times in their own lives. ''My
mother,'' she writes, ''had demonstrated that the best way to defeat the numbing
ambivalence of middle age is to surprise yourself - by pulling off some
cartwheel of thought or action never imagined at a younger age.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gail Sheehy and her adopted daughter (Jill Krementz)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 25, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MINNESOTA TRANSCENDENTALIST

BYLINE: By Joyce Peseroff: Joyce Peseroff, editor of ''Robert Bly: When Sleepers
Awake,'' is currently editing ''The Ploughshares Poetry Anthology.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 2, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1438 words


SELECTED POEMS By Robert Bly. 213 pp. New York: Harper & Row. Cloth, $18.95.
Paper, $8.95.

I FIRST heard Robert Bly read his poems in the mid-1970's, sitting in the drab,
fluorescent-lighted cafeteria of a community college. Most of his audience of
students had been brought by their teachers, and stoically waited to have
culture imposed upon them. Within the first 30 minutes of a two-hour reading Mr.
Bly had every listener leaning forward, enthralled by his stage presence and
props as well as by the tenderness of ''The Dead Seal,'' and by the terror of
''Counting Small-Boned Bodies,'' which he recited from under an enormous straw
mask in a high-pitched, witchy voice. Poetry was no embroidery, it was the fiber
of life; a hundred people walked away convinced.

Mr. Bly has never believed that poetry makes nothing happen. For almost 30 years
he has been a busy and energetic advocate for certain spiritual, political and
literary values; a publisher, translator and shaman. A man who praises privacy
and solitude, he writes poems that rush toward and embrace the world, both the
outer world, acutely observed in its glory and decay, and the inner world, to
him the source of the soul's ecstasy and grief. Reconciling these two worlds has
always been his mission as he writes poems meant, in words he quotes from the
French prose poet Francis Ponge, to ''nourish the spirit of man by giving him
the cosmos to suckle.'' In ''Selected Poems,'' his new collection, he has shaped
from both worlds his record of the body's journey and the soul's quest. This is
not just an anthology of Mr. Bly's best work; its 11 new essays and its
particular method of organization require a fresh look at the poet's
achievement.

The book is arranged in nine sections, each introduced by a short essay. Two
longer essays, ''Whitman's Line as a Public Form'' and ''The Prose Poem as an
Evolving Form,'' conclude the book. Although he begins with early poems
previously uncollected and ends with excerpts from his most recent volume, Mr.
Bly avoids strict chronology. Rather, each section is designed to illustrate a
step in the evolution of his poetics.

The third section, for example, includes poems from ''Silence in the Snowy
Fields'' (1962), written in a rhapsodic mode, as well as others written in the
same mode (''adapted from Waley's translations of Chinese poems, Frank
O'Connor's translations of Celtic poems, and my own translations of Machado, but
a certain gaiety carries them along. The line breaks usually come where the
thought ends, and bring a moment of silence'') but published only 17 years later
in ''This Tree Will Be Here for a Thousand Years.'' Part Five - prose poems from
''The Morning Glory'' (1975) and some from ''The Man in the Black Coat Turns''
(1981) - precedes (heavily revised) selections from ''Sleepers Joining Hands''
(1973) in Part Six. This arrangement allows the poet to contrast prose poems,
like ''The Starfish'' and ''A Bouquet of Ten Roses,'' that ''carry us to the new
place on their minute detail, on what they give us to see,'' with those written
''to turn away from seeing. . . . While I was still writing the Morning Glory
poems, I felt a longing to compose a radical or root poem that would speak to
what has its back turned to me.'' I sent my brother away. I saw him turn and
leave. It was a schoolyard. I gave him to the dark people passing. He learned to
sleep alone on the high buttes. That is from a poem originally titled ''The
Shadow Goes Away,'' the long poem in ''Sleepers Joining Hands'' that immediately
follows the poet's 20-page essay, ''I Came Out of the Mother Naked.'' I regret
alterations here to this poem and to other long poems. Mr. Bly omits his homage
to the Great Mother, preferring to shift emphasis from the female anima to male
images ''suggesting Joseph's betrayal of his brother.''

The volume becomes a quest to find a voice to fit the poet and a prosody to fit
the poem. After abandoning the iambic ''lute of three loudnesses'' described in
Part One (''I loved the music so much I could have written such lines for the
rest of my life, but something in them didn't fit me'') and, I surmise, Harvard
University, the poet moved to New York. He sank, through solitude, ''past . . .
stones, past Eros, past family affections.'' From this period of estrangement
came poems of both despair and healing that Mr. Bly would publish 14 years later
in ''The Light Around the Body.'' It is only after this period that the poet,
who had married and returned to his native Minnesota, composed the poems
published in his first book. Sympathy between the soul and the countryside is
the subject of ''Silence in the Snowy Fields'': Oh, on an early morning I think
I shall live forever! I am wrapped in my joyful flesh, As the grass is wrapped
in its clouds of green. I know of no contemporary poet, except perhaps Allen
Ginsberg in his exuberant poems about sex, who is so unafraid to write about
joy.

One of the pleasures of reading ''Selected Poems'' is to discover themes,
language and imagery that will recur, transformed, throughout the poet's body of
work like DNA passed from the acorn to the oak. The poems in Part One may not
sound much like Robert Bly, but titles like ''Dawn in Threshing Time'' and
''from Four Seasons in the American Woods'' indicate subjects the poet would
write about again and again. ''Where We Must Look for Help'' presages the ''deep
image'' poems of psychic connections, mythic comparisons and unexpected
junctures: The dove returns; it found no resting place; It was in flight all
night above the shaken seas. Beneath ark eaves The dove shall magnify the
tiger's bed.

More surprising is ''Schoolcraft's Diary Written on the Missouri: 1830,'' a
three-page dramatic monologue poem including a good deal of narrative. The
speaker observes the conflict between ''busy whites'' with ''steel traps
hanging, swung from saddle thongs'' and the Sioux, ''as still as Hudson's
blankets winding them.'' He joins a party of men armed to confront a mysterious
white apparition stalking the camp: So armed in case of Sioux, to our surprise
We found a white and wounded Northern Bear Shot in that day about the snout and
head. As well as demonstrating the poet's early and abiding interest in American
history, this long poem marks the beginning of his lifelong reliance on
narrative.

Throughout his later work he would adapt narrative techniques to the lyric, just
as he would appropriate the rhythms of sentences to replace a prosody based on
counting syllables: The boy gets out of high school and reads no more books; the
son stops calling home. The mother puts down her rolling pin and makes no more
bread. And the wife looks at her husband one night at a party and loves him no
more.

Powerful, succinct, poignant, such stories make up another sort of history. The
personal connects us to the world's master plot. In fact, Mr. Bly has been able
to write successful poems about public events because, for him, the political is
personal. His response to the Vietnam War was rooted in grief, not grievance,
and he never excluded himself from the darker manifestations of our national
consciousness: We have carried around this cup of darkness. We hesitate to
anoint ourselves. Now we pour it over our heads. BUT Mr. Bly is a public poet
even in poems without overt political content. Although in Part Four he
introduces ''The Teeth Mother Naked at Last'' with a description of the long,
cadenced line inspired by the Bible, Christopher Smart, William Blake and Walt
Whitman - a line ''that embodies power in a direct way . . . that throws or
catapults itself into the outer world'' - even his most intimate and meditative
poems, with their frequent use of the pronoun ''we,'' are designed to instruct
and exhort. These poems function like stained-glass windows in a cathedral;
their images direct us to wisdom and salvation. Mr. Bly's impulse to teach (some
would say preach) unites him to Emerson on his platform, Bronson Alcott in his
lyceum and Thoreau (whose nature writings Mr. Bly likens to prose poems) awake
in Concord jail. He is, in a sense, the most recent in a line of great American
transcendentalist writers.

''Selected Poems'' begins with images of ''this smoking body plough[ing] toward
death'' and ends with a series of love poems, including the sexy ''At the Time
of Peony Blossoming'': When I come near the red peony flower I tremble as water
does near thunder, as the well does when the plates of earth move, or the tree
when fifty birds leave at once. It is a mellow ending to a good journey, one
that is not over yet.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Robert Bly (NYT/Keith Meyers)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 25, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

APOLOGIES TO THE PRIMATES

BYLINE: By Ursula K. Le Guin: Ursula K. Le Guin's most recent book is ''Always
Coming Home.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2239 words


SILENT PARTNERS The Legacy of the Ape Language Experiments. By Eugene Linden.
247 pp. New York: Times Books. $17.95. ONLY in the peaceable kingdoms of art and
Eden are the relationships of humans and animals innocent and harmonious; here
and now they are complex, uneasy, often cruel and always profound. City
dwellers, seeing only people plus an occasional Peke or pigeon, can pretend that
nothing on earth matters but us; but if we want to eat or breathe, our
dependence on nonhuman life is absolute and immediate, although mostly
unexamined. When we use animals, as work partners, for food, or in laboratories,
the ethics of the relationship become both urgent and obscure. In the matter of
the use of animals in laboratory experiment, some extremists confuse use with
misuse and demand a total ban, while others justify means by ends and demand
that atrocities be condoned. The subject is what might be called a hairy one -
and in ''Silent Partners'' Eugene Linden has picked a particularly tangled but
fascinating aspect of it to explore in his third book about the apes used in
language experiments. His earlier books are ''Apes, Men and Language'' and ''The
Education of Koko.''

In the 1970's, when ecology was considered something more than an obstacle to
quick profits, experiments on the language capacities of animals, as Mr. Linden
points out, were an apt expression of the generous and risk-taking temper of the
times. They were attempts to cross boundaries, and they were greeted with
excitement in part because they were conducted, not as manipulations of a
''subject'' by an ''objective'' experimenter, but as partnerships. Language is
not one-way communication, but essentially exchange, and to carry on the
experiments individuals of two different species had to work together, to
collaborate. Indeed, the teaching of language and the learning of it may go
farther than collaboration and require collusion: ''Ordinary discourse was
characterized on our part by shameless cuing, outright prompting, and dubious
interpretations of Gillian's gnomic, if not unintelligible, utterances. In fact
. . . Gillian began to demonstrate most of the behaviors critics have cited as
evidence that apes cannot learn language: she interrupted, she repeated phrases
incessantly, she responded inappropriately, and she jumbled her word order.''

Gillian wasn't a chimpanzee, but Mr. Linden's 18-month-old daughter. The point
Mr. Linden is making is that normal human language acquisition is not a cool,
methodical, detached affair, but an intensely felt one, involved essentially
with relationship. Chimpanzees and gorillas being sensitive creatures with
notoriously strong emotional responses and attachments, it seems hardly
surprising that ''the interesting, if maddeningly inconclusive, results with
regard to more complex uses of language came from experiments in which the ape
had a relationship with the experimenter - experiments in which the use of the
language was a natural part of the animal's day.''

Experiments and criticisms based on the assumption that an animal is a kind of
machine tried to eliminate emotional relationship and emotional reward from the
attempt to find out if the ape brain could be programmed for language.
Experiments such as one that rewarded a chimpanzee with food when the animal
manipulated a computer correctly have no more to do with language capacity than
any trained-animal circus act. But the temptation to use the stimulus-response
model is strong, since the only model we have for language use is the human one.
That is a very dangerous model, for how is the experimenter to avoid
anthropomorphizing, carrying the analogy too far? Such questions mine the whole
terrain, and make for exciting travel in it. Mr. Linden knows the minefield
well, and guides us through it with intelligence and unfailing good humor. Such
equanimity is an achievement since, as the passage just quoted continues, ''It
was from such experiments that the most extravagant claims for ape language use
came - experiments with the fewest controls and the most passionately committed
experimenters. Thus we had a situation bred perfectly for the most vituperative
type of debate.''

And we got it. In his reporting of the vituperation, the increasing
defensiveness of experimenters and the bad faith of some critics, the
sensationalism and sentimentalism of much media coverage, Mr. Linden's candor
and fair-mindedness contrast wonderfully with the prejudice and paranoia he
describes. He does not pretend, however, to stand above the battle; his concern
is ethical and urgent. For, after all the claims and counterclaims, now that we
no longer see photographs of long, thumbless, inhuman hands signing ''friend''
in the language of the deaf, or read dismissive pronouncements from the lofty
terraces of academic theory, now in the mid-1980's, what has become of the
experimenters and their partners - Washoe, Lucy, Nim Chimpsky, Ally, Koko?

Mr. Linden's answers to that question are all to some degree painful and
extremely interesting, if only as tragicomic drama. Personality, both human and
ape, is paramount from the first experiments to the last. ''Silent Partners'' is
a great display of science as snake pit, and those who liked ''The Double
Helix'' can get the same evil glee from it. But the cost of these experiments
has been more than intellectual: ''It may be that the language-using chimps are
suffering the consequences of having shown themselves before the world was ready
to see them, and the scientists who trained them, the disgrace of having a good
idea before the world was ready for it.'' SERIOUS investigation of animal
linguistic capacity has become almost impossible in the present climate; funding
for most such investigations was cut off years ago. But the animal participants
in the experiments were not only emotionally responsive, highly intelligent and
sensitive, but also temperamental, nondomesticable and formidable; they were
neither pet nor wild; they were rare, extremely valuable for medical
experimentation and expensive. So when the experiments were closed down, what
became of them?

In some cases the trainer has kept a connection with the animal at the cost of
career and even of normal human relationships. Janis Carter, who worked in
language experiments with the chimpanzee Lucy (raised as a ''baby'' by a couple
who gave her to the training center), took her to an island in an African river,
where the woman must live in a cage while two groups of chimpanzees roam free.
Trying to free Lucy of her human dependence, Miss Carter will not use sign
language with her. Washoe and her trainer are keeping a low profile in the
Pacific Northwest.

Koko, the one gorilla involved in the first generation of language experiments,
along with a younger gorilla, Michael, is still being zealously and jealously
guarded by her trainer and interlocutor, Penny Patterson. The experiment is
going on, but its results have been so selectively released that even the most
sympathetic scientists have trouble defending Miss Patterson's work. Without
access to the evidence it is easy to make accusations, but impossible to
disprove them. This is an intellectual loss that may yet be made good; and at
least, Koko and Michael are as well off as they ever were. But Ally has
vanished, nameless, into a maze of laboratories; Nim is in a kind of protective
solitary confinement, and various lesser-known language-trained chimps are in
the care of a tough-minded lab man, James Mahoney of the Laboratory for
Experimental Medicine and Surgery in Primates (Lemsip) in Sterling Forest, N.Y.,
who says, ''Once you know that money is the determining factor, you know what is
going to happen.'' SO these days the National Centers for Disease Control in
Atlanta can announce, without excuse or comment, that chimpanzees have been
''successfully infected'' with AIDS. From the point of view of these researchers
the success is complete. Older laboratory animals, having been subjected to
previous experiments (even if the experiments were intellectual, not medical),
are less valuable and hence appropriate for use in ''terminal studies.'' Mr.
Mahoney, who asks for a kind of retirement colony for the older animals, is in a
minority; most medical experimenters find ''destruction'' easier and cheaper
(indeed, one is tempted to think they save their imagination for thinking up
euphemisms). Mr. Linden's discussion of such difficult issues is exemplary. Only
a prejudiced mind will accuse his book of bias or naivete. But probably some
such accusations will be made - for some members of the scientific establishment
react violently toward even discussion of the possibility that language is used
by animals.

That language - genuine language including syntactics, jokes, lies and
disinterested or esthetic observation - may prove to be a skill accessible in
some degree to several species is an idea so distasteful to some behaviorists
and linguists that they attack not only the results of experiments but the
investigation of the subject. Academic territorialism plays a part in this
tabooing, but the basis of it seems to be a need to believe in the
unquestionability of human uniqueness, human supremacy. Critics of this kind of
''speciesism'' suggest that it is about as useful to science as a need to
believe that the sun goes around the earth. (Mr. Linden may be unwise to call it
''humanism'' as he does in his last paragraph, for that word has become the
property of religious fundamentalists, who, since they assert the God-ordained
superiority of man over beast, would in this usage be humanists.) The attitude
of the human supremacist is expressed in a vocabulary very close to that of the
male supremacist, and both positions probably rise from a terror of losing
control of ''nature,'' defined as an object of male exploitation. That the
animal might exist independently, as a subject capable of cognition, emotion and
pain, - this perception so threatens some Alpha Males of our species that at any
hint of it they go into full aggression display, baring their canines, beating
their chests and ignoring the evidence. Such displays are undeniably impressive,
if unedifying. MR. LINDEN describes some of the apes formerly involved in
language experiments and now at Lemsip: ''Taped to the front of their cages . .
. were depictions of a number of Ameslan signs and their meanings. . . . 'Oh,
they sign all the time,' [Mr. Mahoney] said. 'That's why we put up the posters.
The technicians kept seeing the chimps make these gestures, and they wanted to
be able to respond.' '' One is left with the unforgettable images of an animal
inside a cage, saying, ''Drink! Food! Hurry!'' to a man outside the cage who
doesn't know the language, and of a woman inside a cage refusing to talk to an
animal outside the cage in the only language that animal knows. Such grotesque
miseries bespeak a sickness of our times. Kind, quiet and fair, Mr. Linden's
book is not only a diagnosis of the cruelty and confusion it describes, but also
an antidote. It is pleasant to hope that its success might be a sign of
returning health.

LIKE 'RELATIVES IN A FOREIGN LAND'

''I had an intellectual interest in the language studies, but I didn't really
care about the apes until I met them,'' admits Eugene Linden, a 39-year-old New
Yorker. ''Then I saw how obviously aware and bright they are. It's like coming
across relatives in a foreign land: when you meet a chimp you immediately see
the differences from humans, but you also recognize the similarities.''

In 1971 Mr. Linden, recently graduated from Yale University and embarking on his
career as a freelance writer on social issues, first heard about efforts to
teach apes to talk. He knew that language had been seen as the great divide
between humans and other animals, so, he recalled in an interview, ''It was
compelling to think that these studies might show continuity instead of
discontinuity.'' Before he had the means to pursue the subject, he went to
Vietnam to write an article about ''fragging,'' the killing of officers by
American soldiers. When it appeared it caught the eye of publishers who asked if
he was interested in writing a book, and, bolstered by a contract, he delved
into the ape studies.

He wrote two books on ape language and became attached to many of the animals
and researchers. Then, in the late 1970's, the scientific value of the
experiments was bitterly contested and some funding was stopped. Mr. Linden,
like many of the researchers, had some soul-searching to do. ''Silent
Partners,'' his third book on the subject, ''has more of me in it,'' than the
earlier ones, Mr. Linden said. ''It allowed me to say what I think about what
has happened with the experiments and to the animals.'' Writing the book was
painful; it required ''re-examining things I'd said in earlier books'' and
''dealing with people who'd been my friends in a way they might not like.''

Mr. Linden has also written on foreign aid and consumer societies, and has just
finished, as collaborating author, the personal story of An Wang, the
Chinese-born scientist and entrepreneur who in the United States created the
vast computer empire of Wang Laboratories. What next? ''When I feel I've come
across something that will open up interesting areas of speculation, I'll do
it,'' he replied. - Erik Eckholm

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Roger Fouts (Magnum/Paul Fusco)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 25, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONNECTICUT GUIDE

BYLINE: By Eleanor Charles

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 20, Column 4; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1026 words


OVERNIGHT RIVER RACE - There may still be time to enter the 14th annual Sunfish
Connecticut River Classic Race-Cruise beginning at 8:30 A.M. Saturday in
Riverside Park in Hartford, and ending mid-afternoon June 1 at the Pettitaug
Yacht Club in Essex. Only 100 of the sailboats are permitted, and the entry fee
is $75.

''Last year the wind was great,'' said Marlan Henry Golden, race coordinator,
''the year before we were rained out. If there is no wind, it can take until
dark Sunday to get down the river. When people get really fed up waiting for a
breeze, we tow them in on lines that they must have on board. We don't let them
straggle too far behind.'' A committee boat and several powered guide boats will
keep close watch on the proceedings.

Racers camp out overnight in Hurd State Park in East Haddam, where a barbecue
dinner and a breakfast are to be prepared for them by the race staff. ''One year
it rained so hard that the park was under 3 feet of water,'' said Mr. Golden.
''We had to cancel.''

Quite a bit of equipment must be lashed to the Sunfish - tents, sleeping bag,
food, wool sweaters, foul weather gear, changes of clothing in the event of an
unscheduled dunking and the all-important towline. A festive dinner at the yacht
club and honors for the winners will top off the race for the intrepid sailors
on June 1.

''People come from as far south as Florida and as far west as Ohio,'' Mr. Golden
said. ''They have to be members of the Sunfish class and have a sail number to
race.'' Membership costs $30 a year. For more information or to register, call
Mr. Golden at 887-6969.

VINTAGE PLANES

The fourth Open Cockpit Weekend is to be held at the Bradley Air Museum at
Bradley International Airport in Windsor Locks from 10 A.M to 4 P.M. Saturday
and June 1. More than 3,000 people are expected to clamber into aircraft dating
from World War II to the present to get the feel of the controls and a glimpse
of what it is like to pilot a huge plane.

''We prefer that people wear rubber-soled shoes to climb around,''said Michael
Speciale, executive director of the museum. ''There are two volunteers on each
plane to show them how the controls work, how the aircraft functions and to
explain the history of the plane. Visitors will be able to move the rudder
pedals, ailerons and stick in the five-minute period allotted to each individual
in each plane they enter.''

Among the 16 aircraft are fighters and bombers from World War II including a
United States Navy Corsair, a B-29 and a P-47 Thunderbolt. A Huey helicopter
used for rescue work in Vietnam, a B-47 post-World War II bomber and a 1960
F-100 Supersaver jet are among other military planes. Commercial planes include
a 1960's United Airlines Caravelle.

A fully operational Link Trainer will be demonstrated. Every pilot in World War
II had to serve time in a Link, which allowed them to learn to cope with
simulated flight and instrument readings without leaving the ground.

The public may enter one of two additional flight simulators, which are mockups
of cockpits much like amusement park automobile simulators, with controls and a
screen showing how the operator is handling the plane. ''You get a basic flying
lesson,'' said Mr. Speciale.

The Connecticut National Guard and the Governor's Vacation Travel Council will
also have weekend exhibits, and hot dogs, hamburgers and soft drinks will be
sold. Admission is $4.50, children from ages 6 to 11 pay $2 and children under 6
enter free. To get there, follow the Bradley International Airport and Museum
signs on I-91 north of Hartford. The phone number is 623-3305.

TROLLEYS ON PARADE

If vintage trolleys and rapid transit cars are more your speed, the Shoreline
Trolley Museum in East Haven has a Pageant of Trolleys scheduled for Saturday
and June 1. While visitors stand in the station, they will watch street railway
cars glide by in a narrated Parade of Trolleys at noon, 2 and 4 P.M. In between
they may board an open sided or closed trolley for a one and a half mile ride
along the Farm River and back.

Twenty antique examples of mass transit on exhibit include an old ''El'' -
elevated outdoor train - from New York City circa 1878, a Swedish trolley car,
trolleys from turn-of-the-century New Haven and from around the United States
and Canada dated between 1904 and 1911. A streamlined trolley from Brooklyn,
N.Y., cost $1 million to build in 1936. Commissioned by the presidents of a
number of street railway companies as the last word in noiseless operation and
speed, it was capable of traveling 42 miles an hour, compared with other
trolleys whose top speeds were from 25 to 35 miles an hour, according to William
Riccitelli, a museum associate.

Free pony rides for children, oldtime movies and participation in entertainment
provided by the Connecticut Dinner Theater are included in the admission charge
of $3 for adults, $2.50 for the elderly, $1.50 for children and free to children
under 5 years of age. Take Exit 51 off I-95 and follow the museum signs.

ART ON THE GREEN

A mammoth art show and sale is in progress this weekend on the Green in Milford,
a block from the harbor and Historical Society. More than 200 juried artists and
craftsmen will be displaying their work from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. today, rain or
shine. Represented in the selection are the American Water Color Society, the
Salmagundi Club of New York City, Connecticut Classic Arts and the art leagues
and councils of Guilford, Westport, Norwalk, Milford, New Britain and Branford,
among many others.

Scenes of New England, the Southwest, marine paintings, English landscapes,
nature and wildlife are represented in all media, including photography, and a
number of artists and craftsmen will be at work demonstrating their particular
skills. Among them are box and bucket makers, caricaturists, embroiderers,
canemakers, clockmakers, blacksmiths, quilters, printmakers, theorem painters,
etchers, wreathers and dollmakers. Other handcrafts include furniture, blown
glass, bird carvings, fabric art, jewelry, leatherworks, marionettes, rugs,
stoneware and tapestries. Admission and parking are free.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 25, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LONG ISLAND OPINION;
A FORMER STUDENT ACTIVIST RUNS UP THE FLAG

BYLINE: By KENNETH P. MARION; Kenneth P. Marion lives in North Woodmere.

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 22, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 656 words


MEMORIAL DAY 1985 found me with three children under the age of 4, a house on
Long Island and doing pretty well. College in the 60's had prepared me for many
things. That Memorial Day was not among them. The war in Indochina, colleges
clamping down on student rights, demonstrations for equality; the 60's weren't a
time that you loved the Stars and Stripes just because it was the American flag.
My peers were wearing it; some were burning it.

Who would have guessed that less than 20 years later I would find myself
struggling for answers to the questions of children in front of my house in
suburbia, while putting up the flag?

This was my first attempt at a substantive lesson on America. In a way I was
teaching me, too - letting them know what the flag stands for and why, and that
no matter how bad things may get, it is a symbol worthy of respect. Those stars
and stripes were something to bring to mind the ideals that, even if lost at
some later date, should be fought for fervently.

The metamorphosis was now complete; the antiwar liberal of the 60's had grown
into the antiwar liberal of the 80's. But the perspective of age and parenthood
has added an understanding of, as well as a willingness to understand, freedom
and its symbols.

The two oldest children, 3 1/2 and 2 at the time, love books, particularly Dr.
Seuss, so I tried to use what they could fathom to teach them what Old Glory
means. I told them it stands for freedom, freedom to have books like Dr. Seuss's
and the Berenstain Bears.

I told them that in some places children aren't allowed to have books or, if
they are, it may not be just any book they want; that libraries like ours are
not available everywhere; that in some places and times books have been burned.
These things they grasped. The images were powerful, even for children so young.

It is hard for them to see freedom in every wave of the flag on the front porch,
but the seed needs to be planted. There were more images to be used; full
advantage should be taken of an opportunity such as this.

The children love going to religious services, and when they heard that in some
places these were not permitted, that churches and synagogues were locked, they
were mortified. Missing those special family events would be just terrible. All
the fun we try to give them in that setting had paid off.

The freedom to read and the freedom to pray were only the beginning. We talked
briefly about choosing friends, going to the movies, walking where you want and
visiting friends and relatives in other cities, states and countries.

We even talked about newspapers. They see me read a big one every weekend, and
see the pleasure I get from it. When they learned that people everywhere do not
have access to the news as freely as we, they showed concern.

But Memorial Day is even more than freedom, more than displaying the flag.
Putting out the flag means something extra special on that day. It means
remembering and honoring. These concepts were a lot more difficult to present to
children 3 1/2 and 2, but it was another opportunity not to be passed up.

It was the chance to plant a seed that might grow. It was a chance to set them
on the right path. Something to look back at, to support them if ever they
needed to fight for those ideals.

I mentioned war and killing and dying. There was some comprehension: television,
the violence of our times, even, sadly, at their ages. And when I spoke of
remembering and honoring, remembering was easy.

Honoring was harder. I said it was a special remembering for having done
something special, like keeping us free to read, to play, to have a house and to
watch television. That's not quite how Webster's would define it, but they
understood.

The flag is a symbol of all these things. It is supposed to make us think of the
freedom to read and play, the soldiers who fought and died and those who serve
today to keep our freedom safe.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 25, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SPEAKING PERSONALLY;
IN MEMORY OF 4 YOUNG MEN, A MASK OF FRIVOLITY COMES OFF

BYLINE: By Alice MMitchem Jenkins; Alyce Mitchem Jenkins lives in Warren.

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 29, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 983 words


In memory of John, Paul, Thomas, Walter and all young men and women who gave
their lives in Vietnam and elsewhere for our country.

ON A WALL near the main office of a New Jersey high school hang the portraits of
four handsome, uniformed young men. Their pictures were placed there just a year
ago by the school's chapter of the National Honor Society.

It was 1985, a year when Americans had finally begun to recognize the sacrifices
and pain of our veterans who fought on faraway Vietnamese soil for the
principles of the United States of America.

A high school senior, inspired by seeing the Vietnam memorial in Washington,
solicited the support of the school's administration and his fellow members of
the Honor Society to hold a memorial assembly to recognize the four alumni who
had given their lives for their country.

John, Thomas and Walter died in Vietnam; Paul was killed in 1983 in a naval
maneuver in the Mediterranean.

As a teacher, I dreaded the assembly. Although the four young men had never been
my students, I had instructed and grown to love other Johns, Thomases, Pauls and
Walters in the pre-Vietnam years.

When war came, I lived too far away to learn the fate of those whom I had helped
to educate. Yet I remembered them and mourned the loss of any of our nation's
young.

The lessons I had taught were to prepare them for life, not death.

I assumed that John, Thomas, Paul and Walter were much like my former students
and that they also resembled the adolescents in my classes in 1985. Sometimes
conscientious, sensitive and caring, they often appeared irreverent, immature -
even foolish. Yet they carried within them unrecognized potential for courage
and dedication that offered hope for the future of mankind.

I dreaded the assembly because it would remind me of the tragic loss of precious
young lives like theirs. I also did not want to witness the typical assembly
behavior of teen-agers.

When the chorus and band presented a Christmas program several years before, the
noise and disrespect destroyed my Christmas spirit.

On another occasion, the director of a visiting college band stopped the
performance to chastise the students for their inattention.

And at a recent ''talent night'' program, a young pianist left the stage without
completing her number when calls from the audience drowned out the music.

Guests at the memorial ceremony included parents of the young men being honored,
Vietnam veterans and military and religious dignitaries.

How inappropriate to subject people deeply and personally involved in the
tragedy of war to the irreverence and immaturity of teens exuberant to attend an
assembly only to avoid the boredom of school! I underestimated the students.
They filed quietly and respectfully into the auditorium. As members of the Honor
Society conducted the program, silence reigned.

A senior girl sang ''The Star-Spangled Banner,'' and the young man who had
initiated the event gave the welcome. He then introduced the families of the
honored heroes, the Vietnam veterans in the audience and other distinguished
visitors.

After a clergyman's opening remarks, the young people presented memorials to the
school: portraits of John, Paul, Thomas and Walter, a plaque to be hung below
the pictures in the school hallway and another plaque adjoining the flagpole
outside. All had been bought with money collected by the students.

Following a speech by a lieutenant colonel, the family of one of the young men
gave to the school the American flag that had draped their son's coffin. A rabbi
spoke to end the auditorium ceremony.

The majority of the students returned to their classes while members of the
Honor Society, the chorus and invited guests moved outside to the flagpole,
where a priest made dedication remarks.

The flag, flying at half staff, was replaced by the one given by the
serviceman's family and raised to full height. As the poem ''I Am the American
Flag'' was read, it began to rain; yet students and adults alike stood at
attention.

And then my eyes scanned the building behind us. There, at the windows, stood
classes of students listening in rapt attention to the portion of the ceremony
to which they had not been invited.

As the chorus sang ''America the Beautiful,'' I felt pride not only in the young
men being honored, but also in these students who, despite their immaturity,
recognized and respected true courage and sacrifice.

Because young people mask their insecurities with the appearance of frivolity,
even we who know them well sometimes fail to discern their sensitivity and
perception. But when we challenge them, they surprise us with their wisdom.

The young man responsible for last year's ceremony is now a cadet at the United
States Military Academy at West Point. Commenting on the Challenger disaster, he
reflected on his participation in the memorial ceremony:

''I never realized how hard it was going to be for me to face the parents of all
the boys who had been killed. It had been more than 15 years since their sons
died; yet the tears and the pain they felt were still very fresh . . . It's the
suffering of the families that truly breaks my heart . . .

''I think now that I do understand what making the greatest sacrifice for my
country means, and, as hard as it is, I'm prepared to make it . . . The most
painful thing, however, is hoping that my family will not suffer the pain and
sorrow I've seen . . . Dying for one's country is truly an honor - but a very
painful, heartbreaking one.''

Beneath the portraits of the four fine young men who once walked the school
hallways with their friends and dreamed of a future they would never know, the
plaque placed by the Honor Society reads:

''A man does what he must in spite of personal consequences, in spite of
obstacles and dangers and pressures - and that is the basis of all human
morality.''

JOHN F. KENNEDY

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 25, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

OPINION;
WHAT DEMOCRATS MUST DO TO REINSPIRE THE STATE'S VOTERS

BYLINE: By JOHN F. RUSSO; John F. Russo, who represents the 10th District (part
of Ocean County), is President of the State Senate.

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 1, Column 4; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1107 words


THE Democratic Party in America is coming to grips with its mission, but not
before experiencing major electoral setbacks on the national, state and local
levels.

What we have correctly perceived as a lack of enthusiasm for Democratic
candidates is rooted in our own recent departures from the heritage of our
party. When the leaders of our party rejoin their rank and file and re-embrace
the ideas and programs that have sustained us for three decades, we will
reinspire Democratic voters to support our candidates and defend our policies.

Democrats continue to be the party of ideas. The success of Republican
candidates does not emerge from some new philosophy of government, but from a
direct appeal to the coalition of interests that has always constituted the
heritage of our party.

Democrats have fallen short in recent elections because of their failure to
enthusiastically embrace the programs to which their voters have always been
committed and which they continue to support today.

Having run last year in a statewide primary election in which five major
Democratic candidates spent nearly $5 million to win their party's nomination
for Governor, I am struck not by the results, but by the dismal turnout.

Democrats in record numbers were content to let others decide who would lead
their party for the next four years, and many have decided that it just isn't
their party anymore.

In November 1985, we experienced a general election that reaffirmed the movement
of New Jersey voters away from their Democratic heritage. In a state where
Democrats outnumber Republicans better than 2 to 1, we lost a gubernatorial
election by a landslide vote, we decisively surrendered our majority in the
State Assembly and we bore wit-John F. Russo, who represents the 10th District
(part of Ocean County), is President of the State Senate. ness to Republican
control in 15 of 21 county courthouses.

None of these results can, by themselves, disprove the assumption that many
Democrats remain committed to the strong ideals that have sustained their party
for more than five decades.

But Democrats have lost faith that their leaders can respond to their needs as
effectively as they once did. We as a party have not lost these
Democratic-thinking voters, but we are giving them less reason to remain loyal.

As more and more party leaders diagnose this political anemia of ours, they tend
to prescribe the wrong medicine. Polls are being commissioned to help identify
new voter subgroups, and images are being packaged to project new candidates
espousing new ideas.

No one is talking to individual voters, and still fewer of us are bothering to
listen.

When the New Deal coalition was created and our party began to weave the safety
net for our society, we did so because people cried out for some assurance that
they would never again be denied the basic necessities of life. These people,
who became proud members of the Democratic Party, were partners in the
rebuilding of our society because they had a personal stake in the recreation of
the middle class.

In the 1960's, with an American middle class firmly established, a resurgence of
the Democratic Party emerged from the movement for civil rights. Once again, we
were a party motivated by the collective impatience of our natural constituency.
We heard their voices and we brought leadership to their cause.

In this effort, too, our people had a stake in the civil-rights and social
programs that the Democratic Party championed and established at the national
level.

Since the Depression, the civil-rights battles of the 60's and the Vietnam
struggle of the 60's and 70's, Democratic leaders have stopped listening to
their broader voting public. Narrower, more-sophisticated and better-financed
constituencies - special-interest groups - have emerged, each vying for the
attention and, in some cases, stewardship of their elected officials.

Also since the 60's, the nature of government has changed as well. The issues
that confront our society - environmental degradation, industrial stagnation,
unplanned growth and deficiencies in our educational system - are problems that,
by their very nature, are complex and difficult to solve.

Caught up in the competition to tackle these complex problems, Democrats have
increasingly turned to their natural interest groups -churches, professional
associations and community organizations - to plead their causes with elected
officials in our statehouses and on Capitol Hill.

They identify more and more with narrowly focused and often well-financed
interest groups and less and less with their traditional political parties. They
have become more self-directed, more selfish and less worldly in their social
perspective.

And so it is that many Democratic leaders, playing their traditional role as
representatives, try to be responsive to voters through their interest groups.
Other Democratic leaders take up the complex issues of our day and fashion
programs as cumbersome and complex as the problems they attempt to solve.

Both kinds of Democratic leaders have lost touch with their larger traditional
constituency, some by accentuating the differences between Democrats and others
by proposing programs in which our people no longer recognize their own stake.

Today, campaigning has become a major public-relations enterprise; so, too, has
government.

We have created a system that feeds insidiously upon itself: elected officials
catering to special interests, special interests financing their own independent
political operations, with politics now almost indistinguishable from
policy-making.

In the battle for partisan advantage, Democratic leaders have become party to
this insidious system. Rather than filling the traditional role of providing
people with the wherewithal to improve their lot by their own hard work,
Democrats have surrendered the public interest to a coalition of special
interests. Some have even abandoned their role as representatives by proposing
programs and endorsing causes that bear no resemblance to the public interest.

Democrats can go on in this fashion and undermine the commitment of their rank
and file, or they can begin to respond selectively to the constituencies around
them.

The Democratic Party will re-establish its partisan prominence in New Jersey and
across the nation when it is equally willing to stand up to the special
interests and stand up for the right things.

When we re-embrace Robert F. Kennedy's dictum that leadership consists of
inspiring others to exercise their best qualities, we will rightfully aspire to
majority party status once again.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 25, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM VETERANS HONORED BELATEDLY

BYLINE: By States News Service

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 9, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 564 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


ALTHOUGH she has never been here to view the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, Gloria
Philhower of Denville had always assumed her son's name one of those etched on
it. She was wrong.Her son, Charles Albert Philhower, a fireman's apprentice in
the Navy, died outside the Presidentially approved war zone and was not included
among the 58,022 names on the black granite wall.

Over the next few weeks, however, his name, along with those of 2 other New
Jersey veterans and 105 servicemen from around the country, will be added to the
casualties of America's longest war.

Mrs. Philhower said that had she come to Washington and not found her son's name
on the memorial, ''it would have been an awful shock.'' Her son, she said, died
when fire broke out aboard the Kitty Hawk, a Navy vessel, in 1965.

The other New Jersey residents whose names will be added to the wall, and who
died outside the ''war zone,'' are Ronald W. Ringwall of Millburn, an Air Force
lieutenant who died in Japan, and Richard Stephan, a sailor, of Mercer County.

Efforts to find their relatives proved unsuccessful.

A ceremony will be held here tomorrow - Memorial Day - for the families of those
soldiers who fought in Vietnam but died on the wrong side of the Pentagon's
imaginary lines.

Lieut. Col Leo Broadhead, U.S.A.F. (ret.), father of a fallen Oklahoma soldier,
is responsible for the recent additions. Visiting the memorial two years ago,
Colonel Broadhead searched in vain for the name of his son, a lieutenant killed
when his B-52 crashed on Guam before a bombing run over North Vietnam.

''This fellow brought it to our attention that his son's name was not on the
memorial,'' said Jan Sruggs, president of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund,
the main force behind the monument. When the memorial was built in 1982, the
official casualty list from the Defense Department became the criterion for
inserting names on the wall.

''The casualty list was based upon deaths that occurred within the defined
combat area,'' said Lieut. Col Keith Schneider, a Pentagon spokesman.

Senator Don Nickles, Republican of Oklahoma, met with Mr. Scruggs and the
Defense Department in an attempt to resolve the issue. Pentagon officials agreed
to ascertain how many other servicemen had died in circumstances similar to
Lieutenant Broadhead's.

''We basically felt, from day one, that the names should go on,'' said Mr.
Scruggs, adding that his only concerns were the number of names and the
remaining space on the wall.

''If there were 1,000 names and room for 500 on the memorial,'' he said, ''we
would very well have had to say no, because there are other people who need to
go on the memorial, people who even now haven't left the V.A. hospital since
they were wounded in Vietnam in 1968.''

After the addition of the 108 names, the wall will have room for about 400
others.

''It just took a lot of meetings, a lot of letters and a lot of prodding,'' said
Paul Lee, an aide to Mr. Nickles. ''We were prepared to introduce legislation to
make this change.''

The Ford Motor Company donated $70,000 to airblast the new names on the wall and
set up a phone bank to assemble the families for tomorrow's ceremony.

However, the Philhowers will not be among them. Mrs. Philhower said she planned
to wait until the summer, when her two other sons could join her at what has
been called America's ''Wailing Wall.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 25, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WESTCHESTER OPINION;
MEMORY OF VIETNAM: A LESSON

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SHEERIN; William Sheerin lives in Bronxville and teaches at
Yorktown High School.

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 26, Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1145 words


NOT long ago my wife and I took a trip to Washington with our 9-year-old son. As
luck would have it, we lost our way for a time after entering the District and
ended up driving through what seemed a maze of residential streets before
suddenly coming upon the Capitol, its columns and dome resplendent in the
midafternoon sunshine.

Twenty-three years had passed since my last visit during the summer following my
sophomore year in high school. So much had changed over those years - in the
world, in the nation, in my own life - that it seemed strange to experience the
same thrill driving along the Mall to the Washington Monument and on past the
Lincoln Memorial. Yes, it was all still there, not diminished by grime or
graffiti as I had imagined, but pretty much the same as it had looked back in
'62.

In the evening we walked down Constitution Avenue to the city's newest monument,
the Vietnam Veterans Memorial. We had, of course, read about it and seen
pictures of it in magazines and on television. Yet being there is an experience
of another order - the simplicity of the place, the endless list of names, the
reflective quality of the polished black granite all seem to lead the viewer to
look for a personal meaning of one's own. To me it seemed inevitably an antiwar
memorial, evoking above all a sense of human loss, of tragedy, of waste.

The light was beginning to fail and people were taking out flashlights to search
for familiar names on the wall. Some were leaving mementos at the base; a few
were crying. I felt like an intruder, like a voyeur gawking at someone else's
private grief. And my uneasiness was tinged with something more, something
approaching guilt.

On the face of it, there was no reason to feel guilty. I certainly hadn't done
anything to harm any of these people whose names are inscribed on the wall, and
I hadn't rooted for the enemy like some of those in the antiwar movement who
were always waving their Viet Cong flags. I had opposed the war because it
seemed that we were simply thowing away lives there in a futile cause. Standing
up to Communism might make sense in Korea or Germany or perhaps even Eastern
Europe someday - so long as we were fighting for realistic goals and alongside
people who were committed to fighting for themselves. Vietnam just wasn't such a
place.

Coming of age in the campus climate of the late 60's, though, this sort of
thinking was definitely out of favor. The left-wing orthodoxy had it that one
should oppose the war because the good guys were on the other side and our
people were baby-killers or, at best, pawns of capitalist exploitation. The
gung-ho right wingers were equally possessed with their ideology; any
battlefield was an appropriate one if there were Communists to be killed. There
was, it seemed, no middle ground.

At college, the R.O.T.C. reviews turned into an incongruous weekly spectacle -
the young cadets strutting their stuff as the band played ''Garry Owen,'' the
antiwar demonstrators marching around the parade ground singing Phil Ochs songs
and taunting the cadets, the jocks taking breaks from their touch football games
to make fun of the anti-war people and chant ''Nuke Hanoi!'' or ''Ram the
Cong!'' (a variation on old Fordham cheers like ''Ram the Hoyas!'' and ''Ram the
Redmen!'') It was as if many of us, whatever our backgrounds or political
leanings, had come to see life itself as one more big game - get with a team,
don't quibble over the game plan, bust some heads if necessary but just make
sure you win. The rancor of those days, the violence, the confrontationist
mentality, the ''nonnegotiable demands'' all seemed to indicate that some sort
of misguided machismo had come to grip the national mood.

Of course, it was not total insanity back then. There were antiwar groups that
favored communication over confrontation and which tried to personally take
their message to the public at large. Eventually I made my way into such a group
and enjoyed what seemed to be some modest success talking with people in the
working-class neighborhoods of the Bronx and upper Manhattan, where I lived
during my student days.

There were considerable numbers of people supporting the war who would, in fact,
listen - if you made it clear that you weren't some wiseguy out to
''radicalize'' them or belittle their love of country. But it was slow going and
sometimes it seemed as if we were laboring against the tide.

My own involvement in the antiwar movement started to ebb following the
''Moratorium Day'' protest in the fall of 1969. Proponents of Nixon's war policy
had asked people to drive with headlights on during the daylight hours to show
their support for the President.

I'll never forget the frustration and bitterness I felt standing with a group of
friends on the corner of 207th Street and Broadway in upper Manhattan, seeing
lights shining on virtually every car and truck in every direction, as far as
the eye could see. So much for our ''modest success.'' Suit yourselves, you
fools - I thought to myself - it's your kids who are doing the dying.

As things turned out, neither I nor any of my college friends ever set foot in
Vietnam. All of us managed to avoid it - whether through a deferment, a stint in
the reserves or just the good fortune of a high number in the draft lottery. And
while we may not admit it openly, I suspect that more than a few of us still
feel uneasy about the whole thing, still are perplexed by questions we haven't
fully articulated - let alone resolved.

What is it then that we feel? Is it guilt after all? Should we feel guilty about
not taking part in such an ill-conceived war? Is it rather some sense of
incomplete manhood that troubles us, of being in a way untested, of not having
paid our dues? Is it remorse that many of us made our own separate peace with
the carnage when we found our personal way out? Or is it mostly a feeling of
shame that we stood by as those of our generation who had suffered the most were
made to suffer new indignities after returning home to an ungrateful nation?

As for myself, it is with a great deal of regret that I recall that Moratorium
Day when frustration and a sense of futility led me to start my own phased
withdrawal from the antiwar effort. And now 16 years later, standing in the
gathering darkness by that long wall of names, what I felt most was a sense of
profound failure - that I had been witness to such a tragedy yet had done so
little in trying to change its course.

My son was standing beside me, puzzled at my long silence and restless to head
up toward where the lights were coming on along the Mall. When I was a little
boy, I too was restless and I couldn't wait to grow up - to take charge, to set
everything right, never to feel confused or scared or helpless again. I guess it
took Vietnam to teach me that such a day would never come.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 26, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM MEMORIAL IN KANSAS DEDICATED

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 28 words


Roger Borland showing his son Tyler the name of a friend, Don Bowman, that is
inscribed on memorial dedicated yesterday at University of Kansas in Lawrence.
(AP)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 26, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FOR NATION'S DEFENDERS, FLOWERS AND TINY FLAGS

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 865 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 25


Not long after sunrise last Thursday, several hundred soldiers fanned out over
the hills of Arlington National Cemetery, moving quietly and methodically
through the morning mist. They were planting American flags, one of the first
and most enduring rituals of the Memorial Day observance in the nation's
capital.

There was a flag for James McCubbin Lingan, who fought in the War of the
American Revolution, and one for Brig. Gen. Joseph B. Plummer of the United
States Army, who died in August 1862 ''of wounds and exposure in the active
field.''

There was one for the 26-year-old Air Force lieutenant who died in Vietnam, and
one for the Army colonel buried nearby, who was from West Point's class of 1914.

More than 200,000 lie beneath this gentle ground, but the young soldiers at work
Thursday did not miss a grave. In the chill morning air they planted their flags
deep and straight, sometimes doubling back to adjust the ones that tilted awry.
''This is one duty I don't mind a bit,'' said Specialist 4 David Smith of
Kokomo, Ind.

By the time the cemetery gates opened, the straight lines of the headstones were
matched by neat rows of flags. They will remain until Tuesday, when the troops
of the 3d U.S. Infantry (The Old Guard), stationed at Fort Myer, Va., return for
them.

This is the way of Washington, remembering with ritual and stone. At this time
of year, when the monuments are tended by flags and flowers and private
grievings, the city seems a vast cathedral.

There are more flowers than usual at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial this weekend.

A bouquet of carnations bearing the simple banner, ''Husband.''

A wreath from upstate New York topped by a black and white photo of a young man
in uniform.

A floral arrangement from the town of Rockmart, Ga.

Tourists approach the monument, loose and laughing, but quickly lower their
voices. ''Every name up there is someone who's dead,'' a father explains to his
young daughter as they walk past the black granite walls.

Fonda Grumling was there last week, coming from her home in West Chester, Pa.,
with her daughter and granddaughter. They scanned the wall for the name of
Ronald G. Grumling, and when they found it, Mrs. Grumling began to cry, although
she knew her son would not have liked that. ''We lost him at 22,'' she said.

He was a corporal in the Marine Corps, and he died in 1967 just before he was
due to come home, Mrs. Grumling explained. ''His father had the 'welcome home'
sign made.''

One of the volunteers at the memorial helped Mrs. Grumling make a rubbing of her
son's name. She lingered by the wall, and when she left she did so slowly.

On Monday, a Memorial Day service will dedicate the 110 new names engraved in
the granite over the last month. They were service members who died of wounds
received in Vietnam and those who died on wartime combat missions while
technically outside the war zone.

These names are bright and new in the stone. About 450 members of their families
will be there.

Like many elected officials, Representative John McCain will be making speeches
on Memorial Day, back home in Arizona, where he is running for the Senate this
year. But Mr. McCain gives Memorial Day speeches with more authority than most.
The son and grandson of four-star admirals, he was a Navy pilot in Vietnam. His
plane was shot down over Hanoi in October 1967, and he spent the next five and a
half years as a prisoner of war. At the time, his father was commander in chief
of the Pacific forces, a fact that was not unknown to his captors.

There are not many Vietnam veterans in the House of Representatives - only 11
out of 435 members actually served in Vietnam. And Mr. McCain says he finds
''very, very few'' Vietnam veterans in the Washington circles he moves in. But
the veterans find Mr. McCain.  Sometimes, when he is in a meeting, his secretary
hands him a note that says ''O.N.B.'' - an old Navy buddy has dropped by and is
waiting outside. Mr. McCain says he gets visits from many veterans, some of whom
he served with and some he did not. ''If I ever lose the feeling I have for
those people, I think I will lose a lot of my perspective,'' he says.

On summer evenings, Mr. McCain sometimes wanders down to the Vietnam Veterans
Memorial. ''Sometimes just to remember,'' he explains, ''because there are some
things I don't think I should forget.''

By this morning, a clear and balmy morning on a holiday weekend, the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial was jammed with tourists. Yet it had an achingly private air.
One man was sobbing, his cries hard and jagged, in the arms of another. A group
of veterans from the 101st Airborne Division showed up to lay a wreath. Some
veterans and activists were standing vigil and handing out red ribbons, urging
people to remember the soldiers still unaccounted for in Vietnam.

People knelt to read the poetry and letters left at the foot of the wall this
weekend amid the flags and flowers.

Someone had left a photocopy of a letter from Bill to Rog.

Dated Sept. 2, 1968, and sent from Da Nang, the letter told of heavy casualties
and concluded, ''I have 71 days to go now, and if I make it I hope I never have
to come back here again.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of soldier placing flags on graves at Arlington National Cemetary
(NYT/Jose R. Lopez)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 26, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

COMMENCEMENT CEREMONIES: WORDS OF FAREWELL AND CALLS TO CONSCIENCE;
VASSAR COLLEGE: CARTOONIST GIVES SOBER TALK ON 'STAR WARS' AT EXERCISES

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 410 words

DATELINE: POUGHKEEPSIE, N.Y., May 25


At Vassar College's outdoor amphitheater today, the cartoonist Garry B. Trudeau
urged the graduating class to question the rationale of the Strategic Defense
Initiative as a matter of ''simple duty.''

Unfortunately, he added, the tempo of the times - he likened the political mood
to that of the 1950's - made ''healthy skepticism'' of the Reagan
Administration's space defense program ''an impertinent question.''

Mr. Trudeau, the creator of the satirical comic strip ''Doonesbury,'' was both
funny and serious as he addressed Vassar's 122d commencement, at which 560
degrees were awarded. But he devoted much of his address to what he called the
''mindless momentum'' of the arms program in space, often called ''Star Wars.''

He said that 6,500 college scientists, including a majority of professors in 109
university physics and engineering departments, have declared they would not
work on the project because they believed it to be ill-conceived and dangerous.

''The actions of these scientists constitute an extraordinary repudiation of the
amorality of indiscriminate weapons research,'' Mr. Trudeau said. ''Science,
since it leads to knowledge, has all too frequently led its practitioners to
believe that it is inherently self-justifying, that there is nothing dangerous
about splitting atoms in a moral vacuum.''

Doonesbury-Style Barb

Mr. Trudeau, who has made poking fun at President Reagan and his Administration
a staple of ''Doonesbury,'' did not resist today.

He described the Administration as being led by a man who, since coming to the
White House, has ''as far as we know read no books except two Westerns he
scanned when recovering from gunshot wounds.''

''The Reagan Presidency often reminds me of a remark made by a woman to
sportscaster Heywood Broun following the victories of the great racehorse,
Secretariat, in the Triple Crown,'' Mr. Trudeau told his audience.

''After the trauma of Vietnam and Watergate, she told Broun, Secretariat had
restored her faith in mankind. I would submit to you that Ronald Reagan is the
Secretariat of the 80's.''

Then, returning to a theme of his address, the cartoonist said that while Mr.
Reagan should be congratulated for restoring Americans' faith in themselves,
this should not exempt his ''Administration from criticism from concerned
citizens who love their nation as much as he does.''

A White House spokesman, Michael Guest, declined to comment on Mr. Trudeau's
remarks.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 27, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

THOUSANDS GATHER TO REMEMBER 1.2 MILLION WAR DEATHS, PLUS 110

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1232 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 26


With friends and family members looking on, 110 American servicemen were
belatedly honored today at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial for giving their lives
in the Vietnam War.

Six thousand people gathered on the sun-washed Mall for a Memorial Day ceremony
rededicating the polished black granite memorial. In recent weeks, the names of
the 110 servicemen, which were omitted when it was dedicated in 1982, were added
to the 247-foot-long honor roll of Americans killed or missing in the Vietnam
War, bringing the total to 58,132.

President Reagan sent a written statement of greetings, read by Jan C. Scruggs,
president of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund. In a brief speech at Arlington
National Cemetery, across the Potomac River, Mr. Reagan paid tribute to the 1.2
million Americans who have died in the nation's wars, singling out ''the boys of
Vietnam who fought a terrible and vicious war without enough support from
home.''

''They chose to be faithful,'' he said. ''They chose to reject the fashionable
skepticism of their time; they chose to believe and answer the call of duty.''

At the Vietnam memorial, John Wheeler, a Vietnam veteran who is the chairman of
the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund, told the audience, including about 1,000
invited guests seated on folding chairs on the Mall, ''All of us who went to
Vietnam meant to help the people of Vietnam to be free.''

'Reconciliation and Healing'

''We are sad about the war,'' he said. ''It was the longest war we have ever
been in, and we didn't win the war. But the men and women who went there kept
their promise to the President and the nation who sent them there.''

The memorial, he said, ''offers honor for those who wore the uniform and, for
all of us, reconciliation and healing.''

To Elizabeth Lauer, however, the addition of her son's name to the monument
seemed ''so little for a man's life.''

Mrs. Lauer was among the next of kin who heard the names of their lost loved
ones read aloud, one by one, and saw them honored by a military color guard and
by the laying of ceremonial wreaths. She said her 31-year-old son, Gene A.
Lauer, a career Air Force technical sergeant, was killed in a plane crash on
Wake Island Sept. 24, 1968, while heading home on leave from his post on Guam.

But for Mrs. Lauer and her husband, Robert, who came here today from their home
in West Haven, Conn., the sadness seemed to give way to pride.

Looking about at the other middle-aged parents of men so long dead, and
struggling to control the emotion filling her voice, Mrs. Lauer spoke slowly.

''Finally,'' she said, ''you are touched. Every time a name is added here it is
a victory for these men.''

Inspiring Reminiscences

For Henry and Deborah Aldrich of Southold, L.I., visiting the Vietnam memorial
for the first time today was also a moving experience. Their son, First Lieut.
Robert H. Aldrich, 24, a Marine Corps helicopter pilot, died Dec. 27, 1971, in
crash in what they were told was ''a classified mission'' off the helicopter
attack carrier Tripoli. His body was not recovered, and so in a sense, Mrs.
Aldrich said, he was buried at the memorial.

This morning, as the family stood before Lieutenant Aldrich's newly etched name
at the monument, his mother said that among a flood of reminiscences was one of
her son's dog, a German shepherd, left in her care when he went to Vietnam.

''Just as we found Bob's name,'' she said, ''we looked up at the top of the wall
and there, looking down at us, was a German shepherd. It was as though Bob was
saying, 'O.K., Mom, I see you.' ''

The addition of the 110 names to the memorial came after the Defense Department
decided last year to expand the official Vietnam ''theater of operations'' to
include the distant bases from which the airmen who comprise most of the
additions to the memorial took off on missions that crashed short of the
official war zone.

Ninety-seven of the new names were of servicemen who died outside the war zone.
The 13 others died years later of combat wounds, and Mr. Wheeler said today that
others who die of Vietnam wounds would be added.

No Relatives, but Not Forgotten

Although many of the war deaths memorialized today occurred 15 years ago or
longer, and military records listing the next of kin of some men were outdated,
a special search committee failed to locate the relatives of only a handful. One
of them was Ronald W. Ringwall of Millburn, N.J., an Air Force first lieutenant
who died May 19, 1966, in a plane crash in Japan.

A notation in the search committee's file said that Lieutenant Ringwall had ''no
existing relatives.''

But he and others who were not mourned here today by blood relatives had Ray
Keefer, a 37-year-old Vietnam veteran from Ridgley, Md.

This morning, before the formal ceremonies began, Mr. Keefer, who wore combat
boots and four Purple Hearts on his camouflaged fatigues, moved reverently along
the memorial's displays of wreaths, photographs and letters left by loved ones,
bending down on one knee at each display to read it. Here and there single
carnations studded the wall at eye-level, their stems wedged into the seams
between the granite slabs.

Propped against the wall was a photocopy of a last letter home, wrapped in a
transparent plastic. ''I didn't know him,'' Mr. Keefer said as he rose from
reading the letter, ''but I feel now like I know him.''

Speech by President

Earlier, as Mr. Reagan addressed hundreds of veterans, servicemen and officials
in the amphitheater at Arlington National Cemetery, he spoke of the statue of
three Vietnam servicemen near the Vietnam memorial.

''There's something wounded about them, a kind of resigned toughness,'' he said.
''But there's an unexpected tenderness, too. At first, you don't really notice,
but then you see it. The three are touching each other, as if they're supporting
each other, helping each other on.''

''I know that many veterans of Vietnam will gather today, some of them perhaps
by the wall,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''They're still helping each other on. They were
quite a group, the boys of Vietnam, boys who fought a terrible and vicious war
without enough support from home, boys who were dodging bullets while we debated
the efficacy of the battle.

''It was often our poor who fought in that war. It was the unpampered boys of
the working class who picked up the rifles and went on the march. They learned
not to rely on us, they learned to rely on each other.''

Observances Across U.S. By The Associated Press Across the nation, there were
dedications of new memorials to honor Americans who fought and died in Vietnam.

A ceremony was held at the Arkansas Capitol to break ground for a Vietnam
veterans memorial.

A Vietnam Veterans Memorial Park was dedicated in Dayton, Ohio. And in
Nashville, Tenn., about 300 veterans and their families huddled under umbrellas
as officials unveiled a statue of three infantrymen in battle poses. It was the
first statue featuring a black man to be dedicated on state property.

About 1,000 veterans of every war since World War I marched in a New York City
parade that culminated with a wreath-laying at the Soldiers and Sailors
Monument.

In Summit, N.J., city officials dedicated a new Veterans War Memorial in
Gensemer Park. The monument, a 6-foot-tall bronze angel on a stone pedestal,
honors the town's veterans of 20th-century military conflicts.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 30, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

A Washington dispatch on Tuesday about the Vietnam Veterans Memorial
misidentified an Air Force technical sergeant, Gene A. Lauer, one of 110 war
dead whose names were added to the memorial. He was the brother, not the son, of
Robert Lauer of West Haven, Conn.

GRAPHIC: Photo of President Reagan laying wreath on Tomb of the Unknowns
(NYT/Jose R. Lopez); Photo of two children at ceremony for 110 servicemen whose
names were added to monument (NYT/Jose R. Lopez); Photo of ceremony at Soldiers
and Sailors Monument (NYT/Chester Higgins Jr.)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 27, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, MAY 27, 1986

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 871 words


International African countries seek more aid from the developed world. They are
asking for an increase of $80 billion to $100 billion in aid and debt relief
over five years. The request will be considered at a special five-day meeting of
the 159-member United Nations General Assembly that is opening today. [Page A1,
Column 6.]

Nearly all of Africa has high levels of human misery, and that misery is
increasing. In the drought-stricken nations of sub-Saharan Africa, emaciated
children survive only because truckloads of high-protein food mixtures are
delivered to camps, villages and oases. A12:1-2.]

East German guards turned back West German diplomats seeking to enter West
Berlin and told diplomats from other NATO countries that measures would be
enforced today to enlarge East Germany's legal authority on its side of the
divided city. Diplomats from the United States, Britain and France denounced the
move as an attempt to turn the Berlin wall into a frontier. [A1:4.]

A requested inquiry in Jerusalem set off a furor. Israeli officials said the
Attorney General had asked the police to examine evidence that the head of
Israel's domestic intelligence organization had covered up the involvement of
his agency in the beating deaths of two Palestinian bus hijackers two years ago.
Prime Minister Shimon Peres and other Cabinet officers say such an inquiry could
harm Israeli security. [A1:5.]

Libyan threats against Lampedusa, the Italian island in the Mediterranean that
is nearer Tunisia than Sicility, have frightened the 4,700 residents. Libya has
threatened not only to blow up a United States Coast Guard station on the
island, but also the entire island. Lampedusa is so small that the Libyan threat
is credible. [A1:5-6.]

A Bangladeshi ferry capsized in a storm south of Dhaka and more than 500
passengers were missing. Of at least 80 bodies recovered, most were of women and
children. [A3:1-3.]

A prisoner escaped by helicopter from La Sante Prison in central Paris. The
helicopter flew into the prison, lowered a cable to Michel Vaujour, 34, and
carried him away. He had been serving an 18-year sentence for armed robbery.
Witnesses said the helicopter was piloted by a woman and carried a
pistol-wielding associate. The escape was the fourth in the criminal's career.
[A1:3-5.]

National

110 servicemen were honored belatedly at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in
Washington for giving their lives. Six thousand people gathered on the
sun-washed mall for a Memorial Day ceremony. The addition of the names of the
110 servicemen to the honor roll brings the total to 58,132. [A1:2-3.]

How 4-year-olds should be taught is the focus of a national debate as thousands
of school districts move to open their doors to the children. The major issue is
how public-school teachers can adjust their methods of stressing academic skills
to the much broader needs of children at a time when they are developing social
skills and their sense of identity. [A1:1.]

A dilemma facing doctors who treat AIDS patients is whether to list the disease
as a cause of a patient's death. There is a need to provide accurate data, both
for public health policy and for continuing research. However, doctors also want
to protect victims and their families. [A1:1-2.] Negotiators for Bethlehem Steel
and the steelworkers union reached a tentative agreement that would reduce wages
and benefits $1.92 an hour for 30,000 workers in return for a stock-acquisition
and profit-sharing plan. Union negotiators presented a summary of the agreement
to the full union bargaining panel, which must approve any accord before it is
submitted to the rank and file. [A14:1-2.]

Metropolitan

Four people died in a plane crash in the New York State town of Cairo, about 30
miles south of Albany. The police said the four were killed when the craft
apparently developed engine trouble soon after takeoff and crashed at a private
airport. Officials said those killed were John F. Rose, 38, a former New York
City police detective; his wife, Santi, 32; their son, John Jr., 6, and the
pilot, Alfred Leis, 57. [B2:4-6.]

Investigators have not found a reason why New York City's former taxi chief, Jay
L. Turoff, helped a taxi fleet owner obtain 123 free taxi medallions. They said
they had not been able to find that bribes were paid to Mr. Turoff or other
political figures in return. However, they said they had enough evidence to
obtain an indictment of Mr. Turoff on conspiracy and other charges. [B3:4-6.]

Andrew P. O'Rourke chose a political newcomer, Jeanine Pirro, a Westchester
County assistant prosecutor, as his running mate for lieutenant governor on the
New York State Republican ticket. Mr. O'Rourke, the gubernatorial candidate,
acted after nearly a dozen Republicans had declined to seek the post. [B2:3-4.]

Workers are speeding efforts to complete the Statue of Liberty restoration
before the Fourth of July weekend. E. Lawrence Bellante, the man most
responsible for getting the work done on time and done right, remarked, ''Every
day it seems there's a new problem, but we will solve them and we will finish on
time. That's what we're paid for.'' [B1:1.]

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 27, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Quotation of the Day

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 32 words


''Finally, you are touched. Every time a name is added here it is a victory for
these men.'' - Elizabeth Lauer, whose son's name was placed on the Vietnam
memorial in Washington. [D19:1.]

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 27, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY;
Veterans and the Homeless

BYLINE: By Susan Heller Anderson and David W. Dunlap

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 184 words


Every year, the audience has grown for a variety show put on by the Vietnam
Veterans Ensemble Theater Company. ''And that's pretty depressing,'' the
company's artistic director, Tom Bird, said.

For five years, the company has been putting on its variety show in shelters for
the homeless. ''Sure our show has gotten better over the years,'' Mr. Bird said,
''but the number of homeless has grown dramatically, and that's what's
depressing.''

The show was started by the troupe because the group estimated that nearly
one-third of the homeless in New York were Vietnam veterans.

''A welcome-home parade doesn't mean much when you don't have a home,'' Mr. Bird
said. ''We can't provide that. What we can provide is an hour of happiness and
the knowledge that they are not forgotten.''

The troupe this year included a belly dancer, a retired colonel who plays the
ukulele, a stand-up comic, two dancing girls and a female body builder.

''At the end of the show,'' Mr. Bird said, ''we ask the vets in the audience to
stand up and, there is a round of applause for them. That seems to help a
little.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 28, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER: 'HEARTBREAK,' PRISONERS IN VIETNAM

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 786 words


THE ''Place Called Heartbreak'' of Robert S. Stokes's play is a room in which
American prisoners of war are tortured by the North Vietnamese. We never enter
it, but to judge by the testimony and actions of the characters we meet, a
painfully effective operation goes on there. The goings-on at the Harold Clurman
theater are a bit painful, too.

Mr. Stokes has set out to explore the nature of duty, loyalty, honor in men who
are put to the extreme test. A high aspiration, which, unfortunately, is not
matched by the literary, dramatic or intellectual powers on show here. The
officers in their brown-striped pajamas who shuffle in and out of the cell of
Lieut. Comdr. Ralph Connor represent varying degrees of resistance,
accommodation, collaboration. One even represents normalty. They are mouthpieces
in a muddy morality play.

At the center, between the ''patriots'' and ''traitors,'' is Connor, played by
Tom Felix with an attitude of maudlin truculence. He has been a prisoner for
eight years, needs a crutch to get around and has something on his mind. His
fellow prisoners, particularly the mean and muscular Lieutenant Chadd, know that
he told something under torture that cost the life of another prisoner. But
Connor himself has little use for the camp's two notorious collaborators, who
have traded information for better food, lodging and amenities.

Mr. Stokes, who was a correspondent in Vietnam, makes barely a gesture at a
plot. The war is ending, and the issue turns on whether the turncoats will be
allowed by the prisoners to return to the United States on the first plane out,
as demanded by the Vietnamese: ''You have till 1600 hours to make up your
mind.'' Yet even this small crisis might serve if the give and take on the
deeper questions was more compelling.

Everything is made explicit; the lines seem to come out of a primer in Ethics 1.
''Honor is not a frivolous thing,'' says one duty-bound officer. ''There's no
middle ground here,'' another tells us. A jailer says, in a soliloquy that is
drawn out to the point of torture, ''You thought war was a game back then,
Commander.''

A cheerful sadist called Fidel says, ''What your country asked you to do was
deny man's basic instinct to survive.'' One of the collaborators says, ''We're
all collaborators, after a fashion.'' ''There is no country worth dying for,''
concludes Connor, though we never learn why.

Nothing is left unspoken, but not much of interest is said. We keep waiting for
some revelation of character, some twist on familiar ideas, but there are no
surprises. Why did the collaborator, a former Rhodes Scholar from a well-to-do
family, succumb? He was offered American cigarettes, thick Cuban coffee, hot
soup and conversation about philosophy, literature and politics. That kind of
nourishment is missing here. (The men charged with collaborating in Vietnam
were, in fact, not conspicuous for intellectual leanings.) The director, Ellen
Cannon, does what she can to give movement to the proceedings, by having
prisoners and jailers climb the stairs of Michael Sharp's accommodating set,
douse themselves with water from a bucket, writhe on cots that look like coffins
-but it comes off as makework and at times is distracting. Why is that fellow
with the bandage over his eyes climbing that staircase? Poor Connor keeps having
his crutch pulled out from under him. The many man-to-man encounters have a way
of ending up with the antagonists toe to toe, chest to chest, nose to nose,
ranting at each other.

The acting goes from so-so to no-no. Even the better actors are unable to free
themselves from the servitude to which Mr. Stokes has consigned them. Mr.
Felix's performance shows some life toward the end, but Lieutenant Connor
remains an enigma. The smoothest performance is delivered by Brian Patrick
Clarke as the cultured collaborator, although he overdoes the lounging on the
scenery and lighting up of cigars, apparently gifts from the friendly folks in
Cuba.

NO EXIT - A PLACE CALLED HEARTBREAK, by Robert S. Stokes; directed by Ellen
Cannon; set and costume design by Michael Sharp; lighting design by Howell
Binkley; executive producer, Frank Scardino; production stage manager, Raymond
Chandler. Presented by The Heartbreak Company and Victor Cannon. At the Harold
Clurman Theater, 412 West 42d Street. Lieut. Comdr. Ralph Connor...Tom Felix;
Lieut. Comdr. Rafferty...Rony Clanton; Lieut. Chadd...Patrick Kilpatrick; Capt.
Tom Harrington...Jason Heller; Colonel Nu...Frank Michael Liu; Fowler...Phil
Harper; Fidel...Carlos Cestero; Lieut. Col. Cord Blass...Brian Patrick Clarke;
Comdr. Richard Marquette...Neil Bonin; POW's...Alexander Thomas and Michael
Raynor; Vietnamese Guard...Ray Moy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 28, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

TV REVIEW;
A TEARFUL LOOK BACK

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 492 words


THE 90-minute ''Program for Vietnam Veterans . . .

And Everyone Else Who

Should Care'' is at once a moving cry of pain and a muddled call for peace. Two
agendas co-exist, sometimes uneasily, although on its own terms the program
succeeds wonderfully well. It forces a reaction. It will be seen on WNET/Channel
13 at 10 o'clock tonight.

The setting is an auditorium at the University of Wisconsin; 13 men and women
who served in Vietnam speak about what happened. The audience, mostly young,
listens intently. Often someone must wipe away tears. There is nothing
fraudulent about this; the people who cry are touched. Some of the veterans are
speaking out of deep anguish.

Thus, we hear Norman Wilson, a paraplegic, hit in the spine by a bullet. Mr.
Wilson tells no war stories, however; he talks about his terrible disability,
and says that for years he was unable to speak about it at all. He stops then,
tears trickling down his cheeks. We want to cry with him.

Similarly, we hear Jim Watchendonk, an engaging, attractive man, who served in
Vietnam without being wounded, but whose two children suffered birth defects. He
attributes this to Agent Orange. We also hear Larry Connolly, who survived a
mission in which his seven companions died. Mr. Connolly talks of his life
afterward - anger, despair, guilt, attempted suicide. He saved himself, he says,
only when he allowed himself to grieve for the men who were dead.

''A Program for Vietnam Veterans'' - produced by Michael Hirsh, directed by
Michael Lorentz - serves a noble purpose here. It is presumably a catharsis for
both the veterans who speak and veterans who listen. It is also a reminder that
war is not just hell; it is insane. At the same time, there is a political
agenda. Some of this is self-righteous and self-serving.

Charles Haid, who plays Renko on ''Hill Street Blues,'' moderates the program.
Mr. Haid says he joined the Navy at the age of 18, and soon found himself on a
missile-carrying submarine. Somewhere off the coast of the Soviet Union, he
says, he realized that he was aboard ''a death machine.'' He adds: ''I had no
idea why I was there.''

In fact, Mr. Haid was there because the United States believes that deterrence
has played a vital part in averting nuclear war, and missile-carrying submarines
are perhaps the most effective deterrents in our arsenal. Meanwhile, other
veterans speak of peace. One receives a standing ovation when he says there is a
''war mentality'' now. Another asks rhetorically, ''Does defending your country
mean extending its ideology?'' He is applauded, too.

It is a problem, really. Defending your country may indeed mean standing up for
its ideology; democracies and expansionist dictatorships clash. Mr. Haid and
some of his colleagues make it clear they want peace, but it doesn't seem likely
that they have thought much about how to avoid war. ''A Program for Vietnam
Veterans'' mixes genuine anguish and cant.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Charles Haid

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 29, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: A MIXED ARRAY OF DRAMAS IN LONDON

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 19, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1231 words

DATELINE: LONDON, May 28


As far as new plays are concerned, the West End is in the same fix as Broadway:
No major new drama has excited either city's commercial theater district since
Michael Frayn's ''Benefactors.'' In the West End's case, that means a two-season
drought - ''Benefactors'' has long since come and gone here - but the London
theatergoer, like his New York counterpart, satisfies the hunger for fresh
writing at fringe and institutional companies. As always, the National Theater
and Royal Shakespeare Company mix the classics in their repertory schedules with
contemporary scripts of nearly every esthetic and ideological persuasion. No
doubt some of these new plays will eventually travel to our own institutional
theaters - or even Broadway - though past experience suggests that they could be
either substantially sharpened (''The Real Thing'') or bruised (''A Map of the
World'') in transit.

New Yorkers still await the National's held over hit of last season, ''Pravda,''
the David Hare-Howard Brenton satire of Fleet Street. ''Pravda'' now shares the
company's largest stage, the Olivier, with new works by Alan Ayckbourn and Peter
Shaffer. Mr. Ayckbourn's play, ''A Chorus of Disapproval,'' like such past
comedies as his ''Bedroom Farce'' and ''The Norman Conquests,'' takes a
jaundiced look at provincial bourgeois life. The setting is an amateur operatic
society where John Gay's ''Beggar's Opera'' is in rehearsal, even as its cast, a
motley ''down-the-octave brigade,'' including a punk rebel and daffy old-age
pensioners, carries out its own backstage drama of moral duplicity, sexual
swinging and domestic discord.

While the parallel, and at times hilarious, on- and offstage shenanigans can
recall Mr. Frayn's ''Noises Off,'' Mr. Ayckbourn is less concerned with farce or
the theater than with the sad little defeats that define ordinary, disappointed
lives. When a drab, middle-aged widower named Guy Jones joins the operatic
society, the troupe's desperate married women mistake him for a rake; their
husbands erroneously assume him to be a wheeler-dealer at the multinational
corporation where he actually toils as ''a very small cog'' in the obscure
''Alternative Forward Costing'' department. Soon required to play Macheath in
more ways than one, the innocent Guy unwittingly becomes the frazzled repository
of an entire community's frustrated dreams of romance and escape.

Under the author's direction, ''Chorus'' is splendidly acted by a large cast led
by Jim Norton as Guy and Colin Blakely as the easily exasperated ''Beggar's
Opera'' director, a blustery Welshman who once staged ''The Sound of Music'' on
trampolines (''The hills were alive!''). Although Mr. Ayckbourn's writing
falters slightly in Act II, this impressive play demonstrates the continued
growth of a prolific dramatist who is often compared to Neil Simon but
increasingly reveals Chekhovian aspirations. ''Chorus'' moves to the West End
next week.

Peter Shaffer also seems to be searching for new inroads to his usual themes in
''Yonadab,'' his first play since ''Amadeus.'' This time the envious,
spiritually doubting narrator is the title character, a minor hanger-on in King
David's court, 1000 B.C. An eyebrow-wiggling Alan Bates is wildly miscast in the
role, which requires him to address the audience like a foul-mouthed Tevye, and
the play's difficulties don't end here. Mr. Shaffer, who has said that he is
rewriting ''Yonadab'' for subsequent productions, constantly interrupts his
revisionist retelling of an Old Testament anecdote, the rape of Tamar, to let
the protagonist explain and inflate its metaphysical significance. Only at the
violent end of each act does the drama emit the characteristic Shaffer heat.

''Yonadab'' might benefit from a more intimate production than Peter Hall's
stentorian one, which has been handsomely sheathed in translucent tenting by the
designer John Bury. By contrast, Dusty Hughes's ''Futurists,'' a new play at the
National's studio space, the Cottesloe, might gain by extending its epic reach.
Mr. Hughes wants nothing less than to capture that brief post-revolutionary
moment when radical artistic ferment flourished in the Soviet Union. Among the
contentious, real-life visionaries gathered in the play's Petrograd of 1921 are
Gorky, Blok, Mayakovsky and Gumilev, the Acmeist poet whose execution by the
Cheka signals the full-scale repression soon to come.

There are some finely written scenes in this worthy effort - among them a final
encounter between Gorky and Lenin - that really do illuminate the treacherous
intersections of art and politics, the individual and the state. But Mr.
Hughes's documentary style is often closer to flat Socialist realism than the
thrilling experimental modes of his characters. The actors, directed by Richard
Eyre, work hard to give the famous figures more than cameo weight. Among the
most successful are a bullet-headed Daniel Day Lewis (of ''My Beautiful
Laundrette'' and ''A Room With a View'') as Mayakovsky, Jack Shepherd (Gumilev),
Charlotte Cornwell (Akhmatova) and Roger Lloyd Pack (Mandelstam). William
Dudley's brilliant set is itself a vibrant dramatization of Russian history,
esthetic and political, as it progresses from the pre-revolutionary melancholy
of Chekhov to dynamic Constructivist upheaval to grim Stalinist conformity.

Another revolution that splintered and failed is the preoccupation of the newest
play at the R.S.C.'s studio theater, the Pit. In ''Real Dreams,'' Trevor
Griffiths examines American activists of the Vietnam era much as he previously
investigated latter-day English Socialists (''The Party'') and the odyssey of
John Reed (the film ''Reds''). The setting is 1969 Cleveland, where white
college radicals must ''bring the war home'' and prove their mettle to ''black
and brown leadership'' by ''trashing'' a local A.& P. Adapting a story by an
American, Jeremy Pikser, Mr. Griffiths sincerely honors his characters'
idealistic ''real dreams'' while gently mocking the rhetoric, hypocrisies and
ideological posturing that compromise their goals. Yet the writing is so spare
and impressionistic that ''Real Dreams'' often seems like a rough sketch for the
important and moving play it promises to be. Ron Daniels's lugubrious staging,
whose elegiac tone might be more appropriate to ''Under Milk Wood,'' doesn't
summon up the boisterous 60's, and neither does the play-acting Americanese of
most of the cast (the excellent Gary Oldman most prominently excepted).

Oddly enough, it's on the West End where one can currently find a brand-new
political play that vents its anger at the local audience. ''Made in Bangkok,''
by the young writer Anthony Minghella, means to be a lacerating account of how
supposedly ''civilized'' English tourists and businessmen exploit the third
world for ''cheap and uncomplaining'' labor as well as cheaply bought sex.
Propelled by a lurid (and increasingly contrived) plot and peppered with
didactic sermons by the one righteous character, the play is heavy-handed yet
entertaining - and by no means untalented. As acted with uncommon passion by the
sometimes coy Felicity Kendal and staged to kill by Michael Blakemore (of
''Benefactors''), ''Made in Bangkok,'' rather like ''Whose Life Is It Anyway?''
and ''Pack of Lies'' before it, may well pass as a significant play in the West
End until the next real thing comes along.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Jim Norton and Colin Blakely in 'A Chorus of Disapproval'

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 29, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

'20/20' REPORT ON M.I.A.'S

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 612 words


ARE there still American prisoners of war in Vietnam? It is a ''haunting
question,'' as ''20/20'' says, a question that declines to be dismissed. It
lingers because families want to believe that husbands, fathers and sons are
still alive; it lingers because of unresolved issues. ''20/20'' explores the
question of prisoners on ABC at 10 o'clock tonight.

Say immediately that ''20/20'' doesn't really answer the question. How could it?
Short of a house-by-house, camp-by-camp search in Vietnam - an entirely unlikely
possibility - it is impossible to prove no prisoners remain. In the absence of
an actual repatriation, meanwhile, it is almost equally impossible to prove that
prisoners do remain. The families of those missing in action, the M.I.A.'s, are
trapped in a cruel dilemma.

The entire program, produced by Janice Tomlin, is devoted to the issue. The
first part of the program challenges the Army's method of identifying the bodies
that have been returned to this country. In fact, the word ''bodies'' scarcely
applies. Some of the families, on opening the flag-draped coffins, have found
only a few shards of bones.

Tom Jarriel, the ''20/20'' reporter, interviews independent anthropologists who
challenge the Army's identifications. They call them ''outrageous,'' and insist
that the fragmentary evidence makes positive identification impossible. Mr.
Jarriel also interviews an Army colonel who is placed in the extraordinarily
difficult position of defending the identifications. One may sympathize with the
colonel; he is facing an uphill task.

Subsequently, Mr. Jarriel reports on profiteering at the expense of the M.I.A.
families. Organizations and individuals sell them hope. ''20/20'' visits the
Thai-Laotian border. Information about the missing men is for sale, most of it,
apparently, spurious. Moreover, as Mr. Jarriel says, ''Bone merchants offer to
sell American remains to the highest bidder.'' It is a cruel, commercial
enterprise.

Nonetheless, the search continues, and so do the reports of the alleged
sightings of American prisoners. There have been more than 800 reports since
1975. ''20/20'' gives us one of the most intriguing reports.

Mr. Jarriel talks to Representative Bill Hendon, Republican of North Carolina,
who gets weekly briefings from the Defense Intelligence Agency on the alleged
sightings. Mr. Hendon took it on himself to speak to Robert Garwood, who emerged
from Vietnam in 1979, saying he had been held as a prisoner of war. He was
court-martialed in 1981 and found guilty of collaborating with the enemy.

Mr. Garwood told Mr. Hendon that American prisoners remained in Vietnam, and
drew a map of a military compound in Hanoi where he allegedly saw them. The map
was supposedly identical to one drawn by a Vietnamese refugee, who also said
that Americans were held in the compound.

The Defense Intelligence Agency, according to Mr. Hendon, dismissed the reports
and the alleged sightings. One reason it did, apparently, was that one of the
reports said the American prisoners were seen bathing. The intelligence agency
said this could not be true; the compound had no cistern.

''If the cistern's there, that's the key to it,'' Mr. Hendon says, ''and the
only way you're ever going to know if the cistern's there, is if you walk in
there and see it.''

Accordingly, Mr. Hendon visited Hanoi last February. We see him leaving a
meeting with some colleagues, walking to the compound and finding the cistern.
What does this prove? It is still unclear, but the Defense Intelligence Agency,
''20/ 20'' says, is now re-evaluating Mr. Garwood's information. ''20/20'' is
doing an intriguing, and appalling, program.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 30, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MEN IN THE NEWS;
2 CAREER MEN WHO WORKED THEIR WAY TO THE TOP OF NAVY AND AIR FORCE: LARRY DEAN
WELCH

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 608 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 29


Gen. Larry D. Welch, who entered the Air National Guard fresh out of high school
in 1952, was nominated today to be the new chief of staff of the Air Force.

In the intervening 34 years, the native of the Oklahoma Panhandle earned his
wings, flew combat missions in Vietnam and worked his way up the command
structure. Following a route that is becoming rare among commissioned officers,
he put off college until he had been in uniform nearly two decades.

Since August, General Welch has been commander in chief of the Strategic Air
Command at Offut Air Force Base, near Omaha, in charge of the largest part of
the nation's arsenal of intercontinental nuclear missiles and long-range
bombers. He also directs the strategic planning group that sets targets for
United States nuclear missiles.

'Always in That Left-Hand Seat'

With Senate confirmation, General Welch will assume the top command of the Air
Force as the service is designing a new generation of tactical fighter aircraft
for the next century. His background as a ''fighter jock'' still drives General
Welch to fly whenever he can, according to Air Force officers who know him. ''He
is qualified to fly everything the Air Force has got,'' one officer from the
Strategic Air Command said. ''When he flies on Air Force business, he is always
in that left-hand seat, as the pilot.''

But General Welch, who is 51 years old, has also been prepared for strategic
tasks by studies at the Armed Forces Staff College and the National War College
and by experience in top Air Force planning posts at the Pentagon and the
Strategic Air Command.

His determination to become an aviator earned him his wings in 1955 through the
aviation cadet program, then open to men without a college degree.

He Flew Over Vietnam

Graduation from flight school gave him the second lieutenant's commission that
qualified him later for 137 combat missions in Vietnam, flying F-4's out of
bases at Phon Rang and Da Nang, and in 1966 the operations command of the 366th
Tactical Fighter Wing at Da Nang.

In 1971 he received a bachelor's degree in business administration from the
University of Maryland, which was accompanied by a promotion to colonel near the
end of a five-year tour of duty as chief of the fighter division at Air Force
headquarters. He earned a master's degree in international relations from George
Washington University in 1972.

In 1984, while serving as Air Force deputy chief of staff, he received the four
stars of a full general.

Of slight build - ''tall and lean,'' as he was described by a staff officer at
the Strategic Air Command - the general wears his receding hair closely cropped.

Larry Dean Welch was born at Guymon, Okla., on June 9, 1934, the son of a
mechanic. In the Depression the family moved from Oklahoma to Texas before
settling in Liberal, Kan., about 40 miles up U.S. 54 from Guymon. There Larry
Welch met and married Eunice Ellis.

The Welches have a daughter and three sons. One of them, Paul, is entering the
Air Force Academy this summer.

''He has a very dry sense of humor,'' one former aide said. ''Ordinarily you
would say he is - well, not grim, but totally nonflamboyant. But he is a great
delight when he is wound up, and he seems to surprise and delight himself doing
it.''

The general is an infrequent and reportedly indifferent golfer and an occasional
jogger, but these days he is more apt to indulge his avocations of woodworking
and computer programming.

''He is very pleased to say that he has spent some enlisted time,'' a friend
said. ''It gives him a feeling of affinity with his people that he obviously
values and enjoys.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gen. Larry D. Welch (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 30, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 44 words


A Washington dispatch on Tuesday about the Vietnam Veterans Memorial
misidentified an Air Force technical sergeant, Gene A. Lauer, one of 110 war
dead whose names were added to the memorial. He was the brother, not the son, of
Robert Lauer of West Haven, Conn.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 30, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

HAZARD OF DIOXINS ASSAILED IN STUDY

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHABECOFF, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 20, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 688 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 29


Highly toxic airborne dioxins constitute an ''unacceptable'' and uncontrolled
threat to public health, according to a paper presented to the American Academy
for the Advancement of Science.

The paper, written by the Center for the Biology of Natural Systems of Queens
College, found that exposure to polychlorinated dioxins and their related
dibenzofurans caused 330 to 1,440 cases of cancer per million Americans over a
70-year lifetime of exposure.

The Environmental Protection Agency, in a health assessment published last fall,
concluded that at least some forms of dioxin caused cancer in humans. Robert G.
Kellum, chief of program analysis and technology in the agency's air and
radiation office, said that the agency had analyzed the risk of exposure to
dioxins at several specific sources. He said a national risk assessment of
exposure to airborne dioxins may be ready by the beginning of next year.

Mr. Kellum said he had not seen the Queens College paper and could not comment
on its findings.

Municipal Burning Implicated

Much of the dioxins and furans to which Americans are exposed come from the
burning of municipal and industrial wastes, according to the paper, which was
written by Barry Commoner, director of the Queens College center, along with
Thomas Webster and Karen Shapiro.

The report, which was presented Wednesday at an academy meeting in Philadelphia,
called for action by the environmental agency to limit emissions. It noted that
the cancer risks from these substances was far higher than the risks from
benzene, which is already controlled by the agency.

The cancer risk from benzene is 74.1 cases per million people over a lifetime
exposure, the report said.

It also said that the cancer risks from incinerated trash, already very serious,
was expected to grow because many municipalities were planning to build
incinerators because landfills are no longer available.

Agency Considers Regulation

The environmental agency is looking into whether to regulate dioxins as a toxic
air pollutant under the Clean Air Act. It is also deciding whether specific
sources of dioxin should be controlled, according to Mr. Kellum.

Dioxins and furans are highly toxic chemical compounds that have proved lethal
in tests on animals. There is continuing debate, however, on whether they cause
cancer in human beings. A study conducted by the Air Force on Vietnam veterans
exposed to dioxin in agent orange sprayed during the war found that the
mortality rate among those veterans was no higher than among veterans who had
not been in Vietnam.

Dr. Commoner said in a telephone interview that research in Vietnam by Dr.
Arnold Schecter showed that the exposure of soldiers there to dioxins was only
slightly higher than the average exposure to dioxin in the United States.
Accordingly, the Air Force test would not show a higher mortality rate among the
Vietnam veterans, he said.

The paper also disputes the view that natural events such as forest fire are a
major source of airborne dioxin. It notes that research in North Vietnam, where
there was little agent orange used and no municipal and industrial incineration,
found much less dioxin in the air. It also pointed to sediment samples from the
Great Lakes which showed little dioxin present before the 1930's, even though
there have always been forest fires in the area.

A study published by the Dow Chemical Company in 1978 proposed that dioxin was a
naturally occurring compound produced whenever there was combustion of
substances containing organic chlorine. Michael Rio, manager of Dow's
environmental services division in Michigan, said he could not comment on Dr.
Commoner's paper but that evidence suggested that dioxin in the air came from a
wide variety of sources including forest fires, motor vehicles, and fireplaces,
not just incinerators.

Dr. Commoner said that it was his view that dioxin was not itself a
cancer-causing agent but a triggering mechanism.

Dr. Commoner is the author of ''The Closing Circle'' and other works on the
environment. In 1980 he was the Presidential candidate of the Citizens Party.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 31, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ANSWERS TO QUIZ

SECTION: Section 1; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 386 words


Questions appear on page 10. 1. Students at a butlers' school in London put
glasses on their heads to learn good carriage. 2. Margaret Thatcher made the
first visit by a British Prime Minister to Israel. 3. The names of 110
servicemen were added to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial. Because the deaths
occurred outside the Vietnam war zone, the names were omitted when the memorial
was dedicated in 1982. 4. With her silver-handled umbrella, Mrs. Tucker hit a
purse snatcher in Manhattan and successfully detained him until a passer-by and
a police officer came to her aid. 5. Sport Aid. 6. Lampedusa, a small Italian
island in the Mediterranean, is the site of a United States Coast Guard station.
Libyans have threatened to blow up not only that installation, but also the
entire island, which it says is a base for attacks by the United States and the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization. 7. The seven states have been eliminated as
potential sites for the nation's first nuclear waste dump. The three Western
states are potential sites of the repository. 8. Slower. 9. The Grand Canyon.
10. The road, connecting China and Pakistan, has been opened to nationals of
other countries for the first time since its completion in 1978. 11. The Federal
speed limit of 55 miles an hour. 12. Carnegie Hall. 13. Representative Lundine
was selected as Governor Cuomo's running mate on the Democratic ticket. Mr.
Kavanaugh was named as the Republican candidate for lieutenant governor after
Jeanine F. Pirro withdrew from the ticket. 14. It is now possible to get a drink
at Disneyland. Beer and wine will be served after dark at corporate parties for
500 people or more. 15. President Reagan's decision to stop adhering to the
terms of a 1979 strategic arms accord unless there is a major change in Soviet
policy. 16. Jean Mayberry of Beaver Dam, Wis., is the first person ordered to
pay child support under a state law holding grandparents of an infant born to
unmarried minors liable for the support of the baby until the parents turn 18,
get married or join the service. 17. The Baltimore Sun and The Baltimore Evening
Sun. 18. Africa. 19. Al Arbour, the Islanders, 1980-1983. 20. Mayor Koch
selected Gorman Gilbert, a leading analyst of the nation's taxi industry, to
head New York City's Taxi and Limousine Commission.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Question

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 31, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Nonpresence in Vanuatu Of Cuba and Vietnam

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 171 words


To the Editor:

In a May 19 news article on Vanuatu, you state that this new nation of islands
in the South Pacific Ocean ''has a Cuban and Vietnamese presence'' but that
Vanuatu ''has refused to accredit a United States Ambassador.''

In actuality, neither Cuba nor Vietnam maintains resident diplomatic
representation in Vanuatu. Of the almost 40 nations that Vanuatu has diplomatic
relations with, only Britain, France and Australia maintain the sort of
''presence'' you mention.

Vanuatu has not yet established formal diplomatic relations with the United
States. But it is inaccurate to say the country has refused to accredit a United
States Ambassador. Furthermore, the record should show that Vanuatu became an
independent nation in 1980, when British and French colonial rule both came to
an end. You would lead one to believe that only Britain ruled the former
condominium colony of the New Hebrides. ROBERT F. VAN LIEROP New York, May 19,
1986 The writer is the representative of Vanuatu at the United Nations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 31, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CROCKER ABSORBED INTO WELLS FARGO

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 35, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 547 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, May 30


The Crocker National Corporation, a bank with roots stretching to the early days
of California, ceased to exist today as it was merged into Wells Fargo & Company
in the biggest acquisition in banking history.

Some 1,600 employees of Crocker, plus 43 from Wells Fargo, were laid off today
as Wells Fargo moved quickly to cut costs and realize the economies of scale it
hopes to achieve from the $1.08 billion merger.

Officials of Wells Fargo said another 1,000 jobs or more would be eliminated by
the end of the year and 2,000 more in 1987, bringing the number of eliminated
jobs to 5,000 out of a total employment of 26,000 at the two banks. Some of the
reductions will come from attrition, not layoffs, however. Wells expects to save
$200 million a year in labor costs after the consolidation, which will touch
most departments.

The officials said 120 branches would be closed, leaving the new Wells with just
under 500 branches, compared with a little over 300 that Wells has now. The
Crocker name will stay on the bank's main branch, an ornate building at the
corner of Montgomery and Market Streets.

''The deal closed today,'' Carl E. Reichardt, the chairman and chief executive
of Wells Fargo, said at a news conference. He said the purchase ''went as
smoothly as something this size could go.''

At Crocker, the mood was bittersweet. Jeffrey L. Morby, vice chairman of
Crocker, said, ''It's analagous to what I imagined the evacuation of Vietnam was
like.''

Wells announced on Feb. 7 that it had reached an agreement to buy Crocker, the
25th-largest bank in the nation, from its British owner, Midland Bank. Crocker
returned to profitability in 1985 after several tumultuous years, culminating in
a $324 million loss in 1984 from bad loans. Wells has improved its profitability
in recent years.

Wells Now No. 10

The purchase will make Wells into the 10th-largest bank in the nation, with
assets of more than $40 billion.

Wells executives said the cost of terminating employees, changing signs and
computer systems and other tasks necessary for the merger would cost $65 million
to $75 million, an amount that had been capitalized and would not affect
earnings significantly.

Mr. Reichardt said Wells was interested in further acquisitions, particularly in
California. He said that it will take two years to ''digest'' Crocker but that
the bank might consider another acquisition before then if the right opportunity
came along.

Few Crocker Executives Retained

But all was not as jubilant at Crocker, named for Chester Crocker, who helped
build the first transcontinental railroad in 1869 and helped form one of the
predecessor banks of Crocker Bank in 1883. Only 18 of the 72 Crocker officers at
the level of senior vice president or higher were offered jobs at Wells.

Frank V. Cahouet, Crocker's chairman and chief executive, was offered only a
seat on the Wells board, not an operating position. Mr. Reichardt said Mr.
Cahouet was going to Hawaii to think about his future and had not yet indicated
whether he would accept the seat. Mr. Cahouet could not be reached for comment.

In his last letter to employees today, which he called the ''last page of
Crocker's history,'' Mr. Cahouet concluded, ''May you always carry Crocker in
your heart.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 1, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MISSIONARIES FOR DEMOCRACY: U.S. AID FOR GLOBAL PLURALISM

BYLINE: By DAVID K. SHIPLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2966 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 31


For several years after Soviet troops entered Afghanistan in 1979, a former
editor and Information Minister in Kabul tried to get money to restore the
village school system destroyed in rebel-held areas of his country.

The Afghan, Sabahuddin Kushkaki, applied unsuccessfully to the United States
Agency for International Development and to major American private foundations.
Every one turned him down, thinking the war would be short.

Then, as the fighting continued, he and some friends happened upon an
organization with the right combination of Government money, bureaucratic
flexibility and anti-Communist commitment - the National Endowment for
Democracy.

Using Federal money, it provided $180,845 to train teachers, conduct literacy
courses for rebel fighters, reopen some schools and publish new textbooks with
unflattering accounts of the Soviet role in Afghan history. ''They have been
giving us help without any strings attached,'' Mr. Kushkaki said on a recent
visit to Washington.

Public Money, Private Interests

This is part of an unusual worldwide campaign, billed as a promotion of
democracy and free enterprise, that mixes public funds and private interests.
Conceived in a new spirit of ideological confidence in the United States, the
effort is described by some of those involved as an expression of the ''Reagan
Doctrine,'' which envisions an aggressive American policy in fostering a move
toward democracy in the third world. After three years, the program has now
taken a clear shape.

The National Endowment for Democracy, a private group created for the purpose,
has channeled a total of $53.7 million in Government money to foreign political
parties, labor unions, newspapers, magazines, book publishers and other
institutions in countries, predominantly in countries where democracy is deemed
fragile or nonexistent.

The Federal money is being used for such undertakings as helping the Solidarity
labor union print underground publications in Poland, buying materials for an
opposition newspaper in Nicaragua, bolstering the opposition in South Korea,
aiding a party in Northern Ireland that is a member of the Socialist
International and getting out the vote in Grenada and Latin American countries.

Money is also going to monitor and publicize human-rights abuses by Vietnam, for
union-organizing in the Philippines and for public-opinion surveys to help
political parties opposing the right-wing dictatorship in Chile.

''We're engaged in almost missionary work.'' said Keith Schuette, head of the
National Republican Institute for International Affairs, which conveys some of
the money to foreign political parties that share the Republicans' views.
''We've seen what the Socialists do for each other. We've seen what the
Communists do for each other. And now we've come along, and we have a broadly
democratic movement, a force for democracy.''

In some respects, the program resembles the aid given by the Central
Intelligence Agency in the 1950's, 60's and 70's to bolster pro-American
political groups. But that aid was clandestine and, subsequent Congressional
investigations found, often used planted newspaper articles and other forms of
intentionally misleading information.

The current financing is largely public - despite some recipients' wish to keep
some activities secret - and appears to be given with the objective of shoring
up political pluralism, broader than the C.I.A.'s goals of fostering
pro-Americanism. Although some grants go to unions and parties that are close to
the Administration's policy line, others support groups that disagree with
Washington on the danger of the Soviet threat, for instance, or on aid to the
Nicaraguan rebels. Concept Collects Praise and Criticism The concept of a
private group as a conduit for Government funds for such a program has drawn
both praise and criticism from liberals and conservatives alike.

Supporters praise it for lending a novel flexibility to Government-aided efforts
abroad, for doing what official agencies have never been comfortable doing in
public. Opponents in Congress have branded it as more anti-Communist than
pro-democratic and have faulted it for meddling in other countries' internal
affairs. Others say that while it may make Americans feel good, it has had
little political impact.

The National Endowment was created in 1983 as an amalgam of various sectors of
American society, including business, labor, academic institutions and the two
major political parties.

Its board of directors reflects that diversity, including such prominent figures
as former Vice President Mondale; former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger;
Lane Kirkland, president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O.; Representative Dante B. Fascell,
the Florida Democrat who heads the House Foreign Affairs Committee; Olin C.
Robison, president of Middlebury College; Frank J. Fahrenkopf Jr., chairman of
the Republican National Committee, and Charles T. Manatt, former chairman of the
Democratic National Committee.

The endowment's chairman is John Richardson, who was president in the 1960's of
Radio Free Europe, which was funded by the C.I.A.. He was Assistant Secretary of
State for Educational and Cultural Affairs in the 1970's, and has worked with
nonprofit agencies such as Freedom House and the International Rescue Committee.

The money, disbursed to the National Endowment by the United States Information
Agency, then flows through complex channels. Some is given directly by the group
to those who use it. But most of it goes from the endowment to four ''core
grantees.'' They are the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s Free Trade Union Institute; the Center
for International Private Enterprise of the Chamber of Commerce, and the
National Republican and National Democratic Institutes for International
Affairs, which are affiliated with the Republican and Democratic national
committees. These either run programs themselves or pass the money on to others.

The concept of the endowment took shape as the country moved from the dark
self-doubts after the Vietnam War into a new era of confidence in its own
virtues and a conviction that democracy should be supported publicly and
proudly, without the secrecy that tainted the C.I.A.'s activities. From Covert
to Overt: Evolution of Policy ''We should not have to do this kind of work
covertly,'' said Carl Gershman, president of the endowment, who was an aide to
Jeane J. Kirkpatrick when she was the chief United States delegate to the United
Nations. ''It would be terrible for democratic groups around the world to be
seen as subsidized by the C.I.A. We saw that in the 60's, and that's why it has
been discontinued. We have not had the capability of doing this, and that's why
the endowment was created.''

Mr. Gershman says that there is no contact between the C.I.A. and the endowment
and that before grants are made, a list of the potential recipients is sent by
the endowment through the State Department to the C.I.A. to be sure none of them
are getting covert funds. No such case has been reported, Mr. Gershman said.

J. Brian Atwood, president of the National Democratic Institute for
International Affairs, which receives some of the money, denies that the
endowment's work bears any resemblance at all to earlier C.I.A. activities,
which he said ''did terrible damage to our own values'' and ''reflected a
misunderstanding of what our values as a democratic society were all about.''

He said that ''many institutions didn't know they were receiving C.I.A. money,''
and that those who get money from the endowment are supposed to know where the
money comes from and must agree to have the fact publicized.

Some grants seem at least superficially similar, however. La Prensa, the
opposition paper in Nicaragua, is receiving $100,000 worth of newsprint, ink and
other supplies this year to help it survive. In the early 1970's, the C.I.A.
gave at least $1.6 million to El Mercurio, the major Santiago daily, which also
faced economic pressure from the Government of President Salvador Allende
Gossens. Books and magazines were published with C.I.A. money, and campaigns to
get out the vote were conducted, as they are now with endowment money.

The prospect of publicity causes discomfort to some who receive money. Because
Congress has made the endowment subject to the Freedom of Information Act,
Eugenia Kemble, head of the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s Free Trade Union Institute, has
expressed uneasiness about providing the detailed financial statements that are
being required by the General Accounting Office. In a draft report, the G.A.O.
criticized the endowment for inadequate monitoring of expenditures and
recommended tighter procedures. Miss Kemble complained that any report going to
the endowment can become public.

Since the end of World War II, the A.F.L.-C.I.O. has funneled money from various
Government agencies to build up non-Communist unions abroad. Despite its
denials, the labor movement has been suspected of conveying C.I.A. money. Miss
Kemble expressed worry that publicity could endanger individuals facing
dictatorial governments and involved in ''sensitive'' work.

''There are some grantees we are phasing out because they cannot stand this,''
she said. ''There's a failure to empathize with the people out there in terms of
the political difficulties in which they have to operate.'' The Case for Secrecy
To Protect Infiltrators For example, detailed expense reports, including names
and specifics of the clandestine Solidarity printing operation inside Poland,
would probably give the Polish police enough information to close down the
operation. Miss Kemble said one European organization had infiltrators in
Communist unions to report on their plans and activities; making details public
would damage the effort, she said.

But Mr. Schuette, of the Republican Institute, has a different view. ''We cannot
be secret,'' he said. ''There is nothing secret. Our rule is, it's going to be
public. Therefore, I'm not going to do anything that is going to damage people
if it becomes public.''

Although $53.7 million seems a small amount when compared with the $38.3 billion
allocated in foreign aid over the last three years, some members of Congress
object to the grants in view of cutbacks in domestic programs. At a recent
Congressional hearing. Representative Barney Frank, Democrat of Massachusetts,
said, ''To say that we're not going to fund public transportation or research on
cancer because we've got to give money to a French union for political purposes
just doesn't seem reasonable.'' Representative Hank Brown, Republican of
Colorado, raised questions about possible conflict of interest, noting that the
endowment's board includes current or former officers of some of the major grant
recipients, including the A.F.L.-C.I.O., the Democratic and Republican
institutes, and the Chamber of Commerce. Although they do not vote on their own
programs, he said, ''The board has seen its job as one of dividing the public
money among their own organizations.''

Mr. Gershman and others involved counter that the input of such experienced
people is essential for a wise program.

But that wisdom has also been challenged. At a Congressional hearing recently,
Representative Frank chided the Democratic Institute for supporting the Social
Democratic and Labor Party of Northern Ireland, which grew out of the nonviolent
Catholic civil rights movement. Mr. Atwood called it ''the only major party that
is seeking to work through the democratic process,'' and said it needed help in
building a structure. A total of $85,000 has been allocated for a training
institute and a seminar on financing, communications and organization, Mr.
Atwood said. Taxing Americans To Tell Irish of Politics Representative Frank
raised an eyebrow. ''Maybe I've been in Massachusetts too long,'' he said, ''but
the notion that we have to tax the Americans to teach the Irish about politics
seems to me a very strange one. If people want to help one party or another in
Northern Ireland, that's fine. But I don't think the American taxpayers ought to
be taxed to do that.''

That is precisely what is happening, however, not only in Northern Ireland, but
also in Asia, Latin America and elsewhere. Those involved argue that democracy
cannot be bolstered without strengthening democratic institutions.

The Republicans and Democrats approach the task in different ways. The Democrats
usually hold conferences and seminars for a variety of parties in a given
country or region, while the Republicans choose a particular party that seems to
share conservative American positions on foreign policy and economic issues. The
two institutes worked together to monitor the recent elections in the
Philippines, documenting fraud and intimidation.

The effort thus provides common ground for diverse American viewpoints. ''A
conservative may see it as a better way to compete with the Communists,'' Mr.
Atwood said. ''I see it as a better way to bring about human rights in the world
and a better way to bring about change and development in the world.''

This sometimes puts the program at odds with the Administration's policies and
preferences. The Social Democratic and Labor Party of Northern Ireland, for
example, is a member of the Socialist International and a supporter of the
Sandinista Government of Nicaragua, which the Reagan Administration would like
to see overthrown. State Department Opposed Seoul Program Similarly, when the
Democrats proposed a conference in Washington of the South Korean opposition,
the State Department worried about adverse reaction from the Seoul Government.
The endowment gave the grant anyway, the conference was held and the State
Department ultimately revised its assessment.

On May 9-11, the Democrats used their money to sponsor a conference in Caracas
of democratic parties from Venezuela, Chile, Argentina, Uruguay and Spain ''to
share ideas and experiences of party leaders who have been through the same
problem - military dictatorship,'' Mr. Atwood said.

This kind of activity has two long-term benefits, he says: First, to build a
sense of international solidarity among those who believe in democracy, and
second, to reduce the fear of some leaders in Washington that friendly military
dictatorships may give way to democratically elected governments prone to
Communist influence.

In Mr. Atwood's view, this can reassure ''the people who are status
quo-oriented, who say that we can't get on the side of change because we don't
know what will happen.''

''The fear of the unknown factor is less if you know the people who are pushing
for change,'' he said. Republican Focus Is More Narrow The Republican Institute
focuses more narrowly on moderate and conservative parties. ''We wouldn't get
involved with a Socialist Party,'' Mr. Schuette said. Those the Republicans have
helped have often lost elections -in Portugal, Costa Rica and Bolivia, and most
recently in Colombia, where the Conservative Party's Presidential candidate,
Alvaro Gomez Hurtado, lost in a landslide May 26 to Virgilio Barco Vargas of the
Liberal Party. The grant was intended to increase the participation of
disaffected voters and party members.

''We do not fund political candidates in campaigns overseas,'' Mr. Schuette
said. ''Our programs are not designed or intended to have any effect on
elections.''

This was seconded by Mr. Fahrenkopf, the Republican national chairman and vice
chairman of the endowment. ''We feel we are accomplishing our purpose if in a
country there are free elections,'' he declared. ''It's really superfluous
whether the particular parties we're helping are victorious or not.''

The lines between promoting democracy and promoting a particular party's chances
in an election are hard to draw, however. The A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s Free Trade Union
Institute has channeled money to unions and other organizations associated with
particular parties in Latin America, Africa, Asia and Western Europe. Furor Over
Aid To French Rightists In an unpublicized move that was disclosed late last
year, a $575,000, two-year grant was authorized to an extreme right-wing French
group, the National Inter-University Union, known as U.N.I., its acronym in
French. In 1982, a parliamentary inquiry found that U.N.I. had been created
largely by a paramilitary, extremist nationalist organization called Service
d'Action Civique, or S.A.C., which was founded in 1947 to provide order at
meetings and protection for Gen. Charles DeGaulle.

S.A.C. was infiltrated by criminal elements in the 1960's and 70's, the inquiry
found, and was declared an illegal organization after a political scandal arose
around the killing of six people in the southern French town of Auriol in 1981.
''U.N.I. was, at its beginnings, a satellite movement of S.A.C.,'' the inquiry
concluded, ''and it is today closely associated with it.''

U.N.I. opposed the governing Socialists before and during the last election
campaign, pasting posters over subway maps declaring, ''Socialism is a lie and a
fraud.'' It has distributed pamphlets accusing a Catholic aid agency of being a
Marxist-Leninist front, and has campaigned against what it sees as Marxist
influence in universities.

Last November, after French journalists reported the American funding of U.N.I.,
the endowment suspended its grant, Mr. Gershman said, leaving $73,000 of the
$575,000 undelivered. The board is to decide next week whether to resume
payments on the current grant, but Mr. Gershman said that no further grant would
be made.

It is a new process, Mr. Fahrenkopf observed, one that is bound to run into
trouble in the beginning, if it is as bold as it should be. ''We're going to
make mistakes,'' he said. ''If we don't make mistakes, we shouldn't exist.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of John Richardson (Camera Press, 1973) (page 16); Photo of Carl
Gershman (NYT) (page 16)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 1, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

OFFICIALS SAY TERRORIST GROUP HAD ITS ROOTS IN EFFORT TO IMPROVE PRISON LIFE

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. MADDEN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1311 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, May 30


A nine-year pattern of bombings, murder and bank robberies, charged to eight
people in a Federal indictment here this week, had its origins in a movement to
seek better conditions for prison inmates, according to Federal law-enforcement
officials.

In the early 1970's, the officials said, a few members split away from the
prison movement and evolved into what the indictment described as a radical
terrorist group that sought to overthrow the Government.

Some members of the group, using as many as 32 false identities and 13 different
residences, according to law-enforcement officials, eluded a nationwide search
until investigators got what they described as a lucky breakthrough.

On a hunch, they said, an alias used by one of the group members was checked
against automobile registrations in other states, which eventually led
investigators to Ohio in 1984 and the arrest of five members of the group.

''We thought we had them at least once before we eventually did apprehend them,
but they got away,'' said one official familiar with the investigation.

A String of Charges

The accounts of the group's origins, activities and eventual arrest come from
interviews with law-enforcement officials, allegations in the latest indictment
and testimony in earlier court cases.

With the new indictment, announced here Thursday, new attention was focused on
the group, whose members were charged with 19 bombings or attempted bombings in
Massachusetts and New York; 10 bank robberies totaling nearly $900,000 in five
Eastern states; three attempted murders, and the slaying in 1981 of a New Jersey
trooper, Philip Lamonaco.

Although all eight people are currently in various Federal prisons for
convictions on charges related to some of the latest accusations, Federal
officials, like William F. Weld, the United States Attorney for Massachusetts,
said the indictment for the first time had spelled out the full scope of the
group's activities from Maine to Virginia.

'Frustrated Social Reformers'

The new indictment was denounced by two lawyers familiar with some of the
defendants in earlier cases.

''It's depressing, bordering on disgust, that they are trying to run this
through again,'' said Robert J. Doyle of Boston, who has represented one of the
defendants. Mr. Doyle said that while he did not know all eight people, some of
them were ''frustrated social reformers, who have had a lot of hard knocks, both
in life and in prison.''

William M. Kunstler, the New York lawyer who has represented two of the
defendants, called the latest charges ''vicious'' and ''needless'' because, he
said, some of the people have already been sentenced to prison terms as long as
53 years.

Mr. Kunstler also said that publicity about the indictment would make it
impossible to get a fair trial in New Jersey for two of the defendants, Thomas
William Manning and Richard Charles Williams. Their trial for murder in the
death of Trooper Lamonaco is scheduled to begin Sept. 22.

According to Federal officials, two original members of the group, Mr. Manning
and Raymond Luc Levasseur, both now 39 years old and both veterans of the
Vietnam War, met in the early 1970's while they were inmates at a Massachusetts
prison at Walpole. They said Mr. Manning had been convicted of robbery and Mr.
Levasseur of selling marijuana.

Radical Group Formed

After their release, officials said the two men initially joined a group in
Maine, the Statewide Correction Alliance for Reform, to work for better
conditions for prisoners.

Officials said the two men broke away in 1974 and formed a more radical group,
the Sam Melville-Jonathan Jackson Unit, which was named for Mr. Melville, a
radical killed in the 1971 prison riot at Attica, N.Y., and for Mr. Jackson, who
was killed while trying to kidnap a judge in California.

According to the indictment, Mr. Levasseur's wife, Patricia Helen Gros, and Mr.
Manning's wife, Carol Ann Manning, now both 31, also joined the group in 1974.
Two other defendants -Jaan Karl Laaman, 38, and Christopher Everett King, 36 -
joined in 1980, the indictment said, with Mr. Williams joining in 1981 and
Barbara J. Curzi, 28, joining in 1982, it said.

It Started as Reading Group

One official familiar with the investigation said the group initially began as a
reading group for Marxist and Leninist tracts but evolved into weapons practice
and other activities, in the words of a statement from Federal prosecutors, ''to
bomb corporate, government and military buldings, to issue 'communiques' after
each bombing expressing the purpose of the bombing and inciting others to
similar acts of violence, and to rob banks in order to finance the group's
activities.''

From 1976 to 1979, the indictment said, the Sam Melville-Jonathan Jackson Unit
bombed or attempted to bomb eight buildings in Massachusetts and New York,
including the Suffolk County Courthouse in Boston, where 22 people were injured
in 1976.

From 1982 to 1984, the indictment continued, members of the group, using the
name United Freedom Front, bombed 11 buildings in the New York City area. Six of
the defendants were convicted in Brooklyn last March for one of the bombings.

The indictment said the group financed its activities with the armed robbery of
10 banks in Maine, Connecticut, Vermont, New York and Virginia from 1975 to
1984.

A Complex Methodology

As described by the indictment, members of the group looked over buildings to be
bombed, moved with false identification among a network of ''safe houses,'' used
''mail drops'' and public telephones to talk to one another, monitored
law-enforcement communications with devices such as scanners, and held regular
meetings, called ''sets,'' with coded references to each member, to discuss what
the indictment called ''an agenda for achieving their goals.''

The indictment charged that Mr. Levasseur and Mr. Manning attempted to murder a
Portland, Me., police office after a bank robbery in 1975, that Mr. Williams and
Mr. Manning murdered Trooper Lamonaco on Interstate 80 near the Pennsylvania
border in 1981, and that Mr. King and Mr. Laaman attempted to murder two
Massachusetts troopers in North Attleboro in 1982.

Federal officials said that after the slaying of Trooper Lamonaco in 1981,
various law-enforcement agencies began to see links in the series of robberies
and bombings and began to share information. That led the Federal Bureau of
Investigation to create an investigative team in 1983 with representatives from
Federal, state and local agencies.

After months of futile leads, a random check of names used by one of the women
to register a car in Connecticut led investigators to Ohio where, on Nov. 4,
1984, five members of the group were arrested, the officials said.

Children Used False Names

Even the three children of Mr. Levasseur, ages 9, 7 and 5, and the three
children of the Mannings, ages 11, 6 and 3, used false names, the officials
said. The Mannings and their three children fled their rented house in New Lyme,
Ohio, just before law-enforcement officials arrived, but they were tracked down
and arrested in Norfolk, Va., on April 24, 1985. All the children were turned
over to the juvenile authorities for placement with relatives, officials said.

The indictment this week on charges of racketeering and conspiracy will give
Federal officials additional grounds to hold any of the defendants, who might be
nearing release on earlier, lesser charges. Mr. King, one official noted, is due
to be released from prison in August after serving a sentence for weapons
violations.

Asked why the indictment came more than 18 months after the arrest of most of
the people, one official said time had been needed to sort out the evidence,
some of which was in code, and to produce witnesses.

''It was a fairly complex investigation,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Richard C. Williams (AP); Photo of Thomas W. Manning (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 1, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Carillon for Kennedy Library

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 46, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 40 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, May 31


A veterans' group has presented a carillon to the John F. Kennedy Library here.
The carillon, dedicated Thursday on what would have been Kennedy's 69th
birthday, is a gift from the American Veterans of World War II, Korea and
Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 1, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE VIEW;
AT ITS BEST, IT WAS A SEASON THAT ILLUMINATED OUR WORLD

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 3; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2508 words


As ritual has it, the 1985-86 New York theater season is officially over
tonight, when the Broadway establishment hands out its Tony Awards on
television. If the Tony winners and losers seem beside the point, it's not
completely Broadway's fault. The world became a stage in the season's waning
weeks, with a gruesome vengeance that might upstage any play. One could well
feel silly and irrelevant going about one's business attending the theater while
the front pages screamed of terrorism, of nuclear disaster, or the willful
forgetting of the past by the man who would be president of the country where
Hitler was born. In such a civilization - or absence of same - does one stay
home to watch the late-breaking news and brood, or go off to see the most
profusely nominated Tony contender, ''The Mystery of Edwin Drood''?

There's plenty to be said for ''Edwin Drood,'' of course: The theater that takes
us out of ourselves and out of the world is the one all theatergoers first fell
in love with as children, the one with which none of us could or would ever
part. But a theater's artistic vitality is not measured solely by its ability to
spin beguiling escapist fantasies (of which ''Drood,'' the likely winner of the
Best Musical Tony, was the Broadway season's most transporting). Our stage, like
all before it, must have poetry that makes us re-examine the world we inhabit
and our place within it.

The unexpected truth about the New York season of 1985-86 is that, more than
most seasons in this decade, it actually did provide that kind of theater. Not
much of that work surfaced on Broadway -which is why tonight's Tony telecast
will seem far more geriatric and out-of-touch than the New York theater it
purports to represent - and some of the better plays had to be imported from
abroad. Still, this was a season when one left the theater on surprisingly
numerous occasions convinced that artists (writers, directors, performers) had
illuminated that increasingly dangerous environment beyond the playhouse with a
penetrating and therapeutic, if not necessarily reassuring, brilliance.

Among tonight's sometimes ragtag and capriciously selected Tony nominees, the
most persuasive examples of this living theater are Michael Frayn's play
''Benefactors'' and the Lily Tomlin show, ''The Search for Signs of Intelligent
Life in the Universe.'' Both works are in part about the search for signs of
intelligent life in a universe where that search seems increasingly doomed to
failure. In Mr. Frayn's play, which looks back with distress to London in the
late 1960's, an architect wants to save the world (or an impoverished pocket of
it) with a utopian public housing scheme, even as he and his wife hope to save
the troubled marriage of a couple in their own trendy neighborhood. But, in the
author's Chekhovian view, such efforts at benefaction misfire tragically when
do-gooders refuse either to examine the purity of their own motives or to
understand those they presume to help.

''Benefactors'' eventually becomes a devastating, microcosmic view of how the
progressive faith in change, both social and personal, collapsed after the 60's,
leaving the disillusioned 1980's in their wake. The same description applies to
Act II of ''The Search for Signs.'' Miss Tomlin impersonates all the characters
in a playlet about a gung-ho 60's feminist whose unshakable idealism, like her
back issues of Ms. magazine, is up for grabs at a garage sale. The author, Jane
Wagner, could almost be speaking for Mr. Frayn when she writes of characters
whose activism has given way to the compromise of being ''politically conscious
and upwardly mobile at the same time.''

This theme recurred, with variations, in Eric Bogosian's riveting Off Broadway
one-man show, ''Drinking in America,'' which opened with a recitation from a
1971 Boston University rebel's diary (''I want to change the world, and I know I
can do it'') and concluded with the actor impersonating a panhandler adrift in a
callous 1986 New York that apparently never did undergo that radical change. Two
of the season's many outstanding revivals reflect a similar despair over
civilization's perfectability, and do so from the vantage point of the same
Vietnam era that Mr. Bogosian, Miss Wagner and Mr. Frayn memorialize. The sad
but starry-eyed denizens of Sunnyside, Queens, in John Guare's ''House of Blue
Leaves'' (1971) are as drunk on self-destructive, all-American fantasies of
money, power and fame as the hustlers, junkies and show-biz strivers of
''Drinking in America.'' (''When famous people sleep at night, it's us they
dream of,'' says one of Mr. Guare's most self-deluded dreamers.) The greedy
working-class English rascals and hypocrites in Joe Orton's bleak farce ''Loot''
(1964) are completely contemptuous of their society's civic and religious
pieties; they could well be the citizens that the swinging 60's architect of
''Benefactors'' so misguidedly believes he can ''save'' with his grandiose
housing towers.

''Blue Leaves'' has an added touch of grim contemporaneity: Mr. Guare envisioned
an assassination attempt on the Pope long before the reality arrived. In ''Let
the Artists Die,'' presented by the director Tadeusz Kantor and Cracow's Cricot
2 company at LaMama last fall, and Martha Clarke's ''Vienna: Lusthaus,'' a
Music-Theater Group/ Lenox Arts Center production reopening at the Public
Theater this Wednesday, the audience could be swept into the entire century's
continuum of terror.

Both of these works are choreographed dreams - the 70-year-old Mr. Kantor's
reflecting the repressions and mass graves of his native Poland, Miss Clarke's a
deathly waltz through the fin-de-siecle Vienna of Freud, Schnitzler and
incipient anti-Semitic pogroms. The overpowering imagery - of recurrent suicide
and Holocaustal torture in ''Artists,'' of beautiful bodies passing from Art
Nouveau eroticism into militaristic goose-stepping in ''Vienna'' - seep eerily
into today's nightmarish headlines. Those audiences seeking an equally original
but verbal articulation of the historical forces dredged up by Mr. Kantor's and
Miss Clarke's subconscious could go to the Public Theater, where Wallace Shawn's
bleak comedy about the making of a fascist mind, ''Aunt Dan and Lemon,''
illustrates why and how the big lies of the Nazi experiment could happen (are
happening) again, even in so-called civilized societies.

Should one feel that all the worthwhile theater of the season was downbeat,
however, the most exhilarating new American play of 1985-86, Sam Shepard's ''Lie
of the Mind,'' at Off Broadway's Promenade Theater, leaves one with that same
stubborn, hopeless hope for redemption that was also the residue of the fine
Broadway revival of O'Neill's ''Iceman Cometh.'' To be sure, the lay of the land
in ''A Lie of the Mind,'' as of its author's past works, is not sweet: It's an
America riddled with violence, genocidal cowboy myths, imperialistic fights over
territory, demons lurking in the dark. But Mr. Shepard, for whatever private
reasons, has altered his perspective on the family he's presented so savagely in
the trilogy of ''Curse of the Starving Class,'' ''Buried Child'' and ''True
West.'' While ''A Lie of the Mind'' is not ''domesticated'' Shepard, it is
frequently mistaken for that (especially by male critics) because it's the first
Shepard play with full-blooded female characters. In this work, love -described
as ''a disease'' that ''makes you feel good while it lasts'' - conquers
everything, binding men to women and parents to children with mythic force.

The engagement one feels at ''A Lie of the Mind'' is hard to find on Broadway,
not in the least because new American plays of its ambitions simply aren't
produced there anymore. In 1985-86, the Broadway theater's attrition continued,
unchecked. While a handful of Off Broadway hits do transfer to Broadway (such as
''Loot''), many others (typified by ''A Lie of the Mind'') don't, due to an
increasing and legitimate fear among producers that to move a serious Off
Broadway success to Broadway is to risk prematurely killing a good thing. Thus
does Broadway continue to dwindle into a fairway for musicals, the occasional
London import (''Benefactors'') and the increasingly few plays that risk the
journey from a nonprofit theatrical institution either Off Broadway or out of
town.

It's because the Broadway theater has so completely cut itself off from the
artistic life of the American theater, as defined by its most exciting new
productions, that its audience continues to decline. Theatergoers who want to
see the most provocative new plays, those that connect to the real world, just
assume that they are not on Broadway - any more than a wholly original film like
''My Beautiful Laundrette'' is likely to displace mass fare like ''Spies Like
Us'' on HBO. An unfortunate consequence of this self-perpetuating phenomenon is
that even the worthwhile plays on Broadway have difficulty finding their
audience. This is why such Tony-nominated productions as ''The Iceman Cometh,''
''Hay Fever,'' ''Loot'' and, to a lesser extent, ''Benefactors'' this season -
or ''As Is,'' ''Ma Rainey's Black Bottom'' or ''Joe Egg'' the previous season -
rarely played to full houses (or, in most cases, half-full houses), even when
their tickets were heavily discounted through the TKTS booth or coupons. The
audience that might support these plays, if it goes to theater at all, won't
venture beyond Off Broadway, out of a justified conviction that the cutting edge
of theater as a living art has long since fled there. (Tickets are cheaper,
too.) As far as an observer can determine, the Broadway establishment has
decided to deal with this hemorrhaging crisis by minimizing its gravity and
papering it over with temporary solutions and public relations. For reasons
known only to its membership, the trade organization of Broadway managements,
the League of American Theaters and Producers, made a major effort this season
to publicize a commissioned study demonstrating that ticket prices are in line
with the inflationary increases in other consumer products. Yet even as this
study was disseminated in press conferences and Playbill editorials, the public
was casting its own vote - by consistently paying full price for tickets to only
one or two Broadway productions. Might not the League better devote its efforts
to studying how to facilitate production? The number of new plays on Broadway is
so low that tonight two prestigious revivals - ''Blood Knot'' (a 1960 Athol
Fugard play) and ''Blue Leaves'' (1971) - will be competing in the ''best play''
Tony category, rather than as revivals, to lend glamour to a crucial award
category that couldn't be respectably filled otherwise. Even so, ''Blue
Leaves,'' the likely winner, is not really a Broadway production but an
auspicious hit for the new theatrical regime at Lincoln Center, 20 blocks north
of Times Square.

Arguably the season's best musical also turned up at Lincoln Center and also
dated from 1971 - the Philharmonic concert restoration of Stephen Sondheim's
''Follies,'' presented for two nights with an all-star cast in September. Aside
from Rupert Holmes's ''Edwin Drood,'' a cheering (if uneven) show which was
initiated in Central Park by the New York Shakespeare Festival, the new Broadway
musicals were mediocre to poor - an especially ominous sign for the commercial
theater. It's sad enough when the only new American plays mounted by Broadway
tend to be either Neil Simon imitations (''Doubles,'' ''Social Security'') or
middlebrow regional theater melodramas (''Execution of Justice''). When the
bottom drops out of the musical assembly line, Broadway is risking the desertion
of its most loyal audience, the special-occasion and tourist trade.

Not even the promising recruitment of star dance-world choreographers (Peter
Martins for ''Song & Dance,'' Twyla Tharp for ''Singin' in the Rain'') could
shake the Broadway musical out of its lethargy this season. One musical, ''Big
Deal,'' became the most symbolic and distressing failure of 1985-86. Here was a
multimillion-dollar extravaganza with vintage hit songs, a talented cast, a
proven comic story and no less a choreographer than Bob Fosse. What could go
wrong? All ''Big Deal'' wanted to be was a tired businessman's entertainment in
the ''42d Street'' mold, and all the elements (not to mention dollars) were in
place for it to succeed at that. But such is the low estate of producing
expertise that this once simple Broadway task could not be accomplished: Somehow
''Big Deal'' became a dank, cheerless, characterless show that looked pallid
even when compared to a modest Fosse musical of the 1960's, ''Sweet Charity,''
that was revived during the same month.

If Broadway can't successfully manufacture a crowd-pleasing musical or two a
season and if its high costs and shrinking audiences discourage the production
of plays, it will be lucky to survive in its current, straitened form, let alone
stage a recovery. The litany of rhetorical questions remains unchanged from
season to season: When the plays that get good reviews fail at the box office,
why should producers attempt to produce plays on Broadway? When a writer like
Sam Shepard can become the preeminent contemporary American playwright without
ever having a play done on Broadway, why should the best new writers aspire to
Broadway? Like Mr. Shepard and most other major American playwrights and
directors, emerging theater artists will continue to follow the serious
theatergoing audience, wherever it may go. Only a miraculous, yet-to-be-imagined
change in the entire economic structure of the commercial theater - one that
allows the Shepards and Shawns and Clarkes, among many, many others, to work
there with artistic freedom and without breaking anyone's bank - is likely to
bring back a large Broadway audience for anything other than a hit musical or
spectacle like ''Cats.'' Only by attracting the most dynamic artists of the
American theater - the O'Neills and Williamses of our own day - can Broadway be
reborn as the theatrical center it used to be.

In the meantime, Broadway audiences can be grateful that the performance level
remains high, however weak the material being performed. The Broadway of 1985-86
was full of top actors, and many of tonight's Tony nominees deserve to be called
''the best'': Miss Tomlin, Rosemary Harris, Mary Beth Hurt, Jessica Tandy, Ed
Harris, Hume Cronyn, Bernadette Peters, George Rose, Cleavant Derricks, Joseph
Maher, John Mahoney, Peter Gallagher, Swoosie Kurtz, Stockard Channing and Zoe
Wanamaker. But only a small number of these performers could remotely be
considered to have careers predominantly based on Broadway. Actors, too, follow
the engaged and demanding audience - to an adventurous American theater that
owes no loyalty to any particular theatrical neighborhood but that, with
impressive frequency over the past 12 months, has been hitting many of us
exactly where we live.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Lila York, Swoosie Kurtz, Glenn Close, George Rose, and
Amanda Plummer and James Gammon (NYT/Jim Wilson; Martha Swope; Carol Rosegg;
Brigitte Lacombe); Photos of Eric Bogosian, Lily Tomlin, and Alexis Smith (page
36); Photo of a scene from ''Let the Artists Die'' (page 36)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 1, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FREDERICK WISEMAN TAKES HIS CAMERA TO THE RACES

BYLINE: By DANIEL ASA ROSE; Daniel Asa Rose's first novel, ''Flipping for It,''
will be published next spring by St. Martin's.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 29, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1377 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass.


Hard to believe, perhaps, but it was 20 years ago this spring that an elfin
figure was racing around the corridors of the Bridgewater, (Mass.) State Prison
for the Criminally Insane, gathering footage for a film that was to prove such a
milestone that even today people pause and grow pensive at its name. Frederick
Wiseman was 36 at the time, and his ''Titicut Follies'' emerged as a classic
cinema verite documentary, establishing him as a leading film maker in part
because he was able to reveal not only immense brutality at the institution but
also rare moments of humanity.

''Twenty years! My God, is it possible?'' marveled the slightly less elfin
figure recently, in his white-carpeted duplex film studio here. Sixteen films
later, his newest project, ''Racetrack,'' a two-hour examination of the world of
thoroughbred racing as seen at the Belmont Racetrack, will have its premiere
Wednesday evening at 9 on WNET/Channel 13. In the intervening years, Mr. Wiseman
has explored, usually in stark black and white and with no commentary and no
real sound track, the worlds of army recruits and emergency-room doctors,
welfare offices and police barracks, monasteries and meat-packing houses. A
generation of critics and public-television watchers has come away moved by his
work - not so much by his subject matter, which can be humble, nor by his
approach, which is often grisly enough to show surgery close up - but by his
vision.

Lately, however, some critics have wondered whether there's a softening in the
way he views the world. In response to this question, Mr. Wiseman twirled his
glass of iced tea thoughtfully, looked both shy and droll - his low-key charm is
so effective that one knows at once how he got so many subjects to bare their
souls to his camera - and proceeded to explain why ''Racetrack'' is not a
departure, not a mellowing; why it in no way signifies that he has moved to
loftier concerns.

''If I change rhythms, or have more stark shots or less stark shots, or seem to
have more gentle moments than usual, it's because my subject matter demands
it,'' said the award-winning film maker. ''But I'm always focusing on various
aspects of the American experience, and in that sense there's no discontinuity
at all. Rich or poor, strong or weak, all segments of American society interest
me.''

Dressed in shades of muted gray -the perfect get-up for a practitioner of the
unobtrusive art of cinema verite - Mr. Wiseman shrugged when asked why he chose
in his last two films to depict the worlds of fashion modeling and of
Neiman-Marcus, where customers are seen preening in expensive clothes as
salespeople murmur approval.

''A movie like 'The Store' was an opportunity to explore the relationship of
rich to poor in a place where the rich congregate,'' he said. ''It's hard to
find such a place because they don't tend to congregate at welfare centers.
Similarly, 'Model' was dead center in what I'm all about because it has to do
with how images are created.''

And images rather than words, Mr. Wiseman took pains to assert, are his stock in
trade. Coming from a family of lawyers, he once was a lawyer himself - until he
bolted that world to enter one in which messages are far more enigmatic and
ambiguous.

But how did he get the idea for ''Racetrack,'' which, if not a departure, might
at least be adjudged unusually lyrical? In the film, motes of hay dust drift
lazily in the air, thoroughbreds cast sinuous shadows of grace and speed, and a
scene depicting the birth of a colt manages to appear not merely graphic but
gossamer-like at the same time.

''I got the idea as I get all my ideas: I take a lot of showers,'' Mr. Wiseman
replied with one of his sudden laughs. ''Besides, as an old Damon Runyon fan, I
knew there'd be an interesting cast of characters around the track.''

Frederick Wiseman, purveyor of some of the grittiest footage ever shown on
public television, a fan of the funny Damon Runyon? And not only that - an
aficionado of the Marx Brothers?

''Sure. 'A Day at the Races' is one of my favorite films,'' he said. ''Much of
what goes on at a racetrack is very funny - and I wanted my film to reflect
that. It's not meant to be abrasively funny or comic at anybody's expense, but a
lot of the situations are comic in a sad way, which in many ways is the most
interesting kind of comedy.''

Fitting comment from a man who out of irony, or wry compassion, or Weltschmerz,
perhaps, once described ''Primate,'' his 1974 film about animal research, as ''a
bizarre comedy.'' Has a generation of public-television watchers overlooked
hidden levels of humor in two decades of his work?

''Part of the reason more people haven't recognized my humor is that the
documentary tradition carries a lot of heavy freight of the 'we'll reform the
world' variety,'' he said. ''But it doesn't have to be the heavy-handed,
hit-you-over-the-head kind, whereby I'm right and you're wrong. We're all in it
together, and humor helps get that point across.

''If I've learned anything in 20 years, it's to be less and less interested in a
simple-minded sloganeering kind of approach, which is not only boring but
fantastically condescending, as well. More than any technological improvements
that have come about in two decades, what's changed is my deepened commitment to
dealing with the complexities of a subject and resisting cultural
generalizations. It's one of the reasons I've never used commentary. When this
kind of non-narrative film making works, it works because it puts the viewer in
the middle of the event and asks him to think through his own relationship to
what he's seeing. What I try to do is give the viewer enough information so he
can make up his own mind.''

Two decades of technological improvements are not to be gainsaid, however. ''The
lighter cameras, refined mikes, better editing equipment that are around now
make my job easier, but I could still make the movies I'm making today with the
old stuff as long as the sensibility was there.'' He paused, as though to
measure the hint of a boast coming on. ''But the real reason my films don't seem
dated to me in retrospect - even one like 'Basic Training,' which was made
during the Vietnam War - is because they're not latched to any particular issues
of the day. And if anything, my more recent films have become even less
didactic, even more abstract.''

And ever more influential. According to his admirers, the esthetic Wiseman
established - leisurely yet gripping, theatrical without tricks -serves as a
beacon at a time when the commercial side of the film industry seems to demand a
slicker and slicker pace; a reminder, they say, that truth doesn't necessarily
come out of the fast cut.

Mr. Wiseman would have none of it. ''Influence is hard to gauge,'' he said.
''Most of the year I sit in relative isolation editing alone in the dark, and
then it's on television, and it's very hard for me to get a sense of what it
means that a lot of people see my films. You read the reviews, get a few phone
calls and letters, but it's hard to assess the impact because it's so diffuse.
In one sense you feel very pleased, but in another it's like throwing a pebble
in the water. And the only final conclusion is you go on to make your next
movie.''

So what new inspiration has come to him in the shower? ''I've been working for
18 months on a mini-series,'' he said, ''consisting of four movies about a
school for handicapped children.'' The works will be grouped under the umbrella
title ''Deaf and Blind,'' and all will be in color - ''to show the sensuality of
the physical world the kids are missing.'' The project will bring his oeuvre to
21 films - ''or one long film lasting 38 hours so far'' - exploring the American
experience, and digressing or not digressing from its main themes, as the viewer
sees fit to interpret.

After that there will be a musical based on his 1975 film ''Welfare,'' which he
plans to produce at the Kennedy Center next spring. Given the film's subject
matter - the labyrinthine world of the public benefits system - one wonders,
among other things, whether the musical will be as ''funny'' as his other work.

He studied the question a moment with furrowed brow, then smiled. ''Time will
tell,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Frederick Wiseman

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 1, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HEADLINERS;
The New Guard

SECTION: Section 4; Page 9, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 118 words


For two top military posts, President Reagan has chosen officers who have had
different sorts of careers. Adm. Carlisle A. H. Trost (top), designated last
week as chief of naval operations, began at Annapolis, where he was first in his
class; Gen. Larry D. Welch, nominated to be chief of staff of the Air Force,
spent two decades in uniform before starting college and received his bachelor's
degree and his colonel's commission at the same time.

Admiral Trost is now commander in chief of the Atlantic Fleet, and General Welch
commander in chief of the Strategic Air Command at Offut Air Force Base in
Nebraska. They represent a new generation of military leaders: The first war
each saw was Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Adm. Carlisle A.H. Trost and Gen. Larry D. Welch

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 1, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SUMMER READING;
BASEBALL ON THEIR MINDS -- THE LURE OF THE DIAMOND, THE PLACE OF THE PLOT

BYLINE: By Harry Stein; Harry Stein's baseball novel, ''Hoopla,'' recently
appeared in paperback. He is working on a book about growing up male in America.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2607 words


''DURING those years when most men of promise achieve an adult education, if
only in the school of war,'' wrote F. Scott Fitzgerald upon Ring Lardner's
death, in lamenting what he saw as Lardner's vast, unfulfilled potential, ''Ring
moved in the company of a few dozen illiterates playing a boy's game. A boy's
game with no more possibilities than a boy could master, a game bounded by walls
which kept out danger, change or adventure.''

The game in question, of course, was baseball, and Fitzgerald's view of his
friend Lardner's association with it reflected that of much of the contemporary
literary establishment; indeed, by the end, was pretty much accepted by Lardner
himself. No one ever doubted that Lardner's baseball fiction, notably ''You Know
Me, Al,'' was deft, diverting, occasionally even insightful about human nature.
The problem, Fitzgerald insisted, was with the game itself: ''However deeply
Ring might cut into it, his cake had exactly the diameter of Frank Chance's
diamond.''

It is an attitude that has quietly persisted in literary circles over all the
years since, this notion that while the battlefield is certainly fit terrain for
the serious novelist, and the board room, and the middle-class household made
desolate by discord or silence, and, in Fitzgerald's case, any place where
people habitually wear evening clothes, the ball field and the locker room most
assuredly are not. And it is, not surprisingly, a stigma that novelists who
nonetheless choose to deal with the game often find themselves obliged to face
up to.

In fact, so conscious was Philip Roth of the implications of such an endeavor
that he sat down to write his baseball book, ''The Great American Novel,'' with
the explicit intention of thumbing his nose at what he called ''official
literary culture.'' ''I set myself the goal,'' as he noted two years after the
book's publication, ''of becoming the writer some Jewish critics had been
telling me I was all along: irresponsible, conscienceless, unserious. . . . And
what could be more frivolous, in my own estimation, than writing a novel about
sports?''

''I was still in graduate school when I began writing 'The Southpaw,' '' Mark
Harris recalls of the first of a memorable series that includes the classic
''Bang the Drum Slowly,'' ''and I was constantly being warned off writing about
baseball by self-consciously learned students. 'People won't take you
seriously,' they'd tell me. 'If you want to get ahead in a literary career, you
have to tackle a literary subject.' Of course, in its time I suppose whaling
wasn't much of a literary subject either.''

''The thing that most bothers me about that kind of snobbism,'' says Donald
Hays, whose 1984 first novel was the raucous ''Dixie Association,'' ''is that it
tends to color people's attitude toward your work in general. I'm finishing
another book now - a father-son story set in the 1960's - and I'm just waiting
to hear it: 'Oh, he's the guy who wrote that baseball novel, so what good can
this one be?' ''

''What I like to do,'' offers W. P. Kinsella, the author of ''Shoeless Joe'' and
the recent ''Iowa Baseball Confederacy,'' ''by way of solution, is throw stuff
into my work to give the lit-crit people a cheap thrill every once in a while.
There's enough religious symbolism in my last book to teach eight college
classes.''

''My book,'' says Eric R. Greenberg, whose 1983 novel, ''The Celebrant,'' is set
at the turn of the century and deals with the fascination of a first-generation
Jewish American for the New York Giants star Christy Mathewson, ''is about gods
and heroes and hero worship, as well as the Americanization of a Jewish family.
Basically, what I set out to write was a theology story. But I've learned to
answer the question of what the book's about with a question of my own: 'Do you
like baseball?' When the publishers weren't happy with the original title,
'Matty,' I suggested that they call it 'The Ladies Home Journal Cookbook.' It
probably would have sold better.''

Undoubtedly. For, of course, authors of serious baseball fiction must also
contend with the matched truisms of the publishing business that (a) men tend
not to read fiction and (b) women not to read books about sports.

Why, then, the question arises with some insistence, do these authors insist on
writing them?

Well, most obviously, for starters, there is the matter of love, in this
instance as in many others a commodity that has little to do with the rational.
Virtually every writer of baseball fiction - and the roster includes individuals
as unlikely as P. G. Wodehouse, Zane Grey and James Thurber (whose short story
''You Could Look It Up,'' about the sudden appearance of a midget in a major
league ball game, provided the inspiration for Bill Veeck to pull the stunt when
he owned the St. Louis Browns) - has, if not himself played some ball in the
past, counted himself an enthusiastic follower of the game.

''I was a fan from the time I was a kid and went to Ebbets Field whenever I
could,'' Bernard Malamud once recalled. His book ''The Natural'' is certainly
the best-known baseball novel, especially since it became readily associated
with Robert Redford, and perhaps the very best. ''I saw Babe Ruth hit a homer or
two at Yankee Stadium, and was present when Lou Gehrig took over first base for
Wally Pipp.'' ''I've been to over 400 games in my life,'' Mr. Greenberg notes,
''and only one of them was unmemorable - a 4-1 Dodger victory over the Mets in
the early 1970's. And that one was memorable for that reason.'' ''Writing is
largely fantasy,'' Mr. Harris adds, ''and growing up in this country, of average
height and weight, one could actually fantasize about being a baseball player.
It was plausible.'' But, too, such writers share the conviction that, as subject
matter, the game and its environs are rich in possibility - that they not only
provide a forum for the exploration of larger issues but facilitate the
sometimes cumbersome process of building character and advancing plot.

The game is frequently associated on the printed page, for instance, with the
quality of profound innocence; and, more than that, its prospects for survival
in an increasingly cynical world. Paul Hemphill, whose first novel, ''Long
Gone'' (1979), climaxes with a painful confrontation between a used-up
39-year-old pitcher reduced to laboring in the lowest minor league and the local
fat cats who are pressing him to lose a doubleheader intentionally, observes:
''It sounds corny to say it so baldly, but baseball still represents something
in this society. It is a straightforward and rather pure business. It's always
60 feet 6 inches between the mound and home plate, and 90 feet between the
bases, and when you're standing there in that batter's box it doesn't mean a
thing how much your daddy's worth. All of which makes it an excellent way of
working toward the sad truth that, in fact, those that have usually run right
over those that don't have.'' ''B ASEBALL is a distinctly 19th-century game,''
notes Robert Coover, the author of ''The Universal Baseball Association,'' ''and
it reflects the values of a greener time, when you seemed to have clear-cut
heroes. In baseball - unlike, for instance, soccer, a fluid, existential game
much more expressive of contemporary existence - there is often a real sense of
sin and redemption, of punishment and reward, not only within particular games
but over whole seasons and entire careers; not only for individuals but for
whole teams. That's part of what lends it its mythic quality.''

Indeed, the legends and myths that are so inextricably bound up with the game's
past have themselves been of considerably more than passing interest to writers
of recent fiction who, whether by lambasting them - as did Mr. Roth at the tail
end of the Vietnam era - or frankly celebrating them - as has Mr. Kinsella
during the Reagan years - find in them a means of addressing Americans' view of
themselves. ''Baseball's history, both real and imagined,'' as the novelist
Chaim Potok puts it, ''is a large part of what makes it so quintessentially
American a game.''

It is not for nothing that Mr. Potok, in his memorable opening chapter of ''The
Chosen,'' used a baseball game between a team of young Hasidic Jews and another
made up of assimilated Jewish children to express the vast gap between the
coexisting cultures; nor, for that matter, that so many other Jewish novelists,
from Irwin Shaw to Joseph Heller, have seized upon the game essentially to the
same purpose. ''That tableau was in my mind from the very beginning,'' Mr.
Heller says of the closing scene of ''Good as Gold,'' in which his title
character, en route home from a cemetery where he was unable to read the Hebrew
characters on his mother's tombstone, stops to watch some Jewish boys in heated
argument on a ball field. ''It was as vivid an anecdote of assimilation as I
could find,'' he says. ''For many of us first- or second-generation kids,'' Mr.
Harris adds, ''baseball was about the best way of belonging. I remember my
grandparents asking what I was doing with my life, and when I'd tell them I was
playing a lot of ball, how they frowned on it - it was wasteful, it wasn't
serious. But the child himself wanted desperately to be American.'' BASEBALL'S
historical aspect is, in another sense, what most attracted Mr. Coover, a native
Midwesterner, to the game's novelistic possibilities. ''Quite simply,'' he
observes, ''baseball is among the most precisely historical activities known to
humanity, and one of the most structured. Every single meaningless twitch - how
many pitches a pitcher throws in a game or how many times he throws to first
base; details that are ignored in other games - is recorded in some way. And
every sequence of events is subject to some kind of regulation.'' And yet within
those confines the game is open to enormous, often startling randomness - a
circumstance no more effectively imparted than in Mr. Coover's own book.

The story of a nondescript middle-aged accountant who has created an entire
secret universe - a baseball league with its own distinct personalities and
evolving history in which every action (as in a game the author himself
concocted as a boy) is determined by a roll of the dice - ''The Universal
Baseball Association'' makes it clear that there is considerably more going on
than simple fun and games. ''Two successive throws of triple ones and sixes,''
Mr. Coover writes, ''were exceedingly rare - only about three times in every two
entire seasons of play on the average - but when it happened, the next throw was
referred, finally, to the Chart of Extraordinary Occurrences, where just about
anything from fistfights to fixed ballgames could happen. . . . He also had
special strategy charts for hit-and-run plays, attempted stolen bases, sacrifice
bunts and squeeze plays, still others for deciding the ages of rookies when they
came up, for providing details of injuries and errors, and for determining who,
each year, must die.''

The notion that baseball is a reflection of life is, of course, a decrepit one,
the stuff of 10,000 postgame interviews, and it is hardly an observation that
any self-respecting soul who makes his living with words will offer in precisely
those terms. In fact, some are quick to assert that part of the game's appeal is
that it provides for so complete a departure from the realities of the
day-to-day world. ''We don't care whether Dwight Gooden can get along with some
girl at a Hertz checkout counter,'' Mr. Greenberg says, referring to a recent
highly publicized episode involving the New York Mets star. ''We care about
whether or not the curveball is working.'' And yet, for others the metaphor is
both inescapable and, deftly handled, useful.

''For me,'' says Philip F. O'Connor, whose ''Stealing Home'' (1979), about a man
undergoing a midlife crisis who begins to put his life back together through
coaching his son's Little League team, won wide critical acclaim, ''baseball is
a tremendously instructive game. On that field, in the midst of a quarter-ton of
rules, you have nine people struggling to express their individuality even as
they function as part of the community. If that's not a miniature of general
experience, I don't know what is - except I can't quite figure out where sex
fits in.''

''The thing about a baseball player,'' Mr. Potok concurs, ''is that you can see
him out there. He occupies his own tiny little niche; you can see the way he
uses his body and even his mind. The only other time you get anything like that
is in the bullring.'' ''You've got too many people playing football,'' Mr.
Hemphill says, by way of contrast. ''I don't see much symbolism in a collision
between two 250-pound behemoths. You can use a baseball team, on the other hand,
the way Faulkner used small towns. It's a narrow stage, and you can populate it
with all kind of archetypes - the gnarled old catcher who knows all, the second
baseman who's the runt of the litter, the shortstop who is grace personified
-qualities that are transferable on and off the field.''

The game's unhurried pace, moreover, plays to the novelist's strength. ''I
remember making a list of items I needed to get 'The Chosen' started,'' Mr.
Potok says. ''I needed a situation that would give me a seesawing drama; one in
which there would be moments when distinct personalities could come to the fore;
where the movement of event allowed for observation of not only physical but
psychological and emotional action. Since baseball is not a fast-paced game -
unlike, say, basketball - when the fast pacing does occur, it comes with
powerful dramatic force.'' He pauses. ''Baseball is also a game that's almost
entirely lived in potential. Things tend to go along placidly until, suddenly,
as a result of one or two plays, you find yourself in a great deal of trouble -
at which point, you are able to play the tension for all it's worth. And through
the tension, the essential core of personality is revealed - if not openly, at
least inside, and the novelist can always go inside to do the probing.''

Then, too, as Mr. O'Connor points out, those who write about the game at book
length often find themselves with ''a wonderful built-in structure -the season
itself. It's a great device, one I've wished I had for other books. It
established for me the necessity of working out all the other issues in the main
character's life - his marital problems, the fact that the bookstore he owns
seems to be turning into a T-shirt shop - at the same time I was resolving the
baseball issues.'' BUT, Mr. O'Connor soon makes it apparent, the genre's
stylistic advantages are merely a bonus. For before long, like most of the
others, he is talking about the game itself, marveling at the diversity of its
possibilities, at how frequently, in the midst of the mundane, there is
nobility, at the depth of the emotions it can stir. ''You ever see Earl Weaver
turn his cap backward during an argument so he can get his nose two inches
closer to the umpire?'' he asks, laughing. ''You'd think it was about whether
his mother should be executed, not whether some guy had foul-tipped a ball.''

''That's what you focus on when you sit before the typewriter,'' he says, ''this
beautiful insignificance which can reflect so much about what's going on
inside.'' He pauses a moment, then, continuing, seems to surprise even himself.
''I've been through the game as a player and as a coach, and at a pretty high
level. But, I'll tell you something, it may be that the greatest joy of all was
going through it as a writer.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 1, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CRIME

BYLINE: By Newgate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7; Page 46, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1096 words


One of the most unusual thrillers that will come your way this year is THE HOUND
OF HEAVEN by Glover Wright (Arbor House, $15.95). It is hard to describe: part
adventure story, part religious study, part allegory, part tale of the
supernatural. Whatever it is, it catches the reader from the beginning, and the
tension never lets up.

It starts in Vietnam in 1967. A Special Forces officer on a lethal mission
breaks security and all the rules to save a priest crucified by the Vietcong.
Loss of American lives and materiel results, and the officer is dismissed from
the service. The priest is taken to Jerusalem, where he lies in a coma for 10
years. He is declared a saint. Suddenly he comes to life, bearing the stigmata.
Just at this time the Pope, on a secret mission to prevent war between Argentina
and England, is killed in an airplane crash. Only a few members of the Vatican
know of his death, which is kept top secret.

The newly arisen saint starts preaching doctrines that the Roman Catholic Church
considers blasphemy. He immediately becomes the focus of international news
coverage. The princes of the church mobilize to fight him. Agents are assigned
to look into his background. It turns out he was born a Jew. He seems to have
special powers, and there are many parallels between him and Christ. A powerful
conservative in the church is appalled: Lucifer is stalking the earth. This old,
ruthless conservative priest sets wheels in motion to eliminate the monster.
Chief among his tools is the former American officer, now a priest.

This is only a bare outline of the plot, which has several other elements. Mr.
Wright asks us to believe a great deal. But so carefully has he assembled his
parallels between Old and New Testament texts and the Christ figure in his book,
so well has he integrated theology and action, so clear and sensitive is his
writing, so scary are the final pages, that ''The Hound of Heaven'' goes right
to the top in its genre. Even a few unlikely coincidences important to the plot
are made to appear inevitable, thanks to the the author's deft style.

Despite its title, MONASTERY NIGHTMARE by Ross H. Spencer (Mysterious Press,
$15.95) has nothing to do with religion. It is the latest adventure of Luke
Lassiter, the Chicago private eye, hired here by a famous television evangelist
to follow his wife. He thinks she may be cheating on him. Which she is, a fact
that for many reasons does not surprise Lassiter. The book is something of a
mixed bag. Lassiter has to write a thriller in the style of a dead author. He is
glad to do so; he has all but memorized all of the dead man's books. But
Lassister has to write under the dead man's name. This is forgery, and it leads
to complications. There are a couple of phony capers that would take too long to
explain. There are elements of farce splashed throughout the book. The action
darts around, and the writing is terribly self-indulgent - sort of tough-guy
cutesy, if you can imagine such a thing. Nor are the funny sections or the
parodies of the dead writer's style as funny as Mr. Spencer thinks they are. And
forget the contrived ending. As a matter of fact, forget the book.

AN APRIL SHROUD by Reginald Hill (Foul Play/Countryman, $15.95) will be must
reading for Dalziel-Pascoe fans. The book was published in England in 1975, but
this is its first American appearance. It starts with the marriage of Inspector
Peter Pascoe, after which his superior, Superintendent Andrew Dalziel, goes on
vacation, only to encounter a murder he has to solve. He does it mostly on his
own, though Pascoe re-enters in the last part of the book.

''An April Shroud'' is in the Christie tradition, what with a decaying country
house, a weird family, all kinds of tensions, and false clues sprinkled like
poppy seeds on a bagel. What makes this different from Christie, of course, is
its literacy and suave style, its real humor and often, even, wit. Reginald Hill
creates real characters, and he has raised the classical British mystery to new
heights.

Mickey Friedman's PAPER PHOENIX (Dutton, $15.95) is a nice little book. As those
who remember her ''Hurricane Season'' from 1983 will attest, this woman can
write. ''Paper Phoenix'' is a different kind of book entirely from the previous
one. It introduces Maggie Longstreet, a San Francisco socialite whose husband
has divorced her for a younger woman. She goes through a severe depression but
comes to life when the editor of a gadfly weekly is found dead. He plunged from
his office window, and everybody believes his death to be suicide. There even is
a suicide note. But Maggie remembers overhearing something her husband said
about him, and she is curious enough to start an investigation on her own.

She links up with a young man who has taken over as editor of the weekly, and
they start to uncover things about the dead man and his associates. Perhaps he
was not the paragon of virtue he pretended to be. She gets threats over the
phone; stop nosing around, she is told, or else. She gets shot at. She finds
that her former husband is mixed up in some dirty work right up to his handsome
head.

There is nothing very original about any of this, nor has Mrs. Friedman
attempted to break new ground. She has set out to entertain, and she has
succeeded in doing so in a bright and sensitive manner. Maggie Longstreet and
her young associate are nice, intelligent, average people (as opposed to nice
Nellies) determined to bring to light an abstraction called the truth, and they
get us involved with their struggles. Mrs. Friedman may well have the makings of
an agreeable series here.

The latest entrant in the popular Charles Paris series is DEAD GIVEAWAY by Simon
Brett (Scribners, $13.95). Paris is the seedy actor in London who is much better
as a detective than he is onstage. The trouble is that the author by now is
resorting purely to formula.

There is the usual wry look at the foibles of the trade. The prime exhibit here
is an idiotic British television show patterned after the old ''What's My
Line?'' There is a lethal jab at the intellectual standards of American
producers and a contemptuous one at the kind of audience that clamors to attend
and watch such garbage.

At the premiere of the show, the host is murdered onstage; his glass of gin has
been spiked with cyanide. A woman is charged. Her friends refuse to believe she
could be guilty of the crime, and they ask Paris to clear her. He does. But
carefully plotted though this book is, it is too reminiscent of many others in
the Charles Paris series.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Phyllis Diller (NYT/Vic DeLucia)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 1, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BACK TO THE REAL MEMORIAL DAY

BYLINE: By Ronald Steel; Ronald Steel is author of ''Walter Lippman and the
American Century.''

SECTION: Section 4; Page 25, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 934 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


I never fought in a war. Although I did serve in the post-Korea pre-Vietnam
peacetime Army, the only battlefields I saw were as a tourist. I never had a
relative or a friend killed, or even wounded, in a war. My knowledge of war,
like that of most Americans, came from newspapers, photos and the movies.

For me, Memorial Day was always a holiday - the unofficial beginning of summer,
when the outdoor swimming pools opened and the schools shut down. I guess that's
how the Federal Government feels about it, too, ever since it started shuffling
Memorial Day around to make long weekends. This is good for the airlines, motel
operators, baseball team owners and ice cream vendors.

What it has to do with honoring the dead, I'm not sure. It's probably churlish
to talk about the dead these days, now that it's morning in America. It's too
downbeat. But Americans are still dying, mostly in little skirmishes these days
rather than big wars. Even these - Lebanon, Grenada, Libya - take their tolls of
lives cruelly snuffed out. And it would be wildly optimistic to assume that many
more will not sooner or later join the 1.2 million Americans killed in wars.

On this Memorial Day, I found myself in Washington and thinking about the dead.
The city, as always on holidays, was full of tourists from what people here call
Middle America. They visit places that Washingtonians never set foot in: like
the Space Museum, Congress and the monuments. These tourists are drawn
especially to the Vietnam Memorial, and on this day I decided to join them. For
a great many Americans, this has become a national shrine. It is a strange kind
of shrine: a black flash on the brilliant green lawn between the reflecting pool
and the monument to Abraham Lincoln. The indentation in the earth - the slabs of
black granite with the names of those fallen in Vietnam incised row after
terrible row - seems so dignified, so respectful, so appropriate, that it is
hard to remember what the fuss was about when the design was first chosen.

Now it has become part of our heritage. Not a temple to house a God and inspire
awe - like those to Lincoln and Jefferson. Not a symbol to mount or get one's
bearings from, like that to Washington. Rather it has become a place of
communion, where the living mingle with the spirits of the forever youthful
dead. Here the line between those honoring and those being honored becomes
ill-defined. The names, thousands and thousands of them, become living
presences. This is not, like a country graveyard, a place for elegies; rather it
is a meeting-ground.

I remember a bitterly cold and brilliantly sunny November day nearly 20 years
ago when I marched with hundreds of thousands of others just a few dozen yards
from this site. I was protesting American involvement in the war these men were
fighting and in which they ultimately died. I still think the war was wrong and
that they never should have been sent there. But now I am here to honor their
sacrifice and pay tribute to their memory. However we now interpret the war and
the reasons they fought it, they did what we asked of them and they did it in
our name.

People of every age and background, young and old, black and white, healthy and
infirm, file past. They search among the 58,123 names for the one they know.
They stop, they touch the inscribed letters, they stand silently. Some are
themselves veterans of the war: men wearing the uniforms of combat or bits and
pieces of it - a jungle hat, combat boots, a camouflage shirt. These men have
gray in their hair or their beards and the hard sadness in their eyes of those
who have seen too much; men no longer young who have come here to mourn their
youth and to mourn those comrades who knew only their youth.

Here, too, are the parents and wives and children of those who have died. They,
like the veterans, stop and stare for a long time at the names and rub their
fingers across them, as if through this contact they could summon those lost
behind the granite wall. Sometimes they put pieces of paper over the letters and
make rubbings of the names. Four or five people of different ages and
generations will each do a part of a single rubbing, linking each to the other
as well as to the departed.

One moves slowly along the elongated V-shaped trench, past the single roses and
carnations stuck in the cracks, past the wreaths with the inscriptions, past the
notes and letters and poems left by the living. As one enters the memorial, the
granite wall is very low and contains only a few names. But as the path
descends, the wall grows higher and higher, the names more and more dense. It is
like entering a tunnel. A cascade of names becomes a silent envelope of death.
And then the path slowly rises, the slabs grow lower, the names gradually fewer,
and then suddenly there is grass everywhere.

On all sides, lies monumental Washington - the classical temples lining
Constitution Avenue, the long sweep of the Mall to the Capitol, the graceful
bridges spanning the Potomac. It is hard to connect this tranquil city of
sweeping vistas and tree-graced streets to all these dead, or to link this
subdued throng of mourners in shorts and blue jeans to a decade of war and
death.

I'm not sure what we learn from war. Maybe, like death itself, it is an
essential part of human activity. We honor the dead not because they have taught
us to end war forever, but for something far simpler and more poignant. They
died because we asked them to. And this is their hallowed ground, the sanctuary
where the restless living try to understand the meaning of their death.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 2, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

'SPEARFIELD'S DAUGHTER,' A MINI-SERIES

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 702 words


IN the opening scene of ''Spearfield's Daughter,'' a three-part mini-series
beginning tonight at 8 o'clock on WNYW/Channel 5, a woman watches two bodies
being removed from the street ouside her luxury Manhattan apartment. She was
meant to be one of the victims. The rest of the story, the ''concept,'' has been
distilled in a press release: ''She reflects over the events which have brought
her to the pinnacle of success in the explosive world of international
journalism, yet has kept her personal life in a state of emotional disarray.''

Written as a novel and now adapted for television by Jon Cleary (''High Road to
China,'' ''The Beaufort Sisters''), ''Spearfield's Daughter'' is evidently what
the entertainment mills have deemed to be the stuff of women's fantasies. Cleo
Spearfield (Kim Braden) is a feisty but sensitive young woman whose talent for
being irreverent in print catapults her from ordinary reporter for an Australian
paper to a news star on British television to executive editor of a top
newspaper in New York. Along the way, she is loved and wooed by, among others, a
young journalist oozing integrity, a self-made millionaire who also happens to
be a British lord, and the son of the New York paper's publisher.

Cleo begins as a reporter in Vietnam who, happening across a My Lai-type of
slaughter, takes pictures that are bound to embarrass the arrogant Americans.
But the film is later stolen from her room (it will reappear later as a key plot
device). Recovering from this momentary setback, she begins carving out a career
that will take her from Fleet Street to the slums of Northern Ireland, from
confronting terrorists in France to battling the mob in Chicago. When asked how
she always manages to be in the right place at the right time, Cleo says things
like, ''Just lucky, I guess.''

She meets Tom Border, the nice-guy reporter, in Vietnam. Played by Steve
Railsback, who is best known for the lead character in ''The Stunt Man'' and his
depiction of Charles Manson in ''Helter Skelter,'' Tom is honest and sincere,
which is obvious because he seldom wears a jacket and never a tie. Cleo and Tom
love each other but, because of their careers, seem doomed to meeting each other
over ''big stories.'' Meanwhile, in England, Lord Cruze, portrayed by the always
debonair Christopher Plummer, has become so serious about Cleo that he is
willing to give up his notorious womanizing, although he refuses to divorce his
long estranged wife. As his lordship's constant companion, Cleo gets into the
most rarefied social settings, including dinner with the Prime Minister. ''You
mean,'' she exclaims girlishly, ''he actually invited me!''

The father of the title is Sylvester Spearfield (Christopher Wiggins), a
powerful Australian politician whose role in his daughter's life has been
reduced for television to a an occasional, robust walk-on. And the publisher of
The New York Courier is played by none other than Nancy Marchand, whose
publishing talents were previously on display in the ''Lou Grant'' series. In
this instance, Miss Marchand spends most of her time wearing Louella Parsons
hats and being charmingly sarcastic. In the third episode, however, Miss
Marchand and Mr. Wiggins, two beautifully seasoned pros, have a single scene
together and illustrate that even a potboiler needn't be entirely lifeless.

Filmed in a persistently hazy focus in Canada and Australia, this Robert Halmi
Production was directed by Gilbert Shilton. Miss Braden is appealing enough to
make Cleo seem less the scheming monster that she is. After Lord Cruze assures
her that he has arranged for her to get the editor's job and a board seat on The
New York Courier stictly on her merit, Cleo sighs thoughtfully and tells him,
''Still, it's hard on the old-timers.'' Mr. Railsback is fine as long as he
isn't required to move or register emotion. And Mr. Plummer is remarkably well
tanned for an Englishman. Among the subsidiary characters is a terribly nasty
looking German woman named Ilse. She lurks about dark corners muttering, ''Be
shtill, ve don't vont to get caught.'' Watching this mini-series, which airs
tomorrow and Wednesday nights at 8, many viewers may feel the same way.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Christopher Plummer and Kim Braden

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 3, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TROUBLE IN YELLOWSTONE

BYLINE: By Charlotte Curtis

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 818 words


SEVERAL years ago, Alston Chase, a philosophy professor and amateur biologist,
did some sleuthing, came up with insights as to why Yellowstone National Park
had so few bears and wrote an article.

He accused a misguided park management of starving the bears by closing the
manmade garbage dumps, forcing them to look to the ''wilds'' for food when they
weren't able and of both accidentally and purposely killing them when the new
order of things didn't work out.

Simplistic? Perhaps. Even those who applauded the work as a stimulus to serious
discussion wondered about the political tangles involved. Now there's another
storm over Yellowstone, and it's not a pretty one with geysers spouting against
a vivid blue sky. Dr. Chase has come out of what's left of the great American
wilderness with an important book, ''Playing God in Yellowstone,'' and even more
evidence of the national park's deterioration.

Once again, he blames the people assigned to protect Yellowstone, the National
Park Service. He writes scathingly of environmentalists who refuse to rethink
familiar issues. And he argues that as long as man thinks himself separate from
nature, and therefore minimizes his intervention, more and more park animals
will disappear and die and the destruction will continue.

Now a lot of people are up in arms. It isn't that he doesn't make telling
points. He does, and the book is strewn with compelling observations. But the
Park Service has a list of his errors. Environmentalists are miffed. Yet on one
point, all seem to agree. Yellowstone is indeed in trouble.

''Some of his information is true,'' said Sandy Sargent, a Montana rancher who
has her own problems with the forestry service. ''But he has twisted the
information around to suit a pattern he wanted to portray.''

By the time Dr. Chase came to New York last week to promote the book, he knew he
was in a fight. He'd had to resign as chairman of the quasi-official Yellowstone
Association. The Today Show put him up against Robert Barbee, the park
superintendent. Afterwards, sitting in the Warwick Hotel lobby in khaki trousers
and a blue denim work shirt, the author looked tired and vulnerable.

''They gave us eight minutes,'' he said of his television appearance. ''We
traded accusations.'' Once again, he plumped for ranger professionalization, an
active, hands-on approach to preservation, a scientific hierarchy that didn't
have to answer to lay administrators and, most importantly, the need for
objective, scientific data.

''The park seldom does research on anything that might embarrass them,'' he
said. ''In the absence of such studies, it's almost impossible to contradict the
management.''

But again, he gives little sense of the national politics. ''If this
Administration has hurt us,'' says Paul Pritchard, president of the National
Parks and Conservation Association and a man who finds the Chase controversy
healthy, ''it is in denying us the raw data. The Park Service simply doesn't
have the money to do an inventory of the animals.''

In some ways, Dr. Chase came to this fight by accident. He was an Army child who
had attended 14 schools before getting degrees at Harvard and Oxford and his
Ph.D at Princeton. He taught philosophy at Ohio State. He sat in one of the
first sit-ins against the Vietnam War.

''I'd just finished getting all this education,'' he said. ''I was prepared to
teach and nobody wanted it. So I went to a smaller college.''

The small college was Macalester in Minnesota, where he and other faculty faced
the uproar following the incursion into Cambodia. In the 70's, he headed West
for vacations, loved it, bought a ranch near the park, and made it pay by
running a summer environmental program. But teaching summers and winters was too
much.

So he gave up Macalester, took a job with a Montana fund-raising outfit and
found himself in a fight with the board. ''I wanted it broad-based,
democratized,'' he said. ''They didn't.'' So he quit. ''I always wanted to
write,'' he added. Thus began the quest leading to the article on the bears and
the book.

''I thought it would be a success story,'' he said. ''On paper, the park
management looks so good. Yellowstone is so beautiful.''

But there was little hard information. Staff members wouldn't talk. Those who
did demanded anonymity. They were afraid for their jobs. A pessimistic biologist
told him he pretended optimism to keep his staff's morale good.

''I know what it's like,'' said Elizabeth Laden, a reporter for The Bozeman
Chronicle. ''I'm lied to and thwarted at every turn.''

Dr. Chase was more philosophical. ''I just hope the book is sufficiently
successful so I can stay in Montana,'' he said. ''I'd like to take a look at the
park system in general.''

Maybe so. But until outside scientists are fiananced and permitted to study it,
Americans are not really going to know what's wrong with their beloved park.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 4, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ABDNOR IS RENOMINATED IN SOUTH DAKOTA RACE

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 977 words


Senator James Abdnor won a narrow victory over Gov. William J. Janklow, a
longtime ally, in the Republican primary yesterday in South Dakota, one of nine
states holding primary elections.

In Alabama, Lieut. Gov. Bill Baxley finished first in a five-way Democratic
primary to succeed the ailing Gov. George C. Wallace, but was forced into a
runoff with Attorney General Charles Graddick. Senator Jeremiah Denton easily
won renomination against a minor challenger in the Republican primary, while
Representative Richard C. Shelby led a five-way race for the Democratic
nomination for the Senate.

South Dakota also had a governor's race, as did New Mexico, where Gov. Toney
Anaya, a Democrat, cannot seek a second consecutive term. Six Republicans and
three Democrats, two of them write-in candidates, competed for the nominations
in New Mexico.

In Iowa, Senator Charles Grassley and Gov. Terry E. Branstad, both Republicans,
had no primary opposition. In the Democratic Senate race, a Des Moines lawyer,
John Roehrick, turned back a follower of Lyndon H. LaRouche Jr., Juan Cortez, by
better than a 4-to-1 margin. A former majority leader of the state Senate,
Lowell Junkins, defeated three other Democrats for a chance to run against Mr.
Branstad.

Contest in Mississippi

In Mississippi's largely black Second Congressional District, Mike Espy, a black
lawyer, led two other Democrats for the nomination to run against Representative
Webb Franklin, a Republican. But with almost all the precincts counted, it
appeared that Mr. Espy was forced into a runoff. In the central Supreme Court
district, Reuben Anderson, the first black appointed to the state's high court,
defeated a white segregationist lawyer, Richard Barrett.

In a Republican primary race in Montana, Sheriff Johnny France of Madison
County, who in 1984 captured the ''mountain men'' kidnappers, Don and Dan
Nichols, was trailing one of his deputies in his bid for re-election. The
deputy, Dick Noorlander, said Sheriff France was neglecting his job. There were
no Democratic candidates.

In North Carolina, former Mayor Lester D. Roark of Shelby defeated former Mayor
Jack L. Rhyne of Belmont in a Democratic runoff for the nomination for the Tenth
Congressional District seat being vacated by Representative James T. Broyhill,
the Republican nominee for the Senate. The Republican nominee for the House seat
is state Senator Cass Ballenger.

There were also races in New Jersey and California.

End of Era in Alabama

The end of the Wallace era in Alabama enticed five Democrats into the governor's
race. With 61 percent of the precincts reporting, Mr. Baxley had 199,860 votes,
36 percent, and Mr. Graddick had 164,643 votes, 30 percent. Former Gov. Fob
James ran third with 116,202 votes, 21 percent. A runoff is to be held June 24.
Guy Hunt won the Republican nomination with 11,356 votes, 70 percent, to 4,885
votes, 30 percent, for Doug Carter.

In Alabama, Senator Denton will face Representative Shelby, a conservative
Democrat who, with 58 percent of the vote counted, led Jim Allen Jr., a state
board of education member whose father was a Senator until his death in the
1970's. Mr. Shelby had 232,936 votes, or 53 percent, against 149,594 votes, or
34 percent, for Mr. Allen. Three other candidates split the remainder.

In South Dakota, Governor Janklow, barred from seeking a third term as Governor,
said he had challenged Senator Abdnor for fear that the Senator could not beat
the unopposed Democratic nominee, Representative Thomas A. Daschle. With 95
percent of the precincts reporting, Mr. Abdnor had 56,755 votes, 54 percent, and
Mr. Janklow had 48,533 votes, 46 percent. Mr. Janklow said the loss marked the
end of his political career. ''When the voters tell you it's time to quit, it's
time to quit,'' he said.

A host of candidates in both parties sought the governorship. In the Democratic
primary, state Representative Lars Herseth defeated former Gov. Richard Kneip
and Ken Stofferahn. In the Republican primary, George Mickelson, with 35 percent
of the vote, was leading three other candidates. A June 17 runoff would be
required if no candidate got at least 35 percent.

Actor Runs in Iowa

In Iowa's Sixth Congressional District, Fred Grandy, an actor who played the
bumbling purser on the televsion comedy ''The Love Boat,'' won the Republican
Congressional nomination to succeed a retiring Democrat, Representative Berkley
Bedell. The Democratic nomination went to Clayton Hodgson, a longtime aide to
Mr. Bedell, who is retiring.

In New Mexico, Ray Powell, retired vice president of Sandia National
Laboratories, claimed victory over two write-in candidates in the race for the
Democratic gubernatorial nomination. On the Republican side, Garrey E.
Carruthers, former Assistant Secretary of the Interior in the Reagan
Administration, was leading a field that included four former state legislators.

Democrats were counting on the Republican feuding in South Dakota to help them
capture Senator Abdnor's seat, a key step in their effort to reverse the
Republican party's 53-to-47 margin in the Senate.

Mr. Janklow, known for his abrasive tactics as Governor, insisted he had waged a
restrained campaign against the low-key Senator Abdnor in the interests of party
unity. ''There is no shortage of information out of Washington about how
ineffective he is,'' Mr. Janklow said, ''but I steered clear of it.''

Senator Denton of Alabama, a former Vietnam prisoner of war, was swept into
office in Ronald Reagan's 1980 landslide as the state's only Republican Senator
since Reconstruction. He has also been considered vulnerable to a strong
Democratic opponent.

Mr. Grassley, considered among the most secure of all first-term Republican
senators, predicted he would break the ''jinx'' under which no Iowa senator has
won re-election since 1966.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Gov. George Wallace with a voter (UPI)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 4, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE RESTAURANTS: ROOM TO GROW

BYLINE: By CRAIG CLAIBORNE

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 1; Living Desk

LENGTH: 1135 words


WHEN I first tasted Vietnamese cooking in Paris nearly 20 years ago, I realized
it was a cuisine to be reckoned with. When I visited Saigon several years later,
I was convinced of this.

Today, America is home to almost 500,000 Vietnamese immigrants, according to
State Department figures, and there are Vietnamese restaurants throughout the
country. Yet, in New York - a city that seems to revel in ethnic diversity and
savor the culinary riches that provides - first-rate Vietnamese restaurants
offering authentic Vietnamese food are comparatively hard to find. In the
Vietnamese restaurants that do exist, the kitchen repertory is often limited,
Americanized or both.

Recently I set out to discover why and, in the process, to seek out noteworthy
Vietnamese food.

The first Vietnamese dish I ever sampled was an appetizer called cha gio. An egg
roll of sorts, it is a celebration food, served to herald events such as
weddings, birthdays and the beginning of a new year. Over the years, it has
become the principal food I use to judge a Vietnamese meal. Its preparation and
presentation signals, fairly accurately, the care taken with the food that
follows.

Although the ingredients vary from region to region, cha gio ideally consists of
a filling of ground pork, soaked cellophane noodles, black fungus, garlic,
chopped chives and crab meat. The mixture is spooned onto a softened rice paper
wrapper, which is rolled into small packets and deep-fried in fresh oil until
crisp and golden brown. Cha gio is served hot or lukewarm with a sauce made of
nuoc mam, a fish sauce; garlic, hot chili peppers, lime juice, sugar and water.

The amount and quality of the crab meat is one standard by which I judge a cha
gio: I like lots of crab meat. The quality of the sauce is another; it should be
assertive but with no one ingredient overpowering the others. Then there is the
presentation: Start with a large lettuce leaf and place on it a cha gio, a
thinly sliced cucumber, mint leaf, coriander leaf, basil leaf and thin slices or
rounds of carrot. The whole is bundled up, dipped into the sauce and eaten.

During the last few months, I have been eating at Vietnamese restaurants across
the country. In most of them, cha gio was bland - as was the rest of the meal.
Customers were handed token lettuce, often cut into too-small pieces, a cucumber
slice and, maybe, mint.

There is, of course, more to Vietnamese food than this one appetizer. Among the
memorable dishes I sampled in Saigon all those years ago was pho, a soup made
with chicken or beef and rice noodles plus a garnish of onion, lime, fish sauce,
hot chilies, mint and fresh coriander leaves, and deep-fried perch-size fish
fillets, garnished with dill, rice-noodle pancakes and thinned shrimp paste with
lime juice.

And one cannot forget that the heart of Vietnamese cooking is the artful use of
fresh herbs, principally garlic, shallots, chili peppers, lemon grass, fresh
coriander, mint and scallions (or green onions).

But using even these as a guide, the majority of Vietnamese restaurants I tried
failed in quality and authenticity. Most of the food at Le Duc in Los Angeles
(Telephone 213-653-7652), for example, lacked zest, while the food at the Golden
Turtle in San Francisco (415-221-5285)was too Americanized - very bland or
excessively sweet. (The beef in rice paper with cold noodles, fresh coriander,
mint and hot chilies, however, was outstanding.) There were exceptions, such as
Chez Bach in Branford, Conn. (203-488-8779), where the cha gio is crisp, fairly
bursting with crab meat and beautifully served. There is also a delectable
platter of boneless chicken tidbits marinated in lime, threaded on skewers and
broiled, and rice-paper pancakes filled with ground pork, chopped dark
mushrooms, shallots and ginger and garnished with pieces of pork pate, bean
sprouts and shredded lettuce.

The chef-owner is Bach Ngo. If, as some have said, great Vietnamese cooks are
familiar with dishes cooked from the homes of royalty, then Mrs. Bach is a prime
candidate: Her aunt married one of Vietnam's last kings. (Another Restaurant
Chez Bach, under the same management, is in Westport, Conn., (203-227-6586) but
I found the food lacked the flavor and flair of the Branford establishment.) In
New York, Indochine, although offering both Vietnamese and Cambodian food,
serves up fine Vietnamese fare. It is at 430 Lafayette Street near Astor Place
(212-505-5111). The kitchen is presided over by Bach Yen Ta Boun, who was born
in Phnom Penh. Her mother married a Vietnamese and during the war the family
fled to Saigon.

Mrs. Bach is an artist in the kitchen. The cha gio is crisp and impeccably
served. Pho was made with high-quality sliced beef and a rich beef broth, plus
rice noodles, bean sprouts and fresh herbs.

Among the many fine Vietnamese restaurants in San Francisco, Mai's on Clement
Street (415-221-3046) offered excellent cha gio (I had to ask for the lettuce
and rice noodles, however). I also found a lovely clear broth with bean sprouts,
pineapple cubes and shrimp. In the Old Town section of Alexandria, Va., East
Wind (703-836-1515) serves a memorable spiced shrimp soup with fresh coriander,
beef soup with noodles and grilled quail. Chicago's Mekong restaurant
(312-271-0206) looked garish - right down to the artificial flowers - but
offered good spicy chicken and beef with lemon grass as appetizers. In New York,
at Cuisine de Saigon, 154 West 13th Street (212-255-6003), there is little
variation in flavors among the foods - except for the ground shrimp on sugar
cane. This specialty was prepared to perfection, broiled and served with rice
paper and fresh coriander.

If my complaints about Vietnamese restaurant food in New York go little further
than this, it is because there are so few Vietnamese restaurants there.
Discussions with Vietnamese cooks throughout the country yielded several
possible reasons for this. There is geography. Comparatively few Vietnamese have
settled in New York, so there is as yet no thriving community that a restaurant
would try to cater to with authentic cuisine. Geography, too, has made it
difficult to obtain many of the fresh herbs and other ingredients on which
Vietnamese cuisine depends.

At the same time, the Vietnamese who have opened restaurants, most of them
simple family-run affairs, seem to lack the business acumen to deal with the
morass of laws, regulations and tax structures characteristic of New York.

Mrs. Bach also told me that few of the Vietnamese chefs in Manhattan are well
acquainted with the formal cuisine that came from the kitchens of affluent
residents in Hanoi, Hue and Saigon; I agree. She suggested that many of them
serve unauthentic foods because they know no better and believe Americans will
not know the difference.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Bach Ngo of Chez Bach, with her specialties (NYT/Penny Ann
Dolin)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 5, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
No Peace for Afghans

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 760 words

DATELINE: PARIS


Afghan resistance groups are working on a plan to call an assembly of all the
forces opposing the Soviet-backed Kabul Government and to choose a leader,
according to Prof. Sibgatullah Modjadeddi. He flew from Peshawar, Pakistan, to
attend an international conference here on conditions of a political solution
for his country. He said the effort should be completed before winter.

None of the participants, mostly Western experts and diplomats from Islamic
countries, seemed to think there was much real chance that United
Nations-sponsored talks in Geneva could bring withdrawal of Soviet troops from
Afghanistan. There were poignant pleas for more international support to put
greater political pressure on Moscow to pull out.

The war has been going on nearly seven years, causing immeasurable misery and
pain. It is rare that foreign journalists and TV crews can bring out first-hand
reports, which make a huge difference. The world tends to forget what it doesn't
see and hear in living color and shreiks.

Better organization of the resistance and development of its leaders who could
be accepted as national representatives could mark a significant change, both in
winning recognition for the partisan cause and in enabling them to deal with
Moscow.

Sometimes Soviet officials speak of remaining indefinitely in Afghanistan,
pointing out that it took Moscow over a generation to pacify Kazakhstan, now a
Soviet Socialist Republic. But usually the Russians are willing to admit that
neither side can hope to win a military victory, and that a political settlement
is essential.

The problem is what kind of a political settlement, since the current Kabul
regime could not outlast the presence of Soviet troops. Moscow has said it has a
staged withdrawal program, but refuses to say when it will start or how long it
will take. That is crucial. The Russians give the impression of having reached
the point where the U.S. was in 1970 in the Vietnam War. It would like to bring
the troops home, but leaving behind the situation it went in to preserve in the
first case. Former Ambassador to the U.S. Anatoly Dobrynin said recently that it
must ''protect revolutionary achievements'' with an ''enlarged social base of
the progressive power.''

That is certainly unacceptable to the resistance. The Afghan fighters are often
lumped with the anti-Communist insurgents in Nicaragua and Angola, but it is a
mistake. There are quarrels among them, but they are fighting a foreign
invasion, not essentially a civil war in which opposing sides draw on foreign
help.

Evidently Moscow is counting on heavy military pressure, weakening will and
growing fears of disruption in Pakistan, and disputes among the Afghans to
produce an accord that will leave their friends in control. Even if it were
ready to abandon the regime, which it is not, there is no structure or leader on
the resistance side with whom it could deal effectively.

So it matters that the rebels manage not only to sustain their military
resistance but develop a political leadership. According to Selig Harrison, an
American expert, the U.S. has tended to support Islamic fundamentalist groups
that have the best military commandos, with money and agents. But they do not
have tribal support or the ability to follow up on their exploits, organizing so
that the rebels can establish liberated zones.

Traditionally, Afghanistan was ruled as a collection of tribal entities, with
the trappings of a state in Kabul but a large measure of local autonomy. Some
Soviet officials are thinking of reverting to that system, which existed under
earlier Afghan regimes. They would hope that a series of deals and dilution of
the Kabul organization with some non-Communists would permit the restoration of
that old balance, leaving a facade of complaisant national authority in the
capital.

But it isn't clear whether that is firm Soviet policy. There may well be
disagreements within the Moscow hierarchy and with the military over how much
they dare to let go of the reins. Officials say they must keep in mind the
500,000 to a million Afghans who they claim ''have cast their lot with us and
cannot be abandoned.''

So the war will keep going on, at a ghastly human price each day and mounting
strains within the region. The U.S. should do all it can to encourage the
emergence of coherent leadership among the resistance, to convince the Russians
that it is an indispensable partner in reaching an agreement for withdrawal and
peace. All involved have become victims of Moscow's terrible arrogance.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 6, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. INCLUDES SYRIA IN CHEMICALS BAN

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 710 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 5


The United States announced today that it was banning the sale to Syria of eight
chemicals that might be used to help Iran develop mustard gas and nerve gases
for use in its war against Iraq.

The Reagan Administration has been concerned recently about the possibility of
Syrian involvement in support of terrorists, but the action announced today
seemed unrelated to that. The announcement followed the receipt of intelligence
information that Syria has begun to produce its own chemical weapons and has
been discussing cooperation in that field with Iran.

In March 1984, the United States, concerned about Iraq's use of mustard gas and
nerve gas in the Persian Gulf war, imposed a ban on the sale of similar
chemicals to either Iran or Iraq.

Iraq has continued, however, to use chemical weapons against Iran, despite
condemnation by the United States and, more recently, the United Nations
Security Council. According to the State Department, Iran has been trying to
develop the ability to use chemical weapons, but so far has failed in efforts to
deploy them.

Some Nations Have Stockpiles

Iran, Iraq and Syria, along with the United States and most other countries,
have signed the 1925 Geneva protocol against the use of poison gases. The United
States, the Soviet Union and other nations have stockpiles of chemical weapons
that they say are intended as deterrents against the use of chemical weapons by
others.

The chemicals on the list of those barred for export to Iran, Iraq and now Syria
are: dimethyl methylphosphonate; phosphorus oxychloride; potassium fluoride;
thiodiglycol; methylphosphonyl difluoride; chloroethanol; dimethylamine
hydrochloride, and dimethylamine.

Bernard Kalb, the State Department spokeman, said the United States today was
''extending existing controls on certain chemical exports useful in chemical
weapons production.''

''Previously, these controls applied only to Iran and Iraq,'' he said. ''Now
they will apply also to Syria. This decision is in accordance with U.S. foreign
policy, which opposes the prohibited use of chemical weapons.''

''We have known for several years that both Iran and Iraq have had active,
ongoing programs to develop chemical weapons,'' he said. ''Our imposition of
chemical export controls two years ago was designed to impede the supply of
chemical weapons precursors to these two countries.''

'A Cause of Concern'

Mr. Kalb added that ''the United States is concerned that Syria may have a
chemical weapons capability and has assisted Iran in the Iranian war effort.''

''Iran has not used chemical weapons, but their continued use by Iraq and the
potential for Iranian use is a cause of concern,'' he said.

The United States has taken the lead in trying to persuade the world's nations
to press for an end to the use of chemical weapons. It has accused the Soviet
Union of ''opening the door'' -in words used today by one high-ranking official
- by using chemical weapons against rebel forces in Afghanistan and by supplying
Vietnam with the weapons for use in Cambodia against insurgents there. The
Russians have denied using so-called ''yellow rain,'' and there has been a
debate in this country on the accuracy of the charges.

''We've kept the chemical genie in the bottle since the First World War, and now
it is getting out if we don't stop it now,'' one official said recently.

Neutral Position in War

The United States has taken a neutral position in the six-year-old Iran-Iraq
war, although its sympathies in recent years have been on the side of Iraq
because of Iran's refusal to accept a negotiated solution to the conflict.
Washington has barred the sale of military supplies to either Iran or Iraq, and
has tried to use its influence to prevent Iran from receiving equipment.

State Department officials said that while they had no information that American
companies were exporting the banned chemicals to Syria, the American
announcement was needed before Washington could seek to persuade other
governments to follow suit.

The difficulty in enforcing a ban, officials said, is that many of these
chemicals have ordinary industrial uses, such as in the manufacture of
pesticides, and it is difficult to set up effective international controls.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 6, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

LEGLESS MAN SAVES BABY

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 51 words


James Partridge, who lost both legs in Vietnam 20 years ago, saved a neighbor's
1-year-old child in West Chicago when the baby fell into a swimming pool
Wednesday.

Mr. Partridge rolled his wheel chair and then crawled to the pool, where he
revived the baby using cardiopulmonary resuscitation. (AP)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 7, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

IN AUSTRIAN CAMPAIGN, EVEN BITTERNESS IS MUTED

BYLINE: By JAMES M. MARKHAM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1071 words

DATELINE: AMSTETTEN, Austria, June 6


''Waldheim is a liar,'' read the first placard of the group of 16 young
protesters today as they rounded Breinsbach Street and entered the packed
Hauptplatz, where Kurt Waldheim had just begun to speak.

The demonstrators were immediately surrounded by burly Waldheim supporters, who,
swinging their fists and shouting curses, ripped down the stick-borne placards.
Beate Klarsfeld, the German-born Nazi hunter, looked frightened and close to
tears.

From an elevated platform, Mr. Waldheim raised his long fingers in a spectral
gesture that has become one of his campaign trademarks and intoned, ''So here
you see an example of the abuse of Western democratic liberties!''

Policemen in black leather jackets took down the names of the protesters, who
were also mostly dressed in black, but did nothing to the young men who had
administered the beatings.

'We Were So Isolated'

''We thought we were going to be joined by other young people, young Socialists
and people like that,'' said one of the badly shaken protesters afterward. ''But
we were so isolated.''

The long campaign for the Austrian presidency, which ends with a run-off
election Sunday, is the bitterest in the country's postwar history. Yet although
it has been dominated by allegations about Mr. Waldheim's war record, it has
been strangely short on confrontation or frontal accusation, and it has not
openly split young Austrians from their parents or grandparents who lived under
the Third Reich.

Since Mr. Waldheim, 67 years old, the candidate of the rightist People's Party,
won 49.6 percent of the vote in a first-round election last month, his foes in
the Socialist Party have virtually dropped the issue of his war record, judging
that it has done him more good than harm.

The highly conservative Austrian press, which is overwhelmingly pro-Waldheim,
has observed something like self-censorship on news about the former United
Nations Secretary General, which has been on the front pages elsewhere in
Western Europe. The Austrian state television has been similarly cautious.

Popular With the Young

One of the most striking aspects of Mr. Waldheim's candidacy has been his appeal
to young Austrians. Pollsters are unanimous that more young voters in their 20's
and 30's cast ballots for Mr. Waldheim than for his Socialist opponent, Kurt
Steyrer.

While Freda Meissner-Blau, the standard-bearer of Austria's ecology movement,
drew a strong youth vote in the May 4 election, she campaigned largely on issues
like nuclear energy and played down the questions about Mr. Waldheim's wartime
service in the Balkans.

A former Socialist, Mrs. Meissner-Blau, 59, has steadfastly refused to throw her
5.5 percent of the electorate to Dr. Steyrer. In an interview, she predicted
that on Sunday about a quarter of her followers would vote Socialist, about 15
percent would back Mr. Waldheim and the rest would abstain. Opinion polls
suggest that Mr. Waldheim will triumph with 51 to 52 percent of the vote.

Mrs. Meissner-Blau accused the Socialists of ''pure opportunism'' in dredging up
Mr. Waldheim's war record, saying they were as responsible as the People's Party
for rehabilitating former Nazis and bringing them into public life.

''If Steyrer becomes president, it would bury the whole affair, and the issue of
the past would disappear,'' she said. ''If Waldheim is president, at least the
discussion will go on.''

Antipathy to Socialists Cited

Antipathy for the Socialists, who have been in power for 16 years, is one reason
advanced for Mr. Waldheim's popularity among young Austrians. The many
well-to-do young Austrians swept up in his campaign regard his election as a
milestone toward evicting the Socialists in legislative elections next spring
and installing a government more sympathetic to business and individual
achievement.

Over lunch at his squash club in Vienna, Gerhardt Welley, a 34-year-old
architect who heads Youth for Waldheim, said the political importance of the
election had priority over the issue of the candidate's past. ''If you ask young
Americans about Vietnam,'' Mr. Welley said, ''the reaction is the same: a lot of
people don't want to talk about it.''

In contrast with West Germany, where years of public anguish over the Nazi era
have opened generational chasms, the pervasive myth that Austria was Hitler's
''first victim'' appears to have helped keep fathers and sons closer together.

''I do not know one Austrian from my generation who feels at all guilty because
of World War II,'' said Martin Schlag, a 21-year-old Vienna University student.
''Not one.''

More Gentle Tides in Austria

Other tides have swept more gently over Austria, too. ''The 1968 student
revolution was not as strong here as in Germany,'' said Oliver Rathkolb, a young
historian, ''and only touched the country on the margins. And so this
confrontation now was not as strong either.''

In conversation, several young Austrians said they regarded the accusations
against Mr. Waldheim as politically motivated and thus suspect. At a round-table
discussion at Vienna University, several students said the case that Mr.
Waldheim was a war criminal had not been proved.

''If someone says, 'He's a murderer,' and then it turns out that he was a liar,
then it is as if he had been acquitted,'' said Thomas Uher, a 21-year-old
student of Czech origin. ''But no one has really posed the question of whether
the president of Austria should lie.''

With the Socialists effectively dodging the issue of Mr. Waldheim's past,
frontal opposition has come from a loose coalition of Vienna intellectuals, film
makers and non-Communist leftists who call themselves New Austria. Some of them
were here tonight with Mrs. Klarsfeld picketing the last rally of the People's
Party.

Anti-Semitism Charged

Some New Austria activists say that what has dismayed them the most is the
anti-Semitism their protests have revealed.

''What we have heard in the last few weeks is, 'Dirty Jew,' 'Jewish pig,' 'All
the Jews should have been gassed,' '' said Robert Misik, a 20-year-old economics
student at Vienna University, who was among the tiny group roughed up here.

Sepp Eicholzer, a 36-year-old film maker and a New Austria adherent, gave a
similarly bleak account. ''For the first time,'' he said, ''the rabid
anti-Semites have been mobilized for an election. Where is the middle-class
public? There have been no protests.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Beate Klarsfeld with police officers (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 7, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

MASSACHUSETTS G.O.P. CANDIDATE FALSIFIED RECORD

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 704 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, June 6


A Republican candidate for Governor has admitted that he claimed falsely to have
been a captain in the Special Forces in Vietnam, and politcal leaders say the
incident was a furthur blow to an already weakened Republican Party here.

The disclosure this week by the candidate, State Representative Royall H.
Switzler of suburban Wellesley, is the latest in a series of damaging
disclosures about Republican candidates for Governor.

Mr. Switlzer was endorsed by the state Republican convention in April in a
surprise move after allegations of poor job performance and erratic behavior
were made against Gregory S. Hyatt, who was then the leading Republican
candidate. The allegations were made by Mr. Hyatt's employer, Associated
Builders and Contractors.

Mr. Switzler's disclosures also revived memories of John Lakian, a candidate for
the Republican nomination for Governor in 1982, whose campaign fell apart after
The Boston Globe reported that his campaign literature contained a series of
exaggerations, among them that he had received a battlefield promotion in
Vietnam.

Democratic Governor Popular

Governor Michael S. Dukakis, a Democrat who is completing his second term, is
running for re-election. He has won widespread popularity as Massachusetts'
economy has prospered, with the lowest unemployment rate in the country.

The Republicans in Massachusetts, who once boasted leaders like Henry Cabot
Lodge, Leverett Saltonstall and Edward W. Brooke, have not won a statewide race
in years. Republican registration has dropped to 15 percent of registered
voters, as against 47 percent for the Democrats, and in the past few years
leadership in the state Republican organization has shifted from old-line Yankee
moderates to wealthy conservatives.

It remained unclear today whether Mr. Switzler, who is 47 years old, would
remain in the race for the Sept. 16 Republican primary election. He did not
withdraw his name before the 5 P.M. deadline today for taking his name off the
primary ballot, according to the office of the Secretary of State.

But Mr. Switzler's office issued a terse statement this afternoon saying that he
had canceled all campaign appearances and ''is engaged is a series of
discussions with campaign staff advisers and Republican Party leaders.''

''He will be unavailable for comment until these discussions are complete,'' the
statement said.

Hyatt 'Free to Campaign'

Mr. Hyatt, who has remained in the primary race despite the official Republican
endorsement of Mr. Switzler, said this afternoon that he was now ''free to
campaign exclusively against Governor Dukakis.''

Cile Hicks, a Republican state representative from Wayland who was one of the
party leaders who helped engineer Mr. Switzler's endorsement, said she was
unsure what he would do now.

''What's sad is that I thought we had hit bottom before we went to Worcester,''
for the convention, Mrs. Hicks said. She said that in endorsing Mr. Switzler the
convention had hoped to back a candidate who would not prove an embarrassment to
the party.

In an emotional news conference Tuesday Mr. Switzler surprised his supporters by
admitting that he had allowed incorrect statements about his military record to
appear in political brochures in three previous campaigns.

He said that instead of having been a captain in the Army Special Forces in
Vietnam, he had been a sergeant in the regular Army stationed in Korea. He said
he had once visited Vietnam while on Army leave.

When asked about statements he had made in the state Legislature that he had
seen Americans die in Vietnam, Mr. Switzler replied, ''I've seen people die in
Vietnam on TV.''

Quick to Criticize

Mr. Switzler's disclosure was particularly damaging because he had gained a
reputation for being quick to criticize his fellow legislators for the smallest
shortcomings.

In a debate in 1981 on giving preference to Vietnam veterans in the civil
service, Mr. Switzler criticized the Democratic speaker of the state House of
Representatives who had just cited his own record as a Marine.

Mr. Switzler said he could easily match the speaker's ''war stories,'' but the
issue should be having ''a true merit system in the civil service.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Royall H. Switzler (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 7, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

PROSECUTOR ACCUSED ON HIS INQUIRY ON EDITOR

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 28, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 581 words

DATELINE: PHOENIX, June 6


The prosecutor who brought about the resignation of a newspaper publisher by
disclosing that he had fabricated a career as a combat pilot was accused by a
grand jury Thursday of misusing his office to retaliate against the journalist
for critical articles.

The prosecutor, Tom Collins, the Maricopa County Attorney, denied the accusation
of ''willful or corrupt misconduct'' in his investigation of Darrow (Duke)
Tully, former publisher of The Arizona Republic and Phoenix Gazette.

The grand jury investigation began days after Mr. Collins announced Dec. 26 that
Mr. Tully's assertion that he was a heroic fighter pilot in the Korean and
Vietnam Wars were false.

Mr. Tully admitted he had never served in the military. He resigned as publisher
the same day.

'Private Personal Investigation'

At the time, Mr. Collins said he had been motivated by a desire to expose a
person who ''does not deserve his position as a community leader.''

However, the grand jury said, ''The investigation was not a criminal
investigation conducted because of some suspected criminal violation, but was a
private personal investigation by the County Attorney conducted with the intent
to discredit, embarrass and humiliate'' Mr. Tully.

The grand jury said Mr. Collins had used the news conference to accuse the
newspapers of performing an ''orchestrated smear campaign'' against him over his
expense accounts and over his legal campaign against pornography.

Mr. Collins said at the time that he had used his own funds for the
investigation of Mr. Tully, but the grand jury said he had also used county
facilities and a county employee.

''I will object to the sufficiency of this accusation and deny it,'' Mr. Collins
said Thursday. ''There was no misconduct and I do not feel I can comment on this
any further at this time.''

Mr. Collins, a Republican elected in 1980 and re-elected in 1984, could be
ousted if a trial jury upheld the grand jury accusation.

Court Appearance Scheduled

He was not charged with a crime but was accused under a law that provides for
the removal of public officials found to have abused the powers of office,
according to Julie Paterson, a spokesman for the State Attorney General's
office. Miss Patterson said the accused was entitled to a jury trial.

Mr. Collins is scheduled to appear in court June 12 for an initial proceeding.

Mr. Tully, now the publisher at The Williston (N.D.) Daily Herald, told The
Republic he held no grudge against Mr. Collins. Mr. Tully, who was in the area
on business, said: ''I don't have any ill feelings toward anyone. Tom Collins
didn't do anything to me.''

The grand jury investigation began after a panel member reported having
knowledge of possible wrongdoing by Mr. Collins, said Presiding Judge B. Michael
Dann of the Maricopa County Superior Court. Judge Dann authorized the
investigation Jan. 3.

In April, a petition to remove him from office was taken out by a group angered
over Mr. Collins's prosecution of pornography cases and what it said was his
insufficient aggression in the prosecution of child-molestation cases.

An organizer of the ouster drive, Barbara McDougal, said Thursday that about 70
percent of the 104,235 signatures needed by July 30 to force an election had
been collected.

Pat Murphy, who replaced Mr. Tully as publisher of The Republic and Gazette,
said, ''It was no more proper for Tom Collins to misuse his public trust than it
was for Duke Tully to abuse his public trust.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 7, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Quotation of the Day

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 30 words


''If you ask young Americans about Vietnam, the reaction is the same: a lot of
people don't want to talk about it.'' - Gerhardt Welley, leader of Youth for
Waldheim. [2:5.]

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Refugees Rescued

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 4, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 65 words

DATELINE: TROISDORF, West Germany, June 7


A West German relief ship rescued 77 Vietnamese refugees, 28 of them children,
from a small boat 210 miles southeast of the Vietnamese coast in the South China
Sea today, the aid organization Cap Anamur said. The group said that the
refugees were exhausted and hungry and had run out of water, and that about 30
ships on the Singapore-Hong Kong route had passed them without stopping.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ON THE PHENOMENON THAT WAS THE VIETNAM ERA

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 62, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 891 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 7


To Kenneth J. Wittwer, a 24-year-old college senior from California and the son
of a Vietnam veteran, the Vietnam Veterans Memorial here, its below-ground wall
of black granite slabs engraved with the names of more then 58,000 American war
dead or missing, seemed ''like a dam, holding within it a reservoir of souls,
emotion and knowledge.''

Mr. Wittwer was among a group of students who have been studying the Vietnam War
and made a special trip East just to see the memorial.

It is a measure of the depth of interest that students like Mr. Wittwer have in
a subject their elders have largely tried to forget that he and about 40
classmates from the University of California at Santa Barbara paid their own way
here so they could gather at the memorial on the Mall to share a common personal
discovery.

All were members of a 937-student course, ''The Impact of the Vietnam War on
American Values,'' a class so popular this year that almost 900 other students
had to be turned away when they tried to enroll. The school's largest lecture
hall could not hold them all.

The course is one of a growing number at colleges around the nation that look at
the history of the war and its impact on the United States, according to the
Project on the Vietnam Generation, a new, privately financed organization here
that encourages such scholarship.

From None to 300 in 6 Years

The project office has found that more than 300 university-level courses on
various aspects of the Vietnam era were offered in the academic year that is
about to end, covering everything from actual action in Southeast Asia to
student demonstrations at home and the drives for civil rights and women's
rights. Even more courses are expected to be offered next year. In 1980 there
were almost none.

The project office was opened in donated office space (Room A-1040, National
Museum of American History, Washington, D.C. 20560) in the city where much of
the tumult of the Vietnam period was played out.

The project began as a clearinghouse for inquiries from teachers, students and
Vietnam veterans who want to join in what has gradually become a sorting out of
conflicting perceptions of the war - to some an experience of national shame, to
others a difficult duty, honorably done.

The work is expected to be expanded in the coming year by sponsored university
research, by in-house studies at the project office here and by the annual
publication of a volume of papers.

The research is described by John Wheeler, the project founder and president, as
a review of ''the dynamism and idealism of the generation that bore the brunt of
the war, in Vietnam and at home - the 60 million people who, in round figures,
are 32 to 49 years old today, and of whom 10 million were in uniform during
Vietnam, 3 million actually went to Vietnam and 58,000 died there.''

Mr. Wheeler, a West Point graduate and Vietnam veteran, started the project
after serving as chairman of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund.

There were ironies in the Washington visit of the Santa Barbara students,
ironies that were not lost on them and, in fact, were part of the learning
experience.

Had they come 15 years earlier, for example, they might have been here to show
their feelings about America's longest war by ''trashing the Pentagon.'' In the
1960's and early 1970's, Washington was thronged repeatedly by hundreds of
thousands of angry, deeply alienated young people, self-styled yippies, hippies,
Trotskyites and radicals who came to denounce the war and its leaders to the
beat of tambourines.

Such protests, today's students of the era learn, reached a peak in the 1971 May
Day protest that was designed ''to shut down Washington and stop the
Government.'' It brought the mass arrests of 9,500 people.

Stephanie Nelson, a 20-year-old sophomore among the visitors from Santa Barbara,
said she had tried to learn about the protests from her mother but could elicit
from her only that ''it was a bad time.''

When she decided to write a paper on the public impact of the war, she said, she
went to the library and asked if there were any books on Vietnam.

''It turned out there were aisles and and aisles and aisles of them,'' Miss
Nelson recounted. ''That's when it hit me: there was something there that people
were not telling me.''

''Remember,'' Mr. Wheeler said, speaking of the war and its impact on the United
States, ''it was not only the time of the sometimes violent anti-war protests,
but also of the rise of rock music and the counterculture; sexual license and
drugs; the unreined surveillance of anti-war activists by the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, and the assassinations of President John F. Kennedy, of Robert F.
Kennedy and of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., followed by urban rioting.
And then came Watergate.''

But according to Mr. Wheeler, who left his post as the secretary of the
Securities and Exchange Commission to devote all his time to the Project on the
Vietnmam Generation, what is often overlooked is that the Vietnam era was not
just Vietnam.

It was also, he points out, a time of rising idealism that infused the civil
rights, women's rights and environmental movements, the War on Poverty and the
Peace Corps.

The project, he said, is equally interested in that aspect of the Vietnam
generation because it is equally important.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of John Wheeler and Sandie Fauriol visiting the Vietnam Veterans
Memorial (NYT/Paul Hosefros)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Maureen Footer Marries in West

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 71, Column 4; Society Desk

LENGTH: 214 words


Maureen Wilson Footer, a daughter of Mrs. Arthur Wilson Footer of Piedmont,
Calif., and the late Dr. Footer, was married yesterday to Thong Minh Nguyen, a
son of Mr. and Mrs. Minh Van Nguyen of New York. The Rev. Samuel Lindamood
performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Piedmont Community Church.

Shannon Carrel Williams and Patrice McCormick Footer were their sister's matron
and maid of honor, respectively.

The bride, who will retain her name, is a manager with the Citicorp Investment
Bank in New York. She graduated from Wellesley College and she and Mr. Nguyen
received M.B.A. degrees from Columbia University. She made her debut at the
Winter Ball in San Francisco and is a member of the New York Junior League. Her
father was a surgeon and lawyer in Oakland, Calif.

Mr. Nguyen is a marketing representative for the International Business Machines
Corporation in New York. He graduated from the Lycee Francais de New York and
Columbia College. His father is an auditor for the American Cancer Society in
New York and was a Governor of the province of Saigon in South Vietnam during
the Vietnam War, a lieutenant general in the South Vietnamese Army and commander
of the South Vietnamese forces in the Third Military Region, which included
Saigon, now Ho Chi Minh City.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Maureen Footer (Bachrach)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ARTIST AND MODEL: WHY THE TRADITION ENDURES

BYLINE: By GRACE GLUECK

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2327 words


Last month the sculptor Anthony Caro, renowned since the late 1950's for his
abstract structures of painted and welded steel, surprised his New York audience
with a new body of work - a group of small, figurative bronzes done from a
female model. In 1983, teaching at a summer workshop he runs in upstate New
York, he spent evenings drawing from a professional model ''for fun.'' So
enjoyable did he find the process that the following year he took to sculpturing
the model, Concetta Branson, in clay. Next came the translation into bronze. ''I
had not modeled from the figure since the academic exercises of my student
days,'' he noted, ''and I have no doubt it will come to feed the mainstream of
my work.''

Caro's experience points up the continuing vitality, even in the
trend-conscious, fashion-mad art world such as ours, of the ancient tradition of
artist and model. Never before in history have painters and sculptors had so
many ways and means of making art as they do today. They can do steel
abstractions, reshape a giant crater, wrap a bridge in cloth, bounce images off
satellites, lay down pure fields of color on canvas, and play with motifs
derived from photography, films and television. Yet, in the midst of all these
bright new options, rrthe ''live'' human body, and the struggle to master its
infinitely complicated forms, keeps right on challenging artists as it has since
the golden age of Greece, a challenge now intensified by the current revival of
interest in figurative art.

While not much has come down to us about artist-model relationships of ancient
times, it is probably safe to say that they were hardly less complicated than
those of succeeding centuries. It was not inconceivable that an artist's
scrutiny of an appealing nude body - male or female - for five or six hours a
day could well engender a more than professional interest, and often it did. On
the other hand, for love and/or convenience, artists have always been wont to
use as models the persons they were married to or lived with. The complex
psychological, emotional and sexual overtones of such relationships reverberate
through art history and have contributed to some very great works. The process
is ongoing.

While Caro sees drawing from the figure as ''parallel'' to his main activity of
abstract sculpture, there are other well-known contemporary artists for whom it
is a matter of prime importance, among them Philip Pearlstein, Alfred Leslie,
Alex Katz, William Beckman, Larry Rivers, George Segal, Jack Beal, David
Hockney, Gregory Gillespie. The painter Janet Fish, long concerned with
capturing reflections from shiny still-life objects, has in the last two years
begun to paint the figure from life. And of the younger neo-Expressionist
generation, Robert Longo and David Salle also work or have worked from living
models (Longo photographs his models; Salle works from both photographs and from
life).

Artists have probably worked from live models since prehistoric times, and their
use in the studios of ancient Greece has actually been documented. A model known
as Phryne is said to have posed for Apelles' painting of Aphrodite for the
Temple of Aesculapius on the island of Kos, and the painter Zeuxis supposedly
combined the attributes of five different female models to create his ''Helen''
for the Temple of Hera Lakinia in Croton. From inscriptions, it's also known
that many athletes served as models for sculptors.

One of Leonardo's models was ''Salai'' (Satan), an angelic-looking monster whom
the painter took into his household at the age of 10 and kept there for 26
years, despite the boy's tendency to lie, steal and carouse. Infatuated,
Leonardo drew his beautiful features over and over, until Salai was shot to
death at the age of 36. Rembrandt hired a servant, Henrickje Stoffels, after the
death of his beloved wife, Saskia, one of his favorite models. Shortly
thereafter, Henrickje became his mistress, and model, too. Until her death 17
years later, Rembrandt painted portraits of this plump, undistinguished but
deeply affectionate woman that are among the triumphs of his mature style. Or
take, in our own era, Pierre Bonnard, who was obsessed with painting his wife,
Marthe, in her bath, where she seemed to have spent a good deal of her life.
Using her as a subject, he created a series of ''Bathtub'' canvases in the
1930's whose luminous, dreamlike atmosphere put them among his masterpieces.

But the most celebrated artist-model relationships have been those of Picasso,
for whom the connection between sitter and painter was highly charged. As models
over the years, he used his various wives and mistresses - Olga Koklova,
Marie-Therese Walter, Dora Maar, Francois Gilot, Jacqueline Roque - and in fact
almost the entire body of his painting serves as a documentary of his
relationships with these women. Throughout his career, he returned again and
again to the specific theme of questing artist and seductive, unfathomable
model, commenting not only on the erotic tension of the relationship, but using
it to probe -sometimes with high irony - his own existence and the meaning of
his art. Jacqueline, his last wife, served as the image - though she never posed
- for a marathon ''Artist and Model'' series of paintings that Picasso did in
1963. Commenting on this series, Helene Parmelin, a longtime Picasso friend, has
written, ''Full of arrogance, supremely disdainful of him; growing in his studio
like a tree in the earth - with no problems, whereas the artist has so many -
this nude that Picasso paints for his poor Artist in her multiple poses and
solutions, is for him the double-edged major subject on which his Artist's life
torments itself.''

Artists today, if they are not married or living with their models, tend to have
more professional relationships with them than did their forebears, thanks
partly to changes in the status of women which encourage them to follow their
own goals. Elisa Decker, for instance, who poses for Philip Pearlstein and
Raphael Soyer, is a painter herself, and Valeria Curvelo, also a Pearlstein
model, is a ceramicist. There are, to be sure, ''career'' models who pose at art
schools for a meager living, but most sitters are apt to be artists or students
or in pursuit of other ambitions, appearing in the studio merely to supplement
their incomes. Yet for the artists who observe them, the basic challenge is
still the attempt to depict the elusive human body, with its rich range of
associations and relationships. And their reasons for, and ways of, working with
live models are as varied and complex as ever.

Philip Pearlstein - who almost always paints from professional models, except
for portrait commissions - is not at all concerned with ''spiritual'' insight
into his subjects, but with ''the forms created by the human body in its
movement through space.'' To Pearlstein, the motions made by his nude models are
like ''frozen choreography,'' and, trying to catch ''the reality of their living
flesh,'' he arranges them - or rather, allows them to arrange themselves -in
harsh, angular ''bodyscapes'' that play off other shapes, such as furniture and
even, in the background, city buildings.

''I'm not interested in telling a story or playing Freud,'' Pearlstein says.
''What I see is what I paint, from models who are paid by the hour to pose in my
studio. My problem is how to make a three-dimensional seeing experience into a
two-dimensional one.'' Pearlstein is friendly with his models, some of whom have
worked for him for many years, but preserves a professional distance. ''My wife,
Dorothy, has never posed for me,'' he says, somewhat wistfully.

On the other hand, Alex Katz's wife, Ada, has appeared in perhaps more than 100
of his cool, reductively figurative paintings - over a period of nearly 30 years
- in such guises as a bathing beauty, a sex goddess, a mother, a bystander, a
jet-set aristocrat. Early on in the work, she appears stiff and a little
standoffish, but over the years, as Katz's style has loosened up, she seems more
relaxed and sexier. And if she has aged at all, we discern it only minimally
through the eyes of the artist.

For Katz - who besides Ada presses many friends and acquaintances into service
as models - his simplified figures, always of particular people and never nude,
function less as subjects than as ''symbols,'' ambiguous images that suggest
multiple interpretations. Of his wife, he says, ''She's such a great model; she
can assume any role and like a dancer, she always knows where her body's at.''
Lately more interested in portraying movement and gesture, Katz has done
mural-size friezes of figures in relationship to one another, and he is
currently working on a painting of Paul Taylor's dance company, for which he has
long done sets. ''I use live models because they're much more complicated than a
photograph or anything I could make up,'' he says.

Some artists, as did the late Alberto Giacometti, see their models as actual
participants in the painting process. Alfred Leslie's commitment is to portrait
and narrative painting as a ''social enterprise, an attempt to influence
people's lives by ''helping them relate better to each other.'' And he views the
relatives, friends or other models who pose for his colossal, confrontational
portraits and strong narrative compositions as ''collaborators,'' with a stake
in the outcome of the work. ''The important thing is that the sitters want to
see you, the artist, succeed,'' he says. ''Interaction is what painting people
is all about. In the end, you're painting with, not from, nature.''

In Leslie's mammoth three-panel painting of 1977-78, for instance, ''Americans:
Youngstown, Ohio'' -done to celebrate the opening of the Youngstown campus of
the University of Ohio - 14 figures, including faculty members and others
representative of the Youngstown community, stand in a line dramatically
confronting the viewer. Working on a 9-hour-a-day schedule, Leslie first ''put
them all together as a whole. Then I broke it down. Each person's body is
unique, in that it relates differently to another. Each successively became a
ruler by which the next was measured. I had to keep drawing them - they had to
undergo this tremendous scrutiny, and keep coming back. Some were paid, some
didn't want to be, but they had to have a powerful commitment to the painting.''

William Beckman feels that his subjects, too, have a commitment to his work -
and small wonder. They consist of himself, his wife Diana - a sculptor - and
their daughter Diedra. He has concentrated on them -aside from the landscapes
that are his other subject - for 19 years, in obsessively detailed, nearly
life-size canvases that often present the figures in full nudity. Beckman says
his work is about ''relationships, between men and women, family members, the
control we have or think we have over ourselves and each other. Over the years,
our roles vis-a-vis each other have changed, not only from within ourselves, but
because of such outside forces as the women's movement and the Vietnam war. I
use myself and my family as constants, to reflect those changes. Early on, I did
domestic settings and interiors. Family, child, nest. Closeness was important.
But by the late 70's, my figures had became more separated, more involved with
self-identity and space of their own. Now in the 80's my daughter is going to
college and my paintings reflect the tensions of relating to each other in a
different way.''

There is, in fact, a striking difference in two double portraits of the couple,
done in 1978 and 1985-86. In the earlier one, they stand frontally nude against
a blank backdrop, hand-in-hand and a little starry-eyed, proclaiming a kind of
innocent togetherness. The new painting, ''Studio,'' is much tougher. Beckman,
thinner, older, and shorn of his blond mustache, appears in running clothes
before his easel, gazing almost defiantly out at the viewer. Off to one side
stands his wife, nude but seen from the back, and keeping a little distance from
the artist.

In recent years, spurred by feminist precepts, a number of women artists have
begun - with a certain irony - to paint male nudes in the passive roles that
female models have assumed for centuries. (The trend was celebrated in a recent
show, ''The Male Nude,'' organized by Elisa Decker at the Hudson Center
Galleries.) The painter Sylvia Sleigh, taking note of the art historian Linda
Nochlin's observation that in Ingres's famous harem painting, ''The Turkish
Bath,'' the women all had similar faces, did her own version of that crowded
canvas in 1973. Its nude models were men she knew in the art world, including
her husband, the critic Lawrence Alloway. ''I wanted to do a male bath showing
how women ought to be painted, with love, appreciation and respect,'' she says.

The painter Martha Edelheit also feels that ''if women can be odalisques, so can
men.'' As part of one of her recent works involving a circus horse with a female
rider, she painted the man she lives with as Manet's nude ''Olympia.'' Yet as an
artist, she adds, ''all bodies excite me, male and female, in whatever shapes
and sizes. I still can't forget the first time I had a nude model all to myself,
with no other students around me. I could say to her, walk around, let's see
you. I could do vast compositions, or draw her nose or toes or nipple.
Confronting that primal material in the privacy of my own space was thrilling,
like driving a car for the first time. I felt, wow! this is how Matisse did
it.''

Which may be as good a way as any of saying that as long as there are bodies,
artists will be challenged by their mysteries. Wrote the sculptor Antonio Canova
in 1815, ''You are searching in nature for some beautiful part of the body and
you cannot find it? Do not lose heart. Undress some more persons and you will
find it. In nature there is everything, provided you know how to look for it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of the artist Philip Pearlstein with Ruth Fuglistaller (Jack
Mitchell); Photo of William Beckman with his wife and double portrait (page 27);
Photo of Alex and Ada Katz with painting (Jack Mitchell) (page 27); Photo of
Alfred Leslie with some models for ''Americans: Youngstown, Ohio'' (Page 27)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Midlife Macho

SECTION: Section 6; Page 94, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 126 words


As I read Christopher S. Wren's article ''Midlife Macho'' (About Men, May 4), I
marveled at how enlightened he was - until I reached the last paragraph, in
which he writes, ''But when the courage was desperately needed, they delivered
it, and afterward . . . they got on with less remarkable lives.''

If men (and women) had had more trouble getting on with their lives after such
devastating experiences, we might have realized sooner how tragic war is.
Perhaps there is an important lesson in the post-traumatic stress syndrome
suffered by Vietnam veterans: the nagging reminder of how hellish war is. We
have always forgotten too quickly - World Wars I and II were separated by 20
years, Korea and Vietnam by only 10. BEVERLY J. SMITH Wheeling, W.Va.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHARTON REACHES FOR THE STARS

BYLINE: By LAURENCE SHAMES; Laurence Shames is the author of ''The Big Time,'' a
report on the Class of 1949 at the Harvard Business School.

SECTION: Section 6; Part 2, Page 84, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 2917 words


WHEN I CAME HERE,'' SAYS RUSSELL E. PALMER, dean of the University of
Pennsylvania's Wharton School since 1983, ''I tried to look at Wharton from the
viewpoint of the marketplace. And I realized that if we asked the question,
'What is Wharton known for?' the marketplace would sing out, 'Finance.' That was
the perception.''

Settling into his commodious armchair, locking his hands behind his head, Palmer
continues. He is 51 years old, with clubby good looks and hair the color of
silvery sand. ''Finance is fine,'' he says, ''but we're also damn good at
turning out entrepreneurs -the Donald Trumps, the Michael Milkens, the Saul
Steinbergs -people who went on to make a very personal mark in business. That
side of Wharton was never really talked about before. Well, we're talking about
it now.''

Russell Palmer, who often sounds more like a brand manager than an academic, has
devised an opportunistic marketing strategy to brighten the ledger-book-gray
image of the staid old Philadelphia school. While touting Wharton as an
entrepreneurial breeding ground, he is also courting some of the more
freewheeling figures active in business today - alumni like Trump, the real
estate developer; Milken, the junk bond guru of Drexel Burnham Lambert, and
Steinberg, a pioneer of the hostile takeover bid.

Consider Saul Steinberg, B.S. '59, chairman of Reliance Group Holdings Inc., an
insurance conglomerate. He first came to prominence at the age of 29 when, as a
computer-leasing prodigy, he failed in an attempted takeover of the Chemical
Bank. He has since earned a secure niche in the pantheon of greenmailers
-selling back his stock at a premium to companies afraid of being taken over. He
cleared $60 million from his 1984 move on Walt Disney Productions.

Steinberg's commitment to his alma mater is substantial. ''If I didn't have the
disciplines they taught me,'' he says, ''I'm not sure I would be as successful
as I am.'' Wharton, he adds, is ''a very pro-free-enterprise,
pro-American-business sort of place. You got the feeling that it was a good
thing to go out and make a lot of money.''

He has given the school $4 million for a major construction project and kicked
in $3 million more to retire the debt on the building now called Steinberg
Hall-Dietrich Hall - originally funded by a family of cough drop manufacturers.
Through Reliance, Steinberg also foots the bill for various Wharton symposiums
and is a frequent speaker at the school. ''He's bought the place for all
practical purposes,'' says Richard R. West, dean of New York University's
graduate school of business administration.

Since Palmer's arrival, Wharton's annual take in gifts and pledges for its
undergraduate and graduate business programs has burgeoned from $3.6 million to
$12.4 million last year. During the same period, the school has been able to
hire 58 new faculty members and substantially boost faculty pay. Last year
alone, six endowed chairs were established, at about $1.5 million apiece. (One
was contributed by Ronald O. Perelman - B.S. '64, M.B.A.'66 - chairman of the
Revlon Group Inc., the cosmetics and health care company he acquired in one of
last year's fiercest contests.) Wharton's alliance with some of its more
controversial alumni makes a number of people at the school quietly nervous.
''Look,'' a member of Wharton's entrepreneurial staff acknowledges, ''there's an
argument that runs: we shouldn't take money from people with the reputation of a
Steinberg. But it's all relative. The guy operates within the law.''

And there are other nettlesome questions about the sudden popularity of the
entrepreneurial curriculum - not only at Wharton but at business schools around
the country. (As of 1967, there were roughly a half-dozen American universities
offering courses on the subject; in 1985, there were about 250.) Just how
serious is a curriculum devoted to entrepreneurship, a term indiscriminately
applied to everything from inventing new financial instruments to opening a
falafel stand? Is there any reality, in terms of academic rigor and top-level
faculty, behind all the we-make-entrepreneurs hoopla?

The man who occupies the Wharton dean's chair, endowed by Saul Steinberg in
1979, is no stranger to controversy. After being named managing partner of the
Big Eight accounting firm of Touche Ross at the age of 37, Palmer took the
public heat for a faulty audit conducted during a previous administration; the
firm was censured by the Securities and Exchange Commission. Palmer went on, in
1977, to mastermind the largest merger ever effected in the accounting industry,
the acquisition of J. K. Lasser. And he was a leading advocate of then
unorthodox accounting procedures tailored to inflationary times.

There was considerable discussion about Wharton's decision to hire Palmer. He
was not an alumnus - his only academic credential was a bachelor of arts degree
in accounting and business administration from Michigan State - and he hardly
conformed to the old stereotype of the contemplative, pipe-puffing scholar who
usually occupies a dean's chair. But John Sculley 3d, chairman of Apple Computer
and a member of the search committee that chose Palmer, explains, ''We needed
someone close to business who could talk to business.''

ODAY, WHARTON AND OTHER BUSINESS schools, caught in the rough-and-tumble of
free-market forces, need alumni support as never before. It was just a decade or
so ago that graduate business education swept into vogue. Suddenly, it seemed,
the M.B.A. degree was perceived as the essential passport to success, the foot
in the door for a career in big time business. The list of schools offering the
advanced degree soared from 389 in 1974 to 650 today. As the number of M.B.A.'s
doubled, supply more than caught up with demand - and the value of the degree,
from all but the handful of elite schools, predictably dropped.

Meanwhile, the business curriculum itself was challenged. Business leaders
became disenchanted, for example, with Harvard's narrowly focused case-study
method. Moreover, critics claimed that Harvard was turning out an arrogant breed
of managers focused on short-term opportunism.

Many of the smaller business schools are fighting for survival. The leading
schools - such as Harvard, Stanford and Wharton - are not so threatened, but
they have never been so competitive with each other. They are fighting to
attract the best students. They are paying premiums to lure professors, who are
in increasingly short supply. (As of the 1985-86 academic year, 16 percent of
the tenure-track positions at business schools were going begging.) Like the
business community they serve, the top schools are redefining their markets,
altering their strategies and building up their war chests. Image and the will
to win are essential.

''We're among the best,'' Palmer proclaims, ''which is gratifying. But we'll
keep pushing until there's a general acknowledgment that the Wharton School is
No. 1.''

ISTORICALLY SPEAKING, WHARTON HAD OP-erated in a far less competitive
environment and had comported itself much less feistily. Launched in 1881 on a
$100,000 gift from Joseph Wharton, an iron magnate, the school was America's
first undergraduate business college, and its leadership at the bachelor's level
has never been seriously questioned; indeed, its association with the Ivy League
University of Pennsylvania has always given it a rather tony cast, unlike the
''trade school'' reputation of most other business colleges. As of 1921, when
Wharton weighed in with a master's program, only a handful of universities had
entered the graduate arena, and its star has shone brightly enough to attract
such scholars as Lawrence R. Klein, a 28-year faculty member, who won the Nobel
Memorial Prize in 1980 for his achievements in economic forecasting.

The institution called the Wharton School of Finance and Commerce until 1971 has
always excelled at the inculcation of quantitative skills - what's known these
days as ''number crunching'' -the heart and soul of finance. Its graduates
include such prominent investment bankers as Alvin V. Shoemaker, chairman of
First Boston Corporation; I. W. Burnham 2d, honorary chairman of Drexel Burnham
Lambert, and Geoffrey Boisi, co-head of investment banking for Goldman Sachs.

Yet Wharton has traditionally lacked the cachet of Harvard or Stanford. Soon
after Russell Palmer arrived, he says, ''We did a market study to determine why
roughly 3 in 10 grad students accepted to Wharton go elsewhere. The issue was
identity. We didn't hear complaints or doubts about the quality of the
education. We heard marketplace perception.''

Wharton has moved on a number of fronts to improve that perception. The Lauder
family, including two with Wharton bachelor's degrees - Leonard, president of
Estee Lauder, the billion- dollar cosmetics empire, and Ronald, Ambassador to
Austria -has given $10 million to launch the Joseph H. Lauder Institute of
Management and International Studies. The school has just graduated its first
class of 50 dual-degree M.A.-M.B.A.'s drawn from both Wharton and the University
of Pennsylvania's school of arts and sciences. At graduate school advisory board
meetings, emphasis is placed on boosting Wharton's programs to turn out
corporate managers and on increasing the job offers M.B.A.'s receive in
consulting and investment banking. (The average Wharton M.B.A. last year started
out in the business world at $40,926, only $4,000 behind his peers at the
Harvard Business School.) There are plenty of corporate role models for the
Wharton strivers to emulate. Consider Reginald H. Jones, chairman emeritus of
General Electric, and John A. Mayer, erstwhile chairman of Mellon Bank. Or
Robert L. Crandall, chairman of American Airlines, who successfully led the
airline through the turbulent onset of deregulation with such enterprising ideas
as the frequent flier program and the two-tier labor agreement.

Nowadays, though, Wharton tends to hail the independent operators among its old
grads and to boast of its longtime commitment to the teaching of
entrepreneurship. The Sol C. Snider Entrepreneurial Center - endowed by Ed
Snider, a Philadelphia sports and entertainment mogul, to honor his father, a
banking, real estate and grocery entrepreneur - has been offering courses at
both the undergraduate and graduate levels since its founding in 1973. It was
one of the first facilities of its kind.

Even today, Wharton is one of only a handful of schools that allows both
undergraduates and M.B.A. students to major in entrepreneurship. (The curriculum
includes such course offerings as ''Entrepreneurial and Venture Initiation,''
''Consulting for Small Business'' and ''Entrepreneurial Decision Making in Land
Development.'') Palmer is seeking to establish a $5-million Wharton
Entrepreneurial Fund to provide seed money for student enterprises. And he is
actively hunting new faculty. Late last year Palmer persuaded Ian MacMillan,
then head of New York University's entrepreneurial program and an acknowledged
pacesetter in entrepreneurial research, to take over the directorship of the
Wharton center.

STILL, THERE ARE THOSE NET-tlesome questions. ''I get a little nervous,''
observes Howard H. Stevenson, a professor at the Harvard Business School,
''about how many schools have suddenly discovered that most of their rich alumni
were entrepreneurs, so they come up with that as a flattering catchword for
getting their support.''

And skepticism simmers as to the academic validity of the new courses. ''You
can't teach someone to be an entrepreneur,'' says Bernard H. Tenenbaum,
associate director of the Snider Center. And Marion L. Oliver, vice dean and
director of Wharton's undergraduate division, adds: ''If you don't have it, a
Wharton education isn't going to give it to you -it's just going to let you
understand why the other guys are making money.''

William Zucker, director of Wharton's Real Estate Center and a classroom
presence of some theatricality, is fond of telling how he once threw a pocketful
of rice at his students. ''I was so frustrated at their lack of entrepreneurial
thinking,'' he recalls, ''that I told them I'd been given these magic particles
by Merlin the Magician, and that - Boom! - they were now innovators with the
fire in the belly.''

At Wharton, the evidence suggests that more high-flying entrepreneurs come out
of the undergraduate program than from the M.B.A. program - a tendency that may
be related to the students' family backgrounds. The M.B.A. class today, says
Professor Klein, ''seems to have more sons and daughters of parents from larger
concerns. But in the undergraduate program, it seems to me that more of the
students are the children of small-business people.''

Further, Wharton undergraduates are more likely to be people who have decided
early on a fast-track career in business. Donald Trump, for example, a 1968
B.S., was already cutting real estate deals in Philadelphia while an
undergraduate.

Trump is a folk hero at Wharton. At the usual corporate presentation, an
audience of 200 students is considered a good turnout. When Trump spoke last
year, 600 people showed up. ''The students who arranged the event,'' says
Palmer, ''had a message put up on the electric sign at the football field. Look,
Trump may be controversial, but he seems to be the sort of person the students
want to hear.''

The developer is admired for thinking supremely big - currently on his drawing
board are a domed stadium, for Queens, and the world's tallest building, for
Manhattan's West Side - and for his dynamism and public visibility. Trump's much
criticized role in landlord-tenant disputes and his use of tax abatement
incentives to subsidize luxury housing do not seem to interfere with his star
status at Wharton.

Trump has thus far declined to become a major patron of the school. ''I think a
great deal of Wharton,'' he says. ''They turn out a very aggressive, very
competitive type of student, which I respect. But, let's face it, it's a very
wealthy school. My inclination has always been to give money to people who need
it - to New York City's homeless or to Vietnam vets' organizations.'' Trump has
donated $1 million to the New York Vietnam Veterans Memorial Commission, as well
as hefty sums to such charities as Boys Towns of Italy and United Cerebral
Palsy. What he did for the homeless, though, was to offer them vacant apartments
at 100 Central Park South - a move that, as he himself acknowledged, might lead
tenants already in the building to depart, allowing him to replace the building
with a larger one.

PALMER DEFENDS THE CLOSE connections between his school and some of its more
flamboyant alumni. ''Who am I to judge who the good guys and the bad guys are?''
he asks. ''The controversy over whether you build a building or take over a
company - well, controversies like that always surround entrepreneurs. That's
business today.'' His basic job, after all, is selling the Wharton School to
prospective students and employers, who tend to be less concerned with
philosophical and academic niceties than with the fickle but compelling desires
of the marketplace.

In fact, many schools have benefited from association with businessmen whose
images have, at one time or another, been decidedly ambiguous. Harvard has its
Morgan Hall and Mellon Hall - the first named after J. P. Morgan, the financier,
the second after Andrew W. Mellon, the banker and longtime Secretary of the
Treasury. Fifty years ago, both men were excoriated for their insider dealing
and financial speculation. But one generation's robber barons have a way of
becoming another generation's hallowed citizens.

Time may not, however, be on the side of the business schools' entrepreneurial
bent. Wharton's Ian MacMillan predicts that the schools offering
entrepreneurship programs have ''a three-year window in which to get the
resources and accumulate the faculty. After that, let's face it, some other
field will come into fashion.'' Zenas Block, a founder and associate director of
N.Y.U.'s entrepreneurial program, puts the matter even more bluntly. ''Is it a
fad?'' he asks. ''You bet it's a fad.'' Indeed, Russell Palmer's new marketing
strategy at Wharton has not thus far wrought enormous change. Only 1.4 percent
of the school's 1,300 graduate students and 7.5 percent of the 1,900
undergraduates took the entrepreneurial major last year, and a total of only 700
students, graduate and undergraduate, were enrolled in entrepreneurship classes.
Finance remains at the core of the Wharton education - it was the major for
roughly two-thirds of the graduate students and half of the undergraduates.

When students talk about the shift they would like to see in Wharton's image,
they tend to speak not of entrepreneurship but of general management a la
Harvard; that's the perception they say would lead to more jobs in the glamour
fields of consulting and investment banking.

Back in 1970, with gung-ho capitalism momentarily out of favor, The New York
Times reported that ''Wharton is now trying to exchange its business label for
the more flexible and socially approved one of management science.'' Today, the
school seeks an entrepreneurial label. But all through the years, the real
educational focus has been on finance.

As in the business world beyond Wharton's gates, repositionings come and go,
while the product in the box remains not so very different from what it was
before.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Russell E. Palmer (George Lange); photos of Wharton alumni
Leonard A. Lauder, Saul Philip Steinberg and Ronald Owen Perelman (page 85);
photo of the Wharton School (Gary Gilbert) (page 104)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE RISKS OF REPORTING

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis; Anthony Lewis is a columnist for The Times. He wrote
''Gideon's Trumpet,'' the story of a landmark Supreme Court decision.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 27, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1868 words


SUING THE PRESS By Rodney A. Smolla. 277 pp. New York: Oxford University Press.
$18.95. CHARLES HORMAN, a young American writer, was in Chile in 1973 when a
military coup overthrew Salvador Allende's Government. Two days later he
disappeared. His father came to look for him - and became convinced that the
American Embassy was obstructing the search, perhaps because his son had learned
something about a United States role in the coup. Charles Horman's body was
later found in a cemetery in Santiago.

The movie ''Missing'' was based on the story of the Hormans. It was directed by
Constantin Costa-Gavras, and like his other films it was political in tone and
angry at official inhumanity. Three United States officials took it personally
and sued for libel. Nathaniel Davis, who had been Ambassador to Chile at the
time, and two of his colleagues claimed they were damaged by a false implication
of United States complicity in the murder of Charles Horman. They asked for $150
million. The Davis lawsuit is an example of a remarkable contemporary
phenomenon: the thinning of the American skin. Public officials and public
figures of all kinds are taking furious offense at published comments and are
suing for libel - generals, governors, senators, ambassadors, judges. They seek
damages in the hundreds of millions, although many, like former Ambassador
Davis, might find it hard to show that they have been hurt in the pocketbook at
all.

The phenomenon is remarkable because America of all countries has had a
tradition of critical, even abusive speech about holders of power in the
society. Those who were abused answered back; they did not sue. Thomas Jefferson
was called ''a coward, a calumniator, a plagiarist''; he suffered, but he never
sued. Ulysses S. Grant got far worse from the press than Gen. William
Westmoreland, but he never claimed $120 million to salve his psyche. ''Suing the
Press'' explores the American libel explosion, its causes and its often
grotesque consequences. I should say at once that it is a marvelous book. It
tells stories of riveting human interest. It is wise in its judgments. It is
funny. It proves that a serious legal subject can be made not just
understandable but entertaining to the general reader. And it does all that
without sacrificing accuracy or usefulness to those professionally interested.

Rodney A. Smolla is an associate professor of law at the University of Arkansas.
He brings to the subject of libel a fitting skepticism about all the parties
involved: the press, the angry plaintiffs and the lawyers. He is devastating,
for example, in showing how irresponsibly Time magazine reported and wrote the
story that led Gen. Ariel Sharon to sue - the story charging that General Sharon
had discussed ''revenge'' with the Lebanese Phalangists just before they
massacred Palestinian refugees in Beirut. But he never loses sight of the values
that are at risk in the libel explosion, the values of an open, democratic
society. THE ''Missing'' case is very much in point.

The film treats ''facts'' in an emotional and impressionistic way. There is a
social cost, Mr. Smolla says, for taking our political criticism from such a
medium: ''the displacement of the cerebral with the visceral,'' the substitution
of ''intuition and speculation for investigation and analysis.'' But he does not
stop there.

''The advancement of 'knowledge' in a technical and literal sense is not the
only or even the primary purpose of freedom of speech,'' he says. ''The
emotional spirit that generates society's self-critique, and that gives it the
courage to speak freely, often comes from artistic efforts that do not and
should not claim accuracy as much as they simply generate concern and further
inquiry.''

Moreover, the ''Missing'' case illustrates an essential characteristic of many
of today's big libel suits. It alleges falsity on matters that are not
susceptible of simple true-false judgments. The issue, that is, is not a
''fact'' in the absolute, almost physical sense we usually give that word; it is
an ''ideological fact,'' in Mr. Smolla's shrewd phrase.

Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger as well as Mr. Davis have forcefully denied
that there was any United States link to the coup in Chile. ''Yet it is also at
least theoretically possible,'' Mr. Smolla writes, ''that the likes of Nixon and
Kissinger are lying about Chile. It is not as if they have never lied before.
Both sides in the debate can point to some spe cific historical evidence to
support their case, but neither side can really come near anything like reliable
proof to clinch the issue either way. . . . The dispute becomes wrapped up in
political bias and cultural perceptions. An open, robust, and uninhibited airing
of the conflicting evidence, political biases, and cultural world-views are the
very stuff of a free society, and in the milieu of the United States in the
1980's, these conflicts, if they are to reach a meaningful number of Americans,
will inevitably be carried on in movies and paperback books.''

That is why Mr. Davis's lawsuit is so dangerous - so contrary to the American
tradition of open debate on the most controversial public issues. Mr. Smolla
puts it this way: ''A government official is attempting to punish (and $150
million in damages can only be described as punishment) a filmmaker because he
dares to challenge official reality.'' Moreover, officials have many chances to
put their version of history to large audiences. Dissenters have a harder time
even without the threat of libel suits. OF course it is not just Mr. Davis.
General Westmoreland sought $120 million from CBS for a program charging that he
doctored the count of enemy forces in Vietnam - an issue that turned on the
policy questions of what kind of war it was and whether irregulars should be
included. (The general dropped his suit when it ran into difficulties at trial.)
Former Governor Edward J. King of Massachusetts has asked for $3.6 million from
The Boston Globe for, among other things, cartoons ridiculing him. At least one
other governor and a senator are in the lists. All these are libel suits against
the press. There are others, just as menacing in their way to the American
tradition, against private citizens and community groups that have criticized
the actions of the local police or other officials.

Why are we having a libel explosion? Why, especially just 20 years after The New
York Times v. Sullivan, the Supreme Court decision that for the first time
established a constitutional defense against libel claims? Mr. Smolla explores
the mystery of the premise, as he puts it, that ''American law is always much
more deeply influenced by changing cultural moods than by changes in technical
legal doctrine.''

One cultural change is in the press itself. In the old days reporters were the
raffish characters seen in the play ''The Front Page,'' without oracular
pretensions. And there were lots of newspapers, so what one said might be
corrected in another. In those circumstances, Mr. Smolla suggests, prominent
people did not care that much what the press said.

But today reporters and commentators, especially on television, are national
figures. There are fewer papers, and the establishment press takes itself very
seriously - seeming to dispense, Mr. Smolla says, ''not merely news but Truth.''
Criticism from such a weighty source carries more sting, so naturally the
targets resent it more.

Then, too, Americans are suspicious of power wherever they see it. The press
believes, in my view correctly, that whatever power it has is necessary to
combat a government that has grown incomparably more powerful. But the public
evidently sees big press corporations as among the social institutions that have
to be kept in check. What better way to do it than for a jury to award millions
in damages for a press mistake, even though the plaintiff suffered only
unprovable psychic injury?

Narcissism is another cultural trend. Americans are devoting increasing effort
and expense to ''finding and then nurturing the inner self,'' Mr. Smolla says,
so ''one might expect greater umbrage to be taken when that self is damaged.''
WHAT is to be done about the libel explosion? The odd thing is that while it
intimidates critics it does not do the offended plaintiffs much good either;
most of them spend large sums on lawyers and in the end recover no damages,
though some say the very act of litigating makes them feel better.

Mr. Smolla makes important suggestions for reform. Among them are procedural
changes that would help resolve genuine issues of unjust damage to reputation
with less of the expense and complexity of today's libel actions. But most
important is an effort to remove matters of opinion and ideology from libel
litigation altogether. We do not want jurors to make policy judgments. And we
must not let courts get into the business of punishing rude or biased comment on
public officials and their policies.

''There is nothing evil or unpatriotic about a robust skepticism of the American
government's behavior,'' Mr. Smolla reminds us. ''We are in danger of
surrendering a wonderful part of our national identity [and] in danger of
becoming less American, less robust, wild-eyed, pluralistic and free, and more
decorous, image-conscious, and narcissistic.''

NO MORE ROUGH-AND-TUMBLE

One of the sacred cultural cliches was ''Don't believe what you read in the
papers.'' Back in the heyday of yellow journalism reporting was surely much
worse than it is today, but it was also less harmful, because there was no
presumption, or pretension, of accuracy. Americans understood that the
newspapers of William Randolph Hearst were largely an extension of his
personality, and so they took that into account. Why believe The New York World
when it might be flatly contradicted by The Herald Tribune? Prominent Americans
could afford to let libels against them slide in those more rough and tumble
times, for the press itself never attained complete respectability. . . .

But today, newspapers, magazines, broadcasters, advertisers, and book publishers
are often extremely profitable corporate enterprises that can afford to hire
from the ranks of the college-educated, upper middle class. Although the vast
majority of reporters working across the nation do not earn particularly high
incomes, the most visible reporters and correspondents are paid quite
handsomely, and, as an industry, the media today fares substantially better than
most other American businesses in terms of returns on equity. Television news is
a particularly profitable oligopoly.

Dan Rather, Peter Jennings, and

Tom Brokaw may or may not be elitists, but they are surely elite.

When someone with their style, status, and substance tells bad tales about a
person it really hurts, largely because of who it is that is doing the telling.
If Walter Cronkite came to be the American personification of avuncular wisdom,
what could be worse than to have him defame you? The press has accordingly come
to attain a more oracular tone . . . and juries may be reflecting a general
public backlash against that oracular role. - From ''Suing the Press.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Rodney A. Smolla

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MONOLOGUES IN THREE TONES

BYLINE: By David Wojahn; David Wojahn, who teaches English at Indiana
University, is the author of ''Icehouse Lights,'' a collection of poems.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 38, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1362 words


SIN By Ai. 80 pp. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. Cloth, $13.95. Paper, $5.95.
WILD GRATITUDE By Edward Hirsch. 78 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. Cloth,
$14.95. Paper, $7.95. A SHORT HISTORY OF THE ISLAND OF BUTTERFLIES By Nicholas
Christopher. 81 pp. New York: Viking. Cloth, $17.95. Penguin. Paper, $8.95. THE
current popularity of the dramatic monologue among younger poets is due in part
to the influence of Florence Anthony, who uses the pen name Ai. All her poems
are monologues, and she has given the form a striking contemporaneity: imagine a
Browning monologue rewritten in the terse manner of Sam Shepard and you have a
good idea of what an Ai poem sounds like. Like Browning, she is almost
perversely fascinated by the problems of evil. Whether they are the oppressors
or the oppressed, her characters yearn for power above all else, and they know
they must be corrupted to attain it. Her cast of personae is large, ranging from
Latin American priests and farm women to John and Robert Kennedy, Joseph
McCarthy and J. Robert Oppenheimer. Ai invariably captures her speakers in
physical and psychological crisis, and she permits them neither eloquence nor
redemption. Her characters offer a kind of stammering, desperate testimony,
last-ditch efforts at self-justification before acknowledging their damnation.
As the title of her new collection implies, Ai is ultimately a religious poet,
but the deity she envisions is wrathful and she seems to identify with such a
figure: these are poems in which violence and destruction become eerily
voluptuous.

''Sin'' is Ai's third collection, and easily her best. She has given her poems a
richness of detail and a narrative complexity lacking in her previous work, as
well as a thematic unity that neither of her previous books achieved. This is
not to say that the book is flawless, nor that Ai completely escapes the
sensationalism that has sometimes weakened her poems. The Kennedy and McCarthy
monologues, which open the collection, announce their themes too baldly, and
Ai's elliptical, expressionistic presentation never allows the speakers to
become anything but cartoons. Here are lines given to President Kennedy: I drove
power, the solid-gold Cadillac. Go ahead, frown. Tell me about the sin of pride
and I'll tell you about the lie of forgiveness. It wasn't Oswald killed me, it
was envy.

Ai fares much better when she chooses speakers not based so directly on actual
public figures. ''The Journalist,'' the book's most successful poem, is spoken
by a news photographer as he looks at a photo he took of a Buddhist nun
immolating herself on a street in Vietnam. He then comes to a terrible
admission: I remember how her assistant spoke to the crowd, how no one
acknowledged her, how we stood another two or three minutes, till I put my hand
in my pocket, brought out the matchbook, and threw it to the nun's side.

At her best, Ai is a harrowing and courageous writer, one of the most singular
voices of her generation. Though her poems adamantly refuse to console us, they
cannot easily be ignored. Edward Hirsch treats similar subjects and is also fond
of dramatic monologues, but even though his poems usually begin as troubled
meditations on human suffering they end in celebration. We may not always be
convinced that his speakers have earned the celebration they strive for, but we
are always convinced of the poet's technical prowess. Like Mr. Hirsch's earlier
collection, ''For the Sleepwalkers,'' ''Wild Gratitude'' specializes in two
kinds of poems - homages to artists and poets and gritty autobiographical
vignettes of urban life. The literary and artistic figures he chooses to write
about are often those touched by tragedy. There are poems about suicides, such
as the German poet Paul Celan and the Hungarian poet Attila Jozsef, as well as
poems paying homage to the mad Englishmen John Clare and Christopher Smart. But
Mr. Hirsch also offers elegies for his grandparents, recollections of childhood
and descriptions of sojourns in Detroit. What makes his new book successful is
Mr. Hirsch's ability to merge his concern for the literary with his observations
of daily life. In ''Three Journeys,'' he draws an elaborate parallel between a
bag lady's plight and that of John Clare: Whoever has stood alone in the night's
deep shadows listening to laughter coming from a well-lit house will know that
John Clare's loneliness was unbending. And whoever has felt that same unbending
loneliness will also know what an old woman felt today as she followed an
obedient path between the huge green garbage cans behind Kroger's Super-Market
and the small silver ones behind Clarence's grocery.

Of course, Mr. Hirsch runs the risk of sentimentality, but he can usually avoid
bathos because of his prosodic skill and his gift for engaging metaphor. And,
although his poems are usually long narratives, he punctuates them with bravura
imagery: Slowly the bridges open their arms over the river and the cars fan out
in the mist like a peacock's feathers, or a deck of luminous cards dealt into
shadows.

But Mr. Hirsch's tenderness sometimes threatens to become merely ingratiating,
and even his most surprising effects at times seem rather calculated. These
problems would be less apparent if ''Wild Gratitude'' were a shorter collection.
Although none of the poems is a throwaway, Mr. Hirsch's strategies can grow
redundant. Such shortcomings, however, are quite minor, the price Mr. Hirsch
pays for his wildly abundant talent. In the chilling conclusion of ''Omen,'' a
poem about a friend who is dying of cancer, we are given a sense of how moving
this poet's writing can sometimes be: My friend says the pain is like a mule
Kicking him in the chest, again and again, Until nothing else but the pain seems
real. Tonight the wind whispers a secret to the trees, Something stark and
unsettling, something terrible Since the yard begins to tremble, shedding
leaves. I know that my closest friend is going to die And I can feel the dark
sky tilting on one wing, Shuddering with rain, coming down around me. Nicholas
Christopher also has a penchant for dramatic monologues on literary subjects,
and his work is contrived to charm us. His poems are lushly textured, astutely
detailed and above all sensuous. He approaches the world with a hedonist's
exuberance. In his new volume, however, he has divested himself of the sometimes
naive sensuality that marred his earlier collection, ''On Tour With Rita.'' He
now has the confidence to face death as well as eros in his observations, and
his writing has a new authority: For surely the passage to death is an extended
curve -like lovers who swoon through the many small deaths of falling in and out
of love, giving up the ghost of the solitary spirit each time the body makes its
warmer connections.

Many of Mr. Christopher's poems are set in Italy and the Greek islands. These
poems make frequent references to Lord Byron, and in them the speaker seems to
fancy himself a rather Byronic figure. The pose is not convincing. Although Mr.
Christopher tells us he is of Greek descent, he uses his forays to the Aegean
not to understand something about his ancestry, but to pursue some nebulous
concept of love. When he explores ideas, he is apt to become excessive and
grandiloquent.

In more purely lyric efforts, Mr. Christopher shows his real brilliance. After
opening with a mesmerizing catalogue of surrealist images, ''Cardiac Arrest''
concludes with an even more unsettling fusion of the domestic and the strange:
You are flat on the sidewalk of a busy city street and a crowd has gathered to
watch the policeman loosen your collar. High, high in the sunlight a
construction crane raises a man in a cage - a deus ex machina swaying against
the clouds. Truly, the man could be a god, rising even higher now, escaping with
your heartbeat in the palm of his hand.

There are at least a dozen poems that powerful in ''A Short History of the
Island of Butterflies,'' and they make me believe Mr. Christopher will soon
overcome the reservations some readers may have about his work. He has some
splendid gifts, and nothing should stop him for long.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Ai, Edward Hirsch and Nicholas Christopher (Tony Cammarata;
Janet Landay; Thomas Victor)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SURVIVING CASTRO'S TORTURES

BYLINE: By Ronald Radosh; Ronald Radosh, a professor of history at the City
University of New York, is the editor of ''The New Cuba: Paradoxes and
Potentials.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1494 words


AGAINST ALL HOPE The Prison Memoirs of Armando Valladares. By Armando
Valladares. Translated by Andrew Hurley. Illustrated. 381 pp. New York: Alfred
A. Knopf. $18.95. IN 1958, Jean-Paul Sartre helped rouse the conscience of
France by writing an introduction to ''The Question'' by Henri Alleg, a small
book that recounted the torture of a French opponent of the Algerian war in
Algerian prisons. One had to decide, Sartre wrote, ''whether to be the torturer
or the tortured.'' Alleg suffered the fate of all those tortured, Sartre wrote,
and he showed ''the calm courage of the victim,'' as well as a modesty and
lucidity ''which wake us and show us the truth.''

Now Armando Valladares, a Cuban poet, awakes us to the same task and truths. How
ironic that a year after Sartre wrote these words, he visited Cuba and
proclaimed to the world that Fidel Castro was motivated above all by a hatred
for injustice, and that he had brought about the liberation of Cuba from
despotism. It has taken us 25 years to find out the terrible reality -Mr. Castro
has created a new despotism that has institutionalized torture as a mechanism of
social control.

At the beginning of his book, the author of ''Against All Hope: The Prison
Memoirs of Armando Valladares'' was a young employee of the Postal Savings Bank
of Cuba's new revolutionary government. His misfortune was to be a man with
outspoken opinions. He openly expressed his philosophical opposition to the
Communist system and as a result his home was searched by the agents of the
political police. They found nothing, but he was arrested as a
counterrevolutionary and spent a nightmare of 22 years in Mr. Castro's prisons.
In his introduction, Mr. Valladares speculates that when the truth about Cuba's
political prisoners is made known, ''mankind will feel the revulsion it felt
when the crimes of Stalin were brought to light.'' It is not too tough a
judgment.

How did a revolution whose leader promised a humanist, non-Communist and
democratic revolution descend to such depravity? In his memoir of the
revolutionary struggle, ''Family Portrait With Fidel'' (1984), Carlos Franqui,
the editor of the official revolutionary newspaper, Revolucion, for some years
after the Cuban revolution, notes how shocked he was to hear reports of the
torture of counterrevolutionary suspects. Bringing news of this to Mr. Castro,
Mr. Franqui quickly learned that the torture had the leader's blessings. Mr.
Franqui points out that the decision to execute the former Cuban president
Fulgencio Batista's worst goons created ''a new repressive power that would be
implacable.'' When Mr. Franqui raised the issue of the moral degradation torture
implies, Mr. Castro told him that it ''annihilates the enemy,'' and hence was
necessary.

Until the publication of this book, in a serviceable translation by Andrew
Hurley, we had not had a full picture of the brutality meted out to real and
imaginary opponents by the Castro dictatorship. What Mr. Valladares gives us is
a picture of the hell that was the Cuba he lived in, and the story of how one
man's deep Christian faith enabled him to sustain the most evil treatment and
never abandon hope, no matter how fruitless hope appeared.

Mr. Valladares and other prisoners who refused ''political rehabilitation'' were
forced to live in the greatest heat and the dampest cold without clothes. They
were regularly beaten, shot at and sometimes killed; they were thrown into
punishment cells, including the dreaded ''drawer cells,'' specially constructed
units that make South Vietnam's infamous tiger cages seem like homey quarters.
Eventually, together with several others, Mr. Valladares plotted an escape from
their prison on the Isle of Pines. But the boat that was to pick them up never
arrived. He and his accomplices were brought back to their cells and given no
medical attention, though Mr. Valladares had fractured three bones in his foot
during the escape attempt.

The retribution was swift. Mr. Valladares writes: ''Guards returned us to the
cells and stripped us again. They didn't close the cell door, and that detail
caught my attention. I was sitting on the floor; outside I heard the voices of
several approaching soldiers. . . . They were going to settle accounts with us,
collect what we owed them for having tried to escape. . . . They were armed with
thick twisted electric cables and truncheons. . . . Suddenly, everything was a
whirl - my head spun around in terrible vertigo. They beat me as I lay on the
floor. One of them pulled at my arm to turn me over and expose my back so he
could beat me more easily. And the cables fell more directly on me. The beating
felt as if they were branding me with a red-hot branding iron, but then suddenly
I experienced the most intense, unbearable, and brutal pain of my life. One of
the guards had jumped with all his weight on my broken, throbbing leg.''

That treatment was typical. In the punishment cells, prisoners were kept in
total darkness. Guards dumped buckets of urine and feces over the prisoners who
warded off rats and roaches as they tried to sleep. Fungus grew on Mr.
Valladares because he was not allowed to wash off the filth. Sleep was
impossible. Guards constantly awoke the men with long poles to insure they got
no rest. Illness and disease were a constant. Even at the end, when the
authorities were approving his release, Mr. Valladares was held in solitary
confinement in a barren room with fluorescent lights turned on 24 hours a day.
By then he was partially paralyzed through malnutrition intensified by the lack
of medical attention.

Political prisoners, the author reminds us, were not always treated so brutally
in Cuba. When Fidel Castro was imprisoned following his attack on the Moncada
barracks on July 26, 1953, he was given good food, large and airy quarters, full
mail privileges and even conjugal visits. Mr. Castro himself wrote of ''many
pleasant hours'' spent in an airy yard, of good dinners with Italian chocolate
for dessert and two baths a day. ''They're going to make me think I'm on
vacation,'' he quipped in a letter. By his own account, Mr. Castro had ''plenty
of water, electric lights, food, clean clothes, and all for free.''

The future dictator obviously learned from his own pleasant experience how not
to treat political prisoners. Mr. Valladares's fellow inmates were tagged as
such, and they were of all types - unreconstructed Batistianos, Christian
proselytizers and, it seems, more than a few of the revolutionaries who fought
with Mr. Castro in the Sierra Maestra but had certain differences or doubts
years later. For them, the treatment was unremittingly harsh. Even some
socialists and a French Marxist found themselves condemned to the brutal
prisons. At one point, Mr. Valladares encountered a young political commissioner
sent from Havana to supervise prisoners. The latter was shocked to find that his
wards were not murderers, rapists and thieves as he had been told they were, but
''revolutionaries who helped the Revolution come to power, students,
professionals, campesinos.'' When that man defended the prisoners against new
repressive measures, he was arrested for ''ideological weakness'' and
imprisoned. LIKE the Marxists he opposes, Mr. Valladares at one point announces
that ''poetry is a weapon.'' During his time in prison, he became a writer and a
poet. His poems, smuggled out and published in the West, gained him a following
and some stature. Amnesty International and PEN took up his case.

The pressure eventually led to his freedom, thanks to the direct intervention of
France's President, Francois Mitterrand. But Mr. Valladares knows, and reminds
us constantly, that scores of his friends are ''at this moment'' being brought
to the blackout cells, beaten and forced to live in solitary confinement.

Had he not been an opponent of Fidel Castro, the international left would have
rushed vociferously to his support. Yet the author reports that one prominent
Swede, Pierre Schori, the international secretary of the Social-Democratic Party
and current Undersecretary of Foreign Relations, refused to appear publicly with
Mr. Valladares's wife, because he did not want to give the United States ''a
publicity weapon.'' Both he and Regis Debray, then a special adviser to
President Mitterrand and himself once a prisoner of the Bolivians, suggested she
use what we today call quiet diplomacy.

Mr. Valladares's story is confirmed by that of other recently released
prisoners, such as Jorge Valls, whose ''Twenty Years and Forty Days: Life in a
Cuban Prison'' has just been published by the Americas Watch Committee. Mr.
Valladares ends his book by quoting Fidel Castro, who informed journalists in
1983 that Cuba has ''no human rights problem - there have been no 'disappeareds'
here, there have been no tortures here, there have been no murders here. In
twenty-five years of revolution . . . a crime has never been committed.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Armando Valladares 1983 (Luis A. Melendi)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONNECTICUT OPINION;
FORMULA FOR A HIGH-SCHOOL REUNION

BYLINE: By KATHRYN J. LORD; Kathryn J. Lord lives in Storrs.

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 32, Column 2; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 773 words


NAME. Address. Phone. Spouse.

Children. Those are easy enough; yes to all of them. I love forms. I just got
some regarding my high-school reunion this summer.

I will have to plan the trip, get new glasses, get my teeth cleaned, lose
weight, buy new clothes, decide whether to leave the gray in my hair.

There was an informal class party the day after Christmas five years ago. I
learned about it the day before Christmas, so they had to take me as I was. At
33 years old, the women looked a lot better than the men, anyway. I do not mind
looking 38 this year, but I want to look a good 38.

Something You Want Classmates to Know About You. My work? Spouse's work? Child's
interests? How about things I don't want them to know? I'll come back to this
one.

What will the others put down? Twenty years' of things have happened to us. We
are more than twice as old as we were then. Where is my yearbook? Those young
people in the pictures could be our children.

We all looked so nice: Young men with freshly trimmed hair combed off their
foreheads, dark jackets and white shirts buttoned down over narrow, black ties;
young women with modest hair styles, a black velvet V-necked drape provided by
the studio, the most glamorous illusion some of us had ever worn, or have worn
since. We did not look at the camera. Most of us focused on the future off to
the side somewhere; some gazed up, struck by a vision.

There's Ken, a sweet, gentle boy, smiling shyly. Joined the Army after
graduation, went to Vietnam, came back and died in an accident on a base in, I
think, Virginia. I last saw him in 1966, late summer, when he was home from
basic training. Seemed surprised to be in uniform, to have grown up so fast.

The inscriptions are all so nice, too: ''Remember the fun we had in World
Problems'' and ''Stay as sweet as you are.'' We drew arrows to ourselves in the
activity pictures and wrote ''me!'' We smiled a lot, except for boys on sports
teams who had to look tough. There's Ken again. Football team manager, not
smiling, as tough as the others. Where was I? Your Happiest High School Memory.
Another easy one. The Senior Prom. I was in a rest stop instead of the fast lane
the entire time I was in high school. I tried things to be popular that
surprised me even then, like being the team mascot. With the wildcat costume,
nobody could tell it was me. Boy, the guilt on the faces of the rest of the
cleanup crew, all couples, as I cheerfully wielded a broom the morning after a
long evening in my bedroom with my stuffed wildcat. ''How'd it go?'' I asked.
Oh, yes, the Senior Prom.

But I think I'll put down, ''Winning the writing prize as a senior.'' I love
forms.

Activities You Hope to Attend. 1) Golf. My golf experience is an afternoon on a
putting green 17 years ago with friends and vodka tonics. No. 2) No-Host Happy
Nite. N-i-g-h-t. Sounds like a promotion for a bar, drinks half price. I'll be
there. 3) Men's Lunch. No. 4) Ladies' Luncheon. What a minute. The men get food,
and the ''ladies'' have to wear pastel suits and hats and white gloves and eat
watercress and watch a fashion show? This is the 1980's. Call it ''Women's
Lunch'' and I'll go. 5) Banquet and Dance. A second chance at the prom! At these
prices, it had better be good. Spouse and I will practice. The last dance we
went to was 15 years ago, and he was in the band. 6) Family Picnic. Two adults,
one child. Wonder if we will play softball or something. Better pack my glove.
That's it. Now I can fantasize until August: I will casually drop names at Happy
Nite/ Night and lunch/luncheon, and do something between now and then of which I
can be attractively modest and which will make me a name to be dropped - be the
hottest ticket at the dance, make a spectacular play in the softball game,
receive an unexpected award at the banquet, and in my attractively modest
thank-you, lay on some subtle, guilt-producing irony - My Happiest Reunion
Memory. Wait, back up. Something You Want Classmates to Know About You. My work,
spouse's work, child's interests. That's what I'll put down, but it is not what
I want to know about anyone else. I do not want to know about lousy jobs, Little
League, divorces, deaths. I just want to know that they're all right, still
smiling toward the future, still struck by a vision.

I care about my classmates, but I can't tell them that. They did not really know
me then; I did not know them. Twenty years later it is still all a front. ''Stay
as sweet as you are.'' Yeah, sure. Something You Want Classmates to Know About
You. I'm all right. If anyone's interested.

I think I'll leave the gray in my hair.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONNECTICUT OPINION;
THE 50's: SWEET MUSIC, DIM MEMORIES

BYLINE: By BARRY WALLACE; Barry Wallace lives in Bridgeport.

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 32, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 959 words


I WAS up on a ladder scraping the paint off my house when my wife told me that
my brother was on the telephone.

He had tickets for a fabulous 50's show, and did I want to go? It wasn't the tug
of nostalgia that drew me downward, but I don't see much of my older brother,
and it was a good chance for us to get together.

I don't remember much of the 50's. I was a month old when the decade began. From
what I understand of my parents' earliest days together, we lived in a
two-family house in Bridgeport's West Side, a neighborhood of white ethnics
bordered by the influx of blacks from the South into the Northern cities. This
fertile but uneasy commingling was the setting for the a cappella rhythm and
blues that is the heart and soul of rock-and-roll. But even from its start, the
music was celebrating a vanishing way of life in disappearing neighborhoods.

Like many of his contemporaries, my father moved out of the inner city courtesy
of the G.I. Bill and a job in a defense plant, and followed the fabulous 50's
into the suburbs where the music trailed after it.

I grew up in Bridgeport's wooded North End. We didn't have street corners or
sidewalks or angular youths huddled together singing rock-androll harmonies. I'm
sure that I went through the 50's without hearing a rhythm and blues song. My
mother played a local radio station in the morning, and I remember Arthur
Godfrey doing Hawaiian songs on television. Race music, as it was called, didn't
make the air waves and blacks were still a shadow presence - the invisible men
of the American scene. We kept time with our Davy Crockett watches and played
baseball in the backyard. Life was simple and square and lacked the pungency of
the city.

When the fabulous 50's ended, I was 10 years old and in the fifth grade of a
Catholic grammar school. We wore white shirts and blue slacks and a blue and
white uniform tie. I have vivid memories of driving into the city with my father
or taking a bus downtown with my mother past the tall, aging buildings and the
blank theater marquees and the handbills posted on the telephone poles. For the
most part, however, there were not many hints of a culture outside of the
parochialism that enveloped me. The halls of St. Teresa's were quiet and
proscribed with the Irish puritanism of the Baltimore Catechism. The great
churning American mass of exuberance and vulgarity was remote and transient like
the wisp of music heard from a car radio. The soul of rock-and-roll hadnt spoken
to me yet.

The spirit of the 50's would have been lost on me entirely if not for a boy who
lived next door. His name was Gary Durwin, and we called him The Dur. I always
thought that The Dur resembled Edd Burns on the television program ''77 Sunset
Strip,'' but maybe that was only because he wore the same pompadour slicked
lovingly back to a duck tail. The Dur had muscles that bulged from under his
tight-fitting T-shirts, and he could handle a cigarette like James Dean. He had
enough acne to certify as a teen-ager, and he had the same menacing charm as the
Fonz. The girls waited at his door, which he came out of like a rock star making
a cameo appearance on a television show. What style!

I knew in my heart that I could never hope to be like The Dur, but even then I
wistfully admired him as the symbol of all that I would never become. I had my
first - and last -cigarette with The Dur, and he also introduced me to the facts
of life, which I imperfectly understood after one of his manly lectures. When
The Dur packed off to Vietnam and came back a grown man with two children that
was the end of the 50's for me.

All this brings me to the night of the 50's revival staged at a Connecticut
fronton building. I met my brother in front, and we watched as the crowd filed
in. It was a solidly middle-class audience from the suburbs, the same
respectable, hard-working group that frequents country-western shows. We took
our seats next to a bald-headed man and his wife, both in their early 40's. I
looked around at the crowd for signs of a generation. I saw people about 5 or 10
years older than I am with the mileage of teen-age children and mortgages,
second marriages and careers.

I tried to match the reality with the courtly romantic ballads that colored the
decade. I wondered if the people sitting there had really dreamed those a
cappella dreams of moonlight and hot rods and malt shops. Some of their faces,
aglow with nostalgia, seemed to say that they did. I didn't recognize any of the
songs, but I was charmed by their innocence and their fragile beauty, a music of
neighborhoods and youth and the urban landscape.

I came to rock-and-roll much later than most of the audience, but I have learned
to love it as a distinctly native music and expression of our energy. If songs
are a highly personalized history of the heart, then the fabulous 50's reminded
me of what I never had known rather than what I had lost. I enjoyed the show,
but as the groups worked their way through the venue, I felt the oppressiveness
of too much dreaming and longing. Nostalgia has a bittersweet taste, and the
past never leaves without a rebuke. Camelot exists only in memory.

I thanked my brother sometime around midnight and made my way toward the exit as
the Flamingos, dressed in white slacks and pink sequined vests, ''do-wopped''
mellifluously. Outside, a spring drizzle had turned to sleet. Unaccountably, the
parking lot lights blinked and went out as a few of us wandered in the darkness
looking for our cars. As I fumbled for my keys, I felt a moment of panic that I
couldn't explain. When I got inside my car, I turned on an all-news station for
the drive home. But the news wasn't good, so I switched to a song and did my
best to sing it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LONG ISLANDERS;
A CAPITALIST OF A VERY DIFFERENT CUT

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE VAN GELDER

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 2, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 944 words


''FORBES said we are one of the 200 best-managed companies in the United
States,'' said Franklin G. (Jerry) Bishop of Rockville Centre. ''That's not too
bad for an old socialist.''

The ebullient Mr. Bishop sometimes seems a man of contradictions. He talks with
zest about the days when he worked for labor unions and railed against the big
corporations. But he is very much a capitalist as the president and chief
executive officer of Matrix Inc., a publicly held corporation in the forefront
of a new technology called electronic imaging.

As a capitalist who puts his company's annual sales at about $110 million, he
freely admits that he is opposed to union efforts to organize his workers. But
noting that he has put in a stock ownership plan and what he considers to be the
best medical plan available, he regards himself as the union's chief competitor
in looking after the workers' interests.

''Knee-jerk liberal, bleeding-heart liberal, limousine liberal.'' He applies the
terms to himself with great zest. ''I think they're the greatest words in the
world.''

He notes with pride that the company, with about 1,000 employees, mainly in its
plant in Orangeburg, N.Y., makes a point of hiring the oppressed and
disadvantaged. ''One of the things I did when I got myself organized and the
company was on the right track, we went to various places to bring in victims of
poverty and oppression from around the world,'' he said.

''We went to a Soviet-Jewish group and told them anybody who can get out of
Russia and who doesn't go to Israel can have a job with Matrix. We went to the
State Department to get Polish Solidarity people out of jail. We made
arrangements to get people swimming in the South China Sea. Thailand, Burma,
Vietnam, Cambodia - we have them. From Haiti, the Dominican Republic, the
Philippines.''

''I have also set out to get as many black people, too, skilled and unskilled,
from New York and everyplace else,'' he added. ''I don't need the feminist
movement to push me. I have done my damndest to get women into executive jobs in
my place.''

He said: ''I believe in having the best workplace and the best benefits and
having everybody work long, hard hours, because I want to compete so that our
little company can survive and our people can be free. You can't be free if you
don't make a profit. I want to be free of banks, independent of insurance
companies. I want my stockholders not to bother me. I want them to feel so good
about our stocks that they don't bother me. So far we have achieved that.'' And
while the company is growing in the spirit of competitive enterprise, Mr. Bishop
- who, with his wife, Evelyn, the company's director of investor relations, is a
major stockholder - has been making money. But he gives lots of it away, he
said.  He gave $1 million, he said, to the Israel Institute of Technology in the
last year to pay young research professors a bit more so they won't have to
leave Israel and work in industry. He started a fund for the New York Civil
Liberties Union, of which he is a director, to help it avoid dismissing its
workers when financial emergencies arise. And he recently gave $1 million to his
alma mater, Columbia University, for tuition and other aid for students enrolled
in a combined five-year program to obtain a Bachelor of Arts degree and an
engineering degree.

Meanwhile, Mr. Bishop, who dreamed of running the Tennessee Valley Authority
when he entered Columbia in 1938 on a scholarship, is pushing Matrix forward.
''Essentially,'' he said, ''our company focuses on electronic imaging, and we
keep broadening the applications.''

The major portion of the business consists of manufacturing equipment that makes
photographs from the electronic images created by sophisticated medical
diagnostic scanners. The same technology is used to create photographs from
computer graphics. The company has also recently entered the field of industrial
imaging - the use of laser and video methods to test and measure microcircuits
and other products.

At a time when there is much talk of the transformation of the United States
from a manufacturing to a service economy, Mr. Bishop is a staunch spokesman for
manufacturing. ''We people who believe in having jobs for people in
manufacturing here in the United States,'' he said, ''have got to modernize all
of the procedures and equipment here.''

''When people talk about the service industry,'' he said, ''the first think I
think of is the guys who turn out the towels in the hotels. England! Is that's
what's going to happen to New York? That the Japanese are going to come to New
York for the winter theater season?''

Mr. Bishop was born in Columbus, Ohio, and spent much of his early life in
Pittsburgh. When his father's costume jewelry business collapsed during the
Depression, the family moved to Far Rockaway, on the last street in Queens
before the Nassau border.

Mr. Bishop graduated from Far Rockaway High School, entered Columbia, studied
engineering and took graduate courses in public administration. He worked for
New York City, for the International Ladies Garment Workers Union, for General
Motors during World War II and later in Paris, helping unions fight the
Communists.

After he and his family (the Bishops have three children) returned to New York
in 1953, Mr. Bishop went into the consulting business. Over the years it not
only proved highly successful but also led eventually to his involvement with
Matrix.

''It's a hard job,'' Mr. Bishop said. So, at the age of 65, he is already
thinking about retiring. ''I'm retiring Dec. 6,'' he said. There was a pause.
Then he delivered the year: ''2000.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Franklin G. (Jerry) Bishop

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CAMPUS RECRUITING AND THE C.I.A.

BYLINE: By David Wise; David Wise is the author of several nonfiction books
about intelligence, and of ''The Samarkand Dimension,'' a novel of espionage to
be published by Doubleday & Company next spring.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 20, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6720 words


KEVIN WARD was sitting in a snack bar at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced
International Studies in Bologna, Italy, when he was approached by a stranger.

Ward, then 20 years old, was nearing the end of his junior year abroad. ''I was
having a pastry and a cappuccino,'' he recalled, ''when this guy came in. He was
in his early 30's, dark hair, neatly dressed, you know, the man in a suit. He
said, 'You're Kevin Ward; do you mind if I speak to you?' He handed me some
literature and said, 'Have you ever thought of a career in the C.I.A.?' ''

ONCE AGAIN, THE CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY is at the center of controversy. The
past year has brought an extraordinary number of spy scandals. The Director of
Central Intelligence, William J. Casey, is locked in battle with the press over
leaks, and has threatened prosecution for news stories about how the United
States intercepts foreign communications. And he is at odds with the
Congressional intelligence committees over the conduct of the Reagan
Administration's covert operations in several countries.

In the midst of this, the C.I.A., which says it has made recruiting of new
personnel a key priority, is competing with corporate America, and other
prospective employers, to lure the best of the nation's college graduates (box,
page 23). Sometimes, this has involved aggressive tactics - a major advertising
campaign, for example, and approaches to students in far-off snack bars.

While the attitude of young Americans toward the agency appears more favorable
now than it has been in years - after more than a decade of protests on campus,
the number of inquiries from students has been steadily rising - the C.I.A. is
at a considerable disadvantage compared to other lines of work that pay higher
salaries with less risk and more recognition. The life of a C.I.A. employee is
one of anonymity.

There have been other hurdles in the agency's headhunting campaign. In the last
year, four former or current C.I.A. employees have been implicated in security
scandals. Edward Lee Howard, dismissed by the agency in 1983, was charged with
selling agency secrets to the Russians, but eluded F.B.I. agents and is presumed
to be in the Soviet Union. Larry Wu-Tai Chin, convicted of spying for China,
committed suicide in his jail cell. Sharon M. Scranage, a clerk in the covert
branch, pleaded guilty to giving agency data to her Ghanaian boyfriend. Karl F.
Koecher, a Czechoslovak-born translator, was convicted of spy charges and jailed
before he was traded to the East as part of the swap that freed the Soviet
dissident Anatoly B. Shcharansky.

These cases raise questions about the agency's personnel and security, and their
effect on the C.I.A.'s image inevitably spills over into its recruitment
program. And the Navy spy ring headed by John A. Walker Jr., while not a C.I.A.
case, has tended to shake public confidence in the nation's ability to protect
itself against foreign espionage.

If that were not enough, this summer, the intelligence agency faces hearings on
its personnel and recruitment policies by the Senate Select Committee on
Intelligence. Senator David F. Durenberger, the Minnesota Republican who heads
the committee and who has traded charges with Casey about the overall direction
of the agency, is not impressed with the C.I.A.'s recruiting performance.
''They've got numbers,'' he said over breakfast in the Senate dining room
recently, ''but they don't always have the right person in the right place.''

Casey, on the other hand, strongly defends the quality of the agency's recruits.
''Our standards are high,'' he insisted. There is ''high morale,'' he added,
''and great pride among our people. They are committed to excellence.''

But a Senate committee source complained of inadequate intelligence. ''Time and
again we've run into examples of where we were short of what we needed. In the
Philippines we didn't have enough people who spoke Tagalog,'' he said, referring
to the chief native language of the Philippines. ''We managed, but still, there
was a deficiency.''

Although members of the Senate committee say they are mainly interested in
exploring the quality of C.I.A. personnel, security questions will undoubtedly
be raised. The study had been slated before the recent rash of spy cases, but
that is cold comfort at C.I.A. headquarters in Langley, Va. And the quality and
security of United States intelligence clearly depends on the C.I.A.'s ability
to recruit the brightest graduates.

KEVIN WARD WAS INTRIGUED BY the C.I.A. man's suggestion. A political science
major at Johns Hopkins in Baltimore, he had begun to contemplate what the future
might hold after college. After being approached in Bologna, he wrote to the
agency for an application, but got no reply. (When he asked about this later,
Ward says, he was told the agency is reluctant to send material to applicants
overseas.) Last September, after returning from Italy, he went to Rosslyn, Va.,
just across the Potomac River from Washington, and asked for an application at
the agency's walk-in employment office in the Ames Building, which, unlike the
C.I.A.'s actual recruitment headquarters, is listed in the telephone book.

''They set me up for an interview at the Holiday Inn in Rosslyn,'' Ward recalls.
The interview took place in a conference room on the third floor. The
interviewer was older than the man who had contacted Ward in Bologna. He was
prematurely gray, in his early 40's. And he seemed hardly able to contain his
enthusiasm for Kevin Ward.

Ward had several attributes that were appealing to the agency. Born in Idaho and
raised in Brandon, Fla., near Tampa, he came from a military background - his
father had served four years in the Navy and 26 years in the Air Force.
Moreover, Kevin Ward had been senior class president in high school and
graduated third in a class of 1,233. He had compiled a solid academic record at
Johns Hopkins - he had a 3.64 grade point average - and was a racing-car and
target-shooting enthusiast.

''According to your background,'' the C.I.A. man told Ward, ''you look like
you're tailor-made for a variety of positions.''

Three weeks later, Ward took an all-day C.I.A. aptitude test at George
Washington University. The agency is basically divided into two parts, analysis
and operations (box, page 30). Some questions were designed to test Ward's
analytical skills. But other parts of the test were clearly aimed at measuring
his potential as a secret agent.

''There were questions like, 'Suppose you have to remove something from a desk
in a locked building, after hours. You have 30 seconds to put down everything
you can think of,' '' Ward remembers. ''So I listed, 'Were there dogs? What kind
of security system?' ''

Ward was graduated from Johns Hopkins in December and went home to Florida. He
telephoned the agency several times, hoping to find out his test results.
''You'll be notified,'' he was told. Finally, in February, the call came. The
agency flew him to Washington and put him up for one night at a motel.

Ward was given a special map that directed him to a building in northern
Virginia, a few miles from C.I.A. headquarters in Langley. ''There were armed
guards, metal detectors, and they inspect your bag,'' Ward recalls. He was
issued a visitors' badge and escorted to a small office. ''You walk down the
hall, and all the people stop talking and all the doors shut.''

This interviewer said he had once been a station chief, Ward says. ''He looked
like a military type, in his early 50's.'' He made it clear that Ward was being
interviewed for the Directorate of Operations - the clandestine arm of the
Central Intelligence Agency.

THE DIRECTORATE OF OPERATIONS WAS ONCE VIRTUALLY an Ivy League club. It is no
longer. Even in the 1960's, the agency had begun to reach out for a broader
cross-section of recruits. Vietnam and the antiwar movement made the agency
unfashionable on many campuses. In the mid-1980's, the C.I.A. is once again
attractive to many college students. But it's not the same.  The old spy knew
that. He is in his early 60's now, his face craggy but still handsome, the black
hair turned to gray. He served in the Directorate of Operations, or the D.D.O.,
from the beginning, and he has seen it all and known everybody. Having left the
agency a decade ago, he is now director of a cultural organization, most of
whose members are unaware of his background. He was interviewed in his office,
in a gracious town house on Manhattan's East Side, on condition that he not be
identified by name.

''In the old days,'' he said, ''nearly all of us were brought in by someone who
knew us.'' He smiled. ''You were interviewed, and only later discovered that the
interviewer was the person you'd be working for.''

And, more than likely, the recruiter was another Old Boy, from the same Eastern
Establishment background, who, more often than not, had served in the wartime
Office of Strategic Services, the forerunner of the C.I.A. After Congress
established the Central Intelligence Agency in 1947, recruits from the Ivy
League flocked to its banner. The cold war had begun and it was these men, with
names like Tracy Barnes, Richard Bissell, Frank Wisner, Bronson Tweedy and John
Bross, who, in the early days, ran the agency as if it were a secret society at
Yale.

''I felt an obligation to go into Government service,'' the veteran spy said.
''There was a feeling that the threat of Communism was very real in France and
Italy. People felt a need to do something about it.''

By background and temperament, he fit right in at the new agency. He came from
an old Virginia family where there were lively discussions of foreign affairs at
the dinner table. He had attended an Episcopal prep school and an Ivy League
college. ''I thought I would stay a couple of years,'' he said, with a faraway
look, ''but I stayed a lifetime.'' Under State Department cover, he rose to
become a station chief in the Middle East and other places.

He had earned a reputation as one of the finest officers in the Clandestine
Service, as the D.D.O. is also known, but time caught up with him. He was among
those fired in 1977 by Adm. Stansfield Turner, Jimmy Carter's Director of
Central Intelligence, who eliminated 820 clandestine jobs in what became known
as ''the Halloween Massacre.'' Age and attrition had already thinned the ranks
of the Old Boys; with a stroke of the pen, Turner, who later said he had wanted
to create more room for younger officers, hastened the process.

''Things have changed,'' the old spy said. ''Recently, a younger friend from
C.I.A. came to dinner, with some others from the agency, and they were all
talking about their promotions. We never did. I wondered if it's becoming like
the post office.''

THE INTERVIEWER WOULD ONLY TELL

Kevin Ward his first name. He said he had served in the agency's clandestine
side for 25 years, 17 of them overseas. If Ward joined the Directorate of
Operations, the recruiter emphasized, he would have to accept a certain life
style.

''He made it clear you have to give up a lot,'' Ward remembers. ''He said, 'You
would have a diplomatic passport and work under State Department cover. You
would tell your friends you turned down the C.I.A., and you were really
interested in the State Department.' ''

If he were sent overseas, Ward was told, he would be handling agents. ''You
would service accounts and develop new accounts,'' the interviewer said, using
an agency euphemism for spies, ''and work four or five hours a day on your cover
job. You would be under scrutiny all the time. We watch other countries and they
watch us.' ''

Ward recalls: ''He said, 'Even if I offer you the position, there's little
chance you'll get it. There are lots of psychological tests ahead, and even if
you're accepted, you may wash out. Your life's at risk, that's why you can't
tell people. If you do join the agency, your friends won't respect you. You've
been working for the Department of Commerce or State for 12 years and you're
still low level. Say you wanted to go into politics or do something else, to the
world you would be a low-level State Department person. You'd have a horrible
resume.' ''

The recruiter glanced down at Ward's test scores. He liked the replies about
breaking into a locked building. ''That's good,'' Ward remembers the recruiter
saying. ''You can think on your feet. That would help you talk your way out of a
tight situation.''

But he was less happy with Ward's answers to another question. ''You're asked if
you would like living in a tent with no running water, and so on,'' Ward
explains. ''My test scores indicated I liked the more glamorous life, and didn't
like covert life. He said, 'You don't really fit in with the D.D.O.' I agreed.''

It was clear the interview was over. The recruiter said he would circulate
Ward's resume to the Directorate of Intelligence, the agency's analytical arm
known as the D.D.I., but indicated he did not think anything would come of it.
The D.D.I., unlike the covert side, wants people with graduate degrees.

THE CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY runs its recruiting operation from an unmarked,
six-story, sand-colored office building in Tysons Corner, Va., about four miles
from C.I.A. headquarters.

There is nothing on the front of the building or in the lobby to indicate it is
C.I.A. But a guard bars the way to anyone except employees, or invited visitors,
who must sign in. The guard sits in front of a board full of multicolored lights
that tell him whether perimeter doors and entrances to stairways and offices are
open or closed at any given moment.

John P. Littlejohn, the agency's deputy director of personnel for employment -
the man in charge of recruiting - occupies Room 4N20, a modest-sized corner
office on the fourth floor. His office looks not unlike any other at the
midmanagement level of the agency: beige walls, a walnut veneer conference
table, a desk, and a large white plastic blackboard, the kind that takes a
grease pencil rather than chalk.

But there are reminders that this is an intelligence agency. Affixed to
Littlejohn's pop-up address file is a day-glo orange sticker printed ''SECRET''
in large black letters. Next to it is the white C.I.A. telephone directory, with
the agency seal in black on the cover (a fierce eagle atop a shield), and the
word ''SECRET'' in red letters repeated in a strip across the top and bottom.

A lanky, friendly man of 46, Littlejohn smiles a lot and has an easygoing
manner. ''There will be some people who think it's a James Bond kind of thing,''
he said of a C.I.A. career. ''Glamorous capitals, see the world. We discourage
that. We're not interested in that kind of perception.'' The agency can't
compete with the salaries paid by private industry. A typical recruit might come
in at the $20,000 range, and could expect to earn more than $30,000 only as a
case officer or analyst with several years service (the director earns $75,100).
So aren't the glamour and excitement of being a secret agent one of the rewards?

''Sure,'' Littlejohn replied. ''A lot of people find excitement in the work. And
some are turned on by knowing something that nobody else knows. But from a
security standpoint, we don't want people boasting about secrets. Excitement may
be a motivator, but people in the agency don't have to be James Bond or cowboys.
We're interested in people who are serious.''

Although the agency may not want people boasting about secrets, lately it has
had a lot of trouble with employees selling secrets to the K.G.B. Littlejohn is
not unaware of the rash of recent spy cases, but he said that guarding against
the planting of foreign agents among C.I.A. applicants is not the recruiter's
responsibility. ''A sleeper, a mole, that's the job of the Office of Security,''
he said.

Littlejohn continued, ''Our effort is primarily directed toward college-age
applicants.'' The agency, he said, has 10 recruiting offices around the country.
The one in Pittsburgh is mostly for clerical people. The other nine are
general.''

College students cannot be expected to have the highly specialized knowledge on
exotic subjects that the agency frequently needs, however. The C.I.A. usually
trains its staff members to develop such expertise, one agency official said.
''You don't go out and look for someone who's an expert on sandstorms in the
Sahara,'' he said. ''We hire generalists who can move in different directions.''
If the agency does need a specialist on an arcane subject and can't find one
in-house, it usually hires a consultant from academe or private industry.

In the past, the C.I.A. didn't advertise by name. In today's competitive job
market, the C.I.A. advertises often, in large displays featuring the C.I.A.
eagle and clearly identifying the agency. A newspaper advertisement in March,
for example, listed entrance salaries ''from $22,000 to $34,000 depending on
credentials.'' There is still a clandestine touch, however, the C.I.A. being
what it is. The return address is a Washington P.O. box, care of ''Jay A.
Collingswood, Dept. S, Rm. 4N20,'' which happens to be Littlejohn's office.
''Jay A. Collingswood'' does not exist. Two years ago, a similar C.I.A. ad gave
the same return address, except that applicants were to write to ''J.A.
Compton,'' who has the same initials and, it can be assumed, is equally
nonexistent.

''The recruiters get in touch with placement offices at the colleges,''
Littlejohn explained. ''They might visit twice a year. The recruiter has resumes
in advance, submitted by the students through the placement office, and he asks
to see certain people.'' What the agency calls a ''screening interview'' takes
place, usually on campus, although some colleges, like Harvard, prefer to have
the C.I.A. do its interviewing off-campus. (Harvard students must go to the
C.I.A.'s office in downtown Boston, across from Boston Common, for their
interviews. Since the agency lists only its phone number in the Boston telephone
directory, these students are provided the address by the C.I.A. when they are
notified of their interview.) In some cases, the C.I.A. initiates the approach
when it hears of a likely prospect. But how it does so is mysterious. Kevin
Ward, for instance, says he has no idea how the agency got his name. If the
first interview goes well, the student is given a 12-page Personal History
Statement to fill out. Among other things, it asks about relatives who live
abroad (and who might be subject to pressure by foreign governments). It also
asks whether the applicant has ever used alcohol or drugs - six, including
marijuana, cocaine and heroin, are listed - and if so, how often.

''Many applicants today have experimented with marijuana,'' Littlejohn said.
''That in itself isn't going to disqualify you. Hard drugs would raise
questions, but we look at the circumstances and whole person. Someone who uses
drugs at a frat party and now as an adult isn't using -that says something to
us.'' But once applicants are accepted by the C.I.A., they are not permitted to
use drugs.

''You can have a martini, but you can't have a joint,'' Littlejohn said. The
agency asks applicants whether they have ever had a homosexual encounter. It
denies that homosexuals are automatically barred, but when asked whether the
agency has knowingly hired any, Littlejohn replied: ''I don't know of any.''
Officially, the C.I.A.'s position is that homosexuals won't be hired if ''it
seems likely that access to classified information could pose a risk to the
national security.''

Applicants must be United States citizens, either naturalized or native-born.
The agency does not hire felons, although it gets offers. Suppose an ace
safecracker applied, would he really be turned away? ''I can't imagine we would
hire such a person,'' Littlejohn said. In the early 1960's, the C.I.A. hired two
leading Mafia figures to try to assassinate Fidel Castro, but they were what the
agency calls ''contract employees,'' presumably with unintended irony.

Those who pass the initial hurdles take the battery of tests that Kevin Ward
took. This is followed by a second, more detailed interview. If all goes well,
the clearance process is then begun and the applicant subjected to a full field
investigation by the Office of Security. The investigation covers in detail the
applicant's life history.

Prospective employees are also warned that they will have to submit to a
polygraph test, the first of many periodic lie-detector examinations they will
have to undergo if hired. (Although the value of lie-detector tests is disputed,
the C.I.A. and the National Security Agency continue to require them.) For
C.I.A. applicants, there is a medical examination that includes psychological,
and for certain jobs, psychiatric tests.

It takes at least four months, perhaps longer, to complete the processing - a
time lag that puts the C.I.A. at a disadvantage compared to corporate
recruiters. ''Often the applicant has taken a job in the meantime,'' Littlejohn
said ruefully. If the applicant passes muster, he or she is listed as
''E.O.D.,'' or ''Entered on Duty,'' agency jargon for hired.

''We estimate 150,000 a year inquire,'' Littlejohn said, ''but only a small
fraction are E.O.D.'' He added that ''tens of thousands who apply are not taken.
Our standards are very high.'' Littlejohn won't say how many are hired because
the C.I.A.'s size and budget are among its most closely guarded secrets. But the
intelligence agency has often been described as having almost 20,000 employees
and a budget of about $2 billion a year. It is likely that it hires 200 to 300
clandestine officers each year, and some 1,000 employees annually out of perhaps
10,000 who apply.

By all indications, applications are up, and this spring at least, the agency
experienced little difficulty recruiting on college campuses. This was not
always the case.

M URDERERS AND rapists! Mutilators and exterminators!''

It was April 1985, and the students at the University of Colorado at Boulder
were protesting the presence of C.I.A. recruiters on campus. The protest,
against the agency's support for the so-called contras in Nicaragua, had been
organized by a coalition of groups that called itself Community in Action, or
C.I.A. While the students demonstrated outside, a team of agency recruiters was
interviewing some 170 students inside. The team was led by Tom White, who is
based in Denver and heads the agency's recruitment office for the Rocky Mountain
states. The first student White interviewed seemed genuinely interested in a
C.I.A. career, but when the interview was over, the student attempted to place
White under a citizen's arrest. Instead, he was himself arrested, as were 477
others.

This spring, the C.I.A. did not return to the Boulder campus. An agency
spokesman blamed the restrictions of the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings budget-cutting
law. Kevin D. Harris, one of the organizers of the protest, thought the students
had done it. ''When we found out they weren't coming back, it was an empowering
feeling,'' he said.

Demonstrations have been sporadic and apparently fewer in number this year,
although the C.I.A. does not give out the statistics. College placement officers
report that student interest in working for the C.I.A. has increased. For
example, Susan Hauser, the director of Yale's Career Services, said: ''Student
interest in C.I.A. has gone up in the last 12 years. It hasn't changed
dramatically, but there is a significant increase in interest from the
mid-70's.''

The Ivy League's dwindling impact on the agency was underscored recently by
William E. Colby. In the mid-1970's, while he was Director of Central
Intelligence, Colby recounted: ''I remember sitting around a table with the 10
highest officers in the agency. Just for the heck of it I said, 'Who's Ivy
League?' Two or three were, but the others came from different schools. One had
gone to Whitman College, in Washington state, the others were from various
schools, and two had no college degree at all.''

As the agency's deputy director for administration during the 1970's, John F.
Blake supervised personnel and recruitment. ''At some point,'' he said, ''it was
realized by the top leadership of the agency that they needed to reflect
American mores, that the Far West wasn't Indian territory, and mid-America had a
voice, as well as the Northeast corridor.'' Blake is from San Francisco.

The C.I.A. insists it is actively seeking to hire more women and members of
minority groups. For example, the agency says that it recently ran 400 radio
spots on stations in the southwest, in areas with heavy Hispanic populations.
The agency also advertises in Ukrainian, Polish, Cuban and other ethnic
newspapers.

The agency declines to release figures on what percent of its employees are
women, however. Blake conceded that in his time, the C.I.A. had failed to
recruit and promote women, but said its record was no worse than that of other
private and public institutions. ''By the time I left in 1979, remarkable
progress had been made,'' Blake said. ''In the past 10 years, women have served
as chiefs of station and as office heads.''

The trend away from the Ivy League is supported by a recent C.I.A. internal
study of what schools have provided the most recruits. Although Yale is still on
the list, the top schools, in order, are Georgetown, George Washington
University, the University of Maryland and American University. All are in the
Washington area.

Perhaps typical of the Georgetown students who explore the C.I.A. as a career
option is Ann Lowell, 21, of St. Louis, a graduating senior in the School of
Foreign Service who describes herself as ''basically very conservative.'' She
was interviewed on campus last fall by a C.I.A. representative who gave his name
as Chris Vorderbruegge. ''He was heavyset, early 30's, and had brown, thinning
hair,'' Ann Lowell said. ''He was more the teddy bear image than James Bond.

''He was not incredibly well dressed like the guy from Morgan Stanley,'' she
said, referring to the recruiter from the New York investment banking firm,
''who had an expensive suit and the corporate look.''

In her job hunt, Ann Lowell was also interviewed by several banks, insurance
companies, Bloomingdale's in New York, Xerox and other firms. She accepted a job
in Washington with Amex International Inc., a company that purchases food for
countries that receive United States aid.

Ann Lowell did not have an overwhelming desire to join the C.I.A. ''It just
seemed like any opportunity,'' she said. She decided not to pursue it because
''I didn't like the red tape, the bureaucracy, and was afraid I might be
pigeonholed. It just didn't seem appealing. And a professor warned me that if I
went to another job from the C.I.A., I wouldn't be able to say what I had
done.''

The bureaucratic nature of Government service - not just the salary gap with
corporate America - hampers the agency in its effort to attract the best and the
brightest graduates. Allan E. Goodman, associate dean of Georgetown's School of
Foreign Service, worked for the agency during the Carter Administration. ''At
the beginning when I went there, there was still some belief in the importance
of the job,'' Goodman said. ''By the end, it was part of the bureaucracy. If it
snowed there was an order that only essential Government personnel were to go in
to work. Well, in 1960, there was no question we were essential. There was a big
snowstorm around the time China invaded Vietnam in the winter of 1979, and
people at C.I.A. asked each other, 'Hey, are we really essential?' ''

T HOSE WHO ARE AC-cepted by the C.I.A. have to make it through a three-year
trial period. The luckier ones are chosen as Career Trainees (C.T.'s), an elite
group many of whose members are destined for the Clandestine Service. The C.T.'s
train at ''the Farm,'' a 10,000-acre site at Camp Peary, near Williamsburg, Va.,
where they learn clandestine tradecraft such as opening letters without
detection (Flaps and Seals) and lockpicking (Picks and Locks). Although John
Stockwell and other former C.I.A. officers have written about the Farm in some
detail, the agency refuses to acknowledge its existence. (''What Farm?''
Littlejohn asked.) The Farm is carried on the Navy's books as the ''Armed Forces
Experimental Training Activity.'' A Pentagon spokesman would say only that Camp
Peary is ''a military facility with a classified mission.'' Overt employees are
allowed to say they work for the C.I.A., but covert officers give their cover
employment. In theory, agency employees are not permitted to tell their family
any classified information. But, said Littlejohn, ''We recognize that certain
information goes to the spouse.'' Agency people tend to stick close together and
to socialize among themselves - it gets complicated when C.I.A. officers, some
clandestine and some not, mix with outsiders. ''There's a risk,'' Littlejohn
noted, ''that someone will say to an officer under cover, 'O.K., Joe, see you at
work on Monday.' ''

There are many second-generation C.I.A. employees, and a number of
husband-and-wife employees. A few years ago, during a crisis, a woman who was
the agency's Portugal analyst was awakened by a call at 2 A.M. from a C.I.A.
operations officer. When he had finished talking to her he asked if she possibly
knew how to reach the Angola analyst. ''Just a minute, he's right here,'' she
said, reaching across the bed and handing the phone to her husband.

In the high-stress environment of a secret intelligence agency, divorce and
alcoholism rates are said to be slightly higher than the national average, the
suicide rate slightly lower.

Covert officers learn to live a life that is a lie, sometimes going to great
lengths to preserve their cover. Former C.I.A. agent Melvin Beck was stationed
in Mexico in the 1960's under deep cover as a writer. ''I actually wrote several
novels,'' he says. ''Potboilers. But I thought they had great plots. They were
spy thrillers.'' Beck had to send his novels to the agency, but got back the
rights to them after he retired. They remain unpublished.

The C.I.A.'s pervasive concern with security occasionally victimizes officers
who have spent years in the service of the agency. During the 1960's, James J.
Angleton, the agency's counterintelligence chief, came to rely heavily on
information provided by a Soviet defector, Anatoli Golitsin. Golitsin said a
C.I.A. man who spoke Russian and had been stationed in Berlin was a K.G.B. mole.
As a result, a shadow of suspicion fell on Paul Garbler, a former Navy bomber
pilot in World War II, whose rise in the agency's Clandestine Service came to an
abrupt halt. Garbler, whose background fit Golitsin's profile, was relegated to
dead-end posts for nine years, four of them as station chief on a Caribbean
island. ''There was lots of rum and sunshine, but no Russians,'' said a
colleague. ''They really destroyed his career.''

Garbler, who was never officially told why he had been exiled, retired from the
agency, hired a lawyer, and with the intervention of the staff of the Senate
Intelligence Committee won a cash settlement from the C.I.A. He declined to
comment on his case, but the agency colleague and other sources confirmed the
details.

A few years later, in 1980, Congress, at the request of Admiral Turner, passed a
little-known law, since expired, that allowed the Director of Central
Intelligence to compensate any employee who ''unfairly had his career with the
agency adversely affected as a result of allegations concerning the loyalty . .
. of such employee.'' The Garbler case, in other words, was not an isolated
incident. According to Turner, several former C.I.A. men were compensated under
the law. He said he could not say how many, but it was ''less than a dozen.''

There are other risks to the job. In the white marble wall of the lobby at
C.I.A. headquarters, 49 stars are carved, each representing a C.I.A. employee
killed in the line of duty. Others have been captured and tortured. The agency's
recruiting brochure for the Clandestine Service understandably downplays the
risk, calling it ''slightly higher than for police or firemen in a large city.''

Although the agency professes to be pleased with its recruiting program, it
cannot be pleased at the prospect of the planned Senate Intelligence Committee
hearings into its recruitment and personnel policies.

Senator Durenberger said of the C.I.A.: ''Oh, they'll tell you, 'We have higher
grade point average, not all Ivy Leaguers, they're from all over the country
now.' But when you pin them down, they don't have the people that meet the
requirement. Old hands are retiring, but nobody came in the 1970's, when the
agency was unpopular, so there is a gap in the ranks.''

Aware that the C.I.A.'s image has been tarnished by the spy cases that broke in
1985, and perhaps anticipating the Senate probe, the C.I.A. chief William Casey,
in his classified annual report to Congress in April, listed personnel - the
need to recruit, keep and reward high-quality people - as his No. 1 priority.

Casey insists that C.I.A. applicants undergo ''one of the most rigorous
screening processes known to man,'' including ''security clearances with
background investigations going back 15 years.'' They must live, Casey added,
''in complete anonymity in many cases . . . they know they will receive little
public recognition for their achievements, and that criticisms -justified or not
- must be tolerated in silence.''

The anonymity may bring internal rewards to some who thrive on secrecy. ''A lot
of people find excitement in the secret knowledge,'' John Littlejohn said.

Yet the anonymity may prove a burden to others. John Blake, the former C.I.A.
deputy director, said: ''Look, you might work the same number of years that in
the Navy you would become a vice admiral, or a lieutenant general in the Army,
or a career minister at State. And perhaps you would get to be a station chief.
But the career minister flies the American flag on his car and the admiral has
gold braid on his cap. What do you have? Your kids might come home and say,
'Gee, Dad, Billy's father is a lieutenant general. What happened to you?' Some
people can cope with it. Others can't.''

F OR KEVIN WARD, the C.I.A. was only ''one option'' among many. He applied as
well to law schools, the Brookings Institution, the Rand Corporation, some large
banks and a major stock brokerage firm. In the end, a political job proved the
most attractive; this month he began working for the Senate campaign of Bob
Graham, Florida's Democratic Governor, who is running against Paula Hawkins, the
Republican incumbent.

But the C.I.A. had one request that Ward's other potential employers did not.
The agency advised him, he said, to check his files and ''destroy anything that
has our name on it.

THE SELLING OF THE AGENCY

The little brochure is discreet -matte gray in color, with a small seal of the
Central Intelligence Agency tucked into one corner. Inside, there are no
photographs, only text: ''The Clandestine Service . . . the cutting edge of
American intelligence. Its operational terrain is the human mind, where people -
alone or together - make decisions, develop intentions, decide to go to war,
make peace, change history.''

Like many other prospective employers, the Central Intelligence Agency uses
brochures to attract recruits. Most of these brochures, which describe the
agency, its history and its functions, are handed out to prospective applicants
on college campuses and at job fairs.

The Clandestine Service brochure - which is given out more selectively, to
candidates who have been screened - explains that, ''Besides its primary job of
collecting intelligence, the Clandestine Service - also called the Directorate
of Operations - seeks to change adversaries into friends or neutrals through
covert operations by political, psychological, or paramilitary means. It works
with friendly intelligence services toward mutual goals. It also defends itself
and the Government against hostile penetration and attack.''

Those in the Clandestine Service ''must be adaptable and well-disciplined. They
accept an anonymity in the ordinary world for the recognition of their peers
within the Service. They are an elite but are known only to an elite of a very
special world.''

This is, the brochure says, no 9-to-5 job being advertised. ''The call may come
in the middle of the night or on a rainy Sunday morning, or it may interrupt a
dinner party or a daughter's graduation. If it is urgent, the case officer exits
his social and cover life to meet with an agent in a corner of a deserted park,
at a table in a bistro, in a safehouse. If the agent or operation is very
sensitive, messages are exchanged through a 'dead drop,' a place of
concealment.''

A post office box number in Washington is given, along with the instructions:
''When you write to the above address, do not mention your interest in the
Clandestine Service. Tell this only to the recruiter in your first interview.''

Unlike the Clandestine Service publication, which is new this year, most of the
C.I.A. brochures are large and glossy, with color photographs - what one might
expect from I.B.M., perhaps, or a large bank. One, which pitches the agency's
analytical branch, is entitled, ''Directorate of Intelligence: Careers That Can
Make a Difference.'' On the cover is a photograph of the statue of Nathan Hale
that guards the entrance to C.I.A. headquarters in Langley, Va., just outside
Washington. Inside, the brochure advertises ''career opportunities'' in economic
research and analysis, the physical sciences and engineering, political science,
history, international relations and computer science.

''A Professional Career in Intelligence Analysis,'' another brochure, provides
answers to ''commonly asked questions,'' such as, ''What do analysts do?''
(''They interpret and forecast for senior U.S. officials . . . issues and world
events of importance to the United States''); and ''Does agency employment
reduce my later career options?'' (''Our experience is that . . . an analytical
career in the D.I. enhances your later options and generally provides you with
training and experience that others simply cannot match'').

There is also a brochure for the Office of SIGINT - signals intelligence, part
of the Directorate of Science and Technology - and another one that extols the
C.I.A. and its employees; its title is, ''Intelligence: The Acme of Skill.''

CAREERS WITH THE COMPANY

The Central Intelligence Agency is basically divided into two parts - one that
collects intelligence and runs covert operations, and one that analyzes
intelligence. Administratively, these tasks are carried out by four
directorates: intelligence (analysts and researchers); operations (case
officers, i.e. spies, and covert operators); science and technology (a wide
variety of technical jobs), and administration (the bureaucrats who run the
C.I.A. and protect its security). The agency recruits for all four of the
directorates, although the total number of employees, like the agency's budget,
is classified.

The Directorate of Intelligence seeks computer scientists, econometricians,
mathematicians, statisticians and political scientists for its Analytic Support
Group.

The Directorate of Science and Technology recruits engineers, scientists and
computer specialists. The Directorate of Administration's Office of
Communications seeks communications systems engineers and programmers.

The C.I.A. also advertises career opportunities in such areas as the Office of
Central Reference; the Office of Imagery Analysis; the Foreign Broadcast
Information Service; the Office of East Asian Analysis; the Office of Training
and Education; the Office of Medical Services; the Office of Security, and the
Office of Personnel.

For those chosen for the elite Career Training Program, from which the
Clandestine Service selects its officers, starting salaries range from $22,000
to $34,000. Midlevel salaries at the C.I.A. are in the $50,000 range, and a top
agency executive can earn more than $70,000. Case officers, the agency's
clandestine operatives, are eligible for 9.6 percent bonus.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: ;;Photo of William J. Casey (Dennis Brack/Black Star); photo of
checkpoint at ''the Farm,'' Camp Peary, Va. (Bill Ballenberg); photos of Kevin
Ward and Ann Lowell (David Burnett/Contact) (page 22); photo of University of
Colorado students demonstrating against presence of C.I.A. recruiters on campus
(Lauro Jo Galinson) (page 24); photo of C.I.A. walk-in employment office in
Rosslyn, Va. (Bi

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 9, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ECONOMY DESCRIBED AS STABLE

BYLINE: By PETER T. KILBORN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1492 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 8


As the American economy enters the second half of its fourth straight year of
growth, economists and leading business executives find conditions sounder than
they have been in two decades or more and see signs of further growth right
through next year.

People see great distress, depressions even, in the farm belt and the oil patch
of Texas and across much of the West's mining and timber country. They note a
lot of weak manufacturing businesses, an unemployment rate that remains above 7
percent and record high levels of consumer debt.

But many executives and economists speak of the best underlying conditions they
have seen since before the Vietnam War.

No Bottlenecks in Sight

Behind their optimism are the abating traumas of high interest rates, inflation
and oil prices and the dollar's strength as well as prospects that the nation
will soon have seen the worst of the great deficits in the Federal budget and in
foreign trade.

''If you look out over the economy, you don't see the pressures building,'' said
William E. Gibson, chief economist at the Republic Bank in Dallas. ''You don't
see bottlenecks. You don't see distortions. You don't see anything that portends
any change. It's not without challenges. But it's a good economy to live in.''

As it grows, the economy is changing character in some important ways. More
stable interest rates, inflation and the like make the economy more predictable.
The overhang of uncertainty, itself a brake on growth, is easing.

Easier to Plan Spending

The only important unknowns now, executives say, center on the tax and budget
policies of Washington, and with the others subsiding it is easier for consumers
and business executives to make the plans to spend and invest that help, in
turn, to keep the economy rolling.

This is also a more disciplined and in some ways a harsher economy. Industry
cannot raise prices to cover up mistakes as readily as a few years ago. And
industry, keeping its belt tight, is less willing to add new workers even as
profit prospects improve.

And it is a more uneven economy. Most businesses and most of the population are
gaining ground, but the regions and businesses dominated by oil, agriculture and
other natural resources have been losing ground. For them, deflation - falling
prices for their goods - has meant decreasing profits, incomes and jobs.

Geography Vs. Economics

To some extent, these losses could persist as the country continues its shift
from a production-based economy to a service-based economy. But if enormous in
terms of geography, natural resource industries are tiny in terms of the
nation's jobs. In cold economic terms, their pain helps to keep the much larger,
overall economy from hurtling toward the kind of uncontrolled growth that would
lead again to recessions and high inflation.

The boom in the financial markets and near-record levels of confidence among
consumers, whose spending accounts for two-thirds of the gross national product,
testify to perceptions of the economy's strength. Economists and executives see
little that would keep this year's pattern of recession-free, low-inflation
growth from extending a fifth year and a sixth, which is about as far as they
dare to hazard a guess.

''I'm not worried about anything, honestly,'' said Barnard M. Fauber, chairman
of the K Mart store chain in Troy, Mich., and a retailer for 44 years. ''I just
returned from a three-day trip to our stores. May was about 5 percent better
than April, and the first week of June ran about double the rate for May. I see
less to be really worried about than I've seen in a long, long time.''

Ordering Pace Adjusted

Frederic H. Brooks, chairman of the McGregor Sporting Goods Company in East
Rutherford, N.J., sells his wares to chains such as K Mart. In fact, K Mart
worried Mr. Brooks earlier this year when it cut back its orders because it had
overstocked late last year. ''But they've stepped it up again,'' Mr. Brooks
said.

''We're going full steam ahead,'' he said. ''Footballs: We can't take another
order. Basketballs, those miniballs: We have three factories making them, three
shifts a day. I can't see any real clouds over the next 12 to 18 months.''

Even some of the heavier industrial companies, those that have been battered by
foreign competition and the once-strong dollar, are cheering up a little now.

''The economy on the whole is getting stronger,'' said Frederick P. Stratton
Jr., president of the Briggs & Stratton Corporation near Milwaukee, which makes
engines for lawn mowers and garden tillers. ''We're not going to have a
recession,'' he said, ''unless they do something screwy with the tax bill''
(''they'' being Washington).

Comparison of Figures

The growth that economists see over the next 18 months or so varies considerably
from modest to strong, from 3 percent or a little less to the 4 percent
projected by the Reagan Administration. The economy grew at a rate of 3.7
percent during the first three months this year, after a lackluster 2.2 percent
last year.

Some analysts predict that the current quarter, battered partly by the
reverberations of the oil-price decline on the domestic industry, might show
little growth at all, but nearly all see a stronger second half.

''When all is said and done, we're going to get 4 percent growth this year,''
said Lacy H. Hunt, economist at Carroll, McEntee & McGinley Inc., dealers in
government securities in New York.

Whatever the figures, business executives are particularly encouraged by the
decline of the uncertainty that clouded prospects before and a new calm in the
expected gyrations in interest rates, the dollar and inflation.

Richard J. Mahoney, chairman of the Monsanto Company, the diversified chemical
producer in St. Louis, said he asks his staff every year: ''What are the three
events that will determine our outlook but that we don't know how they will come
out?''

This Year, No Candidates

Last year the three imponderables were the course of oil prices, the course of
the dollar and the farm bill, then before Congress, which would affect
Monsanto's fertilizer sales.

''When I do that now,'' Mr. Mahoney said, ''there aren't any events that anybody
can name.''

None of this means, he said, that Monsanto is trouble-free. Although the
uncertainty has subsided, Monsanto, as a heavy industrial company, now must
struggle with the tougher discipline that a world of low inflation imposes, with
the slow performance of its industrial customers and the distress among farmers.

''We've got to tighten up, tighten up, tighten up,'' he said. ''We've got to be
careful with inventories. We've got to work on the margins, watch things
closely. This is a time of blocking and tackling.'' But his profits, he said,
are improving.

In the days of high inflation, companies could raise prices not simply to cover
rising costs but also to cover waste, extravagance and management errors. They
say they cannot do that any more because their competitors, both foreign and
domestic, are not raising their prices.

''We're in a very competitive business,'' Mr. Stratton of Briggs & Stratton
said. ''Our objective is not to raise our prices over the next five years.
That's the way the world is today. You make money by being more efficient, not
by raising prices.''

Questions in Washington

Where uncertainty lingers, it is largely concentrated on Washington. Most of the
business community is cheered by most aspects of the proposal before the Senate
to change the income tax system. But many companies have been delaying plans to
invest in new plants and production machinery until they actually see a new law,
and their delay accounts for some of the more pessimistic economic forecasts.

And while businesses are cheered by the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings law requiring a
balanced budget by 1991, they worry that the Supreme Court could overturn it,
possibly weakening Congress's resolve to cut the deficits.

Further, some economists have calculated that lower-than-expected Federal
revenues in the present sluggish quarter could widen the deficit several billion
dollars beyond the record $212 billion it reached last year. Such economists
assume slower growth or less deficit-cutting political resolve this year than
others do.

Many, however, think they have seen the worst of the deficits.

''Right now, we've got a cash-flow problem pushing the deficit above $200
billion,'' said Mickey D. Levy, chief economist at the Fidelity Bank in
Philadelphia. ''But watch June through September, the last three months of the
fiscal year. Lower interest rates will be pushing it down again, to about $195
billion for the year.''

The economy's other striking feature - the unevenness amid the diminished
uncertainty - has provoked some speculation that the troubles in farming and
natural resources could eventually undermine the much broader economy. But they
say the odds of that are slim.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 10, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN PRESSES FOR ANTI-SANDINISTA AID

BYLINE: By GERALD M. BOYD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 688 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 9


President Reagan said today that support for Nicaraguan insurgents ''towers
above partisan concerns'' and that a failure to provide aid would abandon the
rebels.

''The Communists have made their decision, the resistance has made its decision
and now we must make ours,'' Mr. Reagan said in a speech to foreign policy
experts here. ''The choice is stark, the choice is unavoidable. We can help our
neighbors in their struggle for freedom or, by doing nothing, we can abandon
them to a Communist dictatorship.''

Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger, who later addressed the same forum, a
conference of Georgetown University's Center for Strategic and International
Studies, assailed those he called ''Vietcong supporters,'' who he said were
falsely equating the United States' involvement in Vietnam with a role in
Central America.

The appearances by Mr. Reagan and Mr. Weinberger represented the latest attempt
by the Administration to obtain approval by the House of Representatives of a
$100 million aid package for the rebels, who are known as contras. The
Administration is seeking $70 million in military assistance and $30 million in
nonlethal aid.

House Vote Due Next Week

The House is expected to vote next week on the request, which has already been
approved by the Senate.

Mr. Reagan, asserting that the military situation for the Nicaraguan Government
was improving, said that in the last three months since the House originally
rejected the aid request, Soviet-supplied weapons in Nicaragua had increased and
censorship and other rights violations had risen.

Earlier, Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, acknowledged publicly an
Administration assertion Saturday that a Soviet freighter had brought a cargo of
military supplies to Nicaragua for the first time since 1984. Mr. Speakes said
the shipment had been received in early May.

Mr. Reagan said that Nicaragua, in addition to the Soviet aid, was also
receiving assistance from Cuba, the Palestine Liberation Organization and Libya.
The President said such assistance was an example of Communists having decided
to help Nicaragua.

Cuban Troops 'Swarm' Managua

''Soviet military advisers in Nicaragua number in the hundreds,'' he said. ''The
Sandinistas possess at least six Soviet-built Hind attack helicopters
-helicopters that represent, in effect, flying tanks. Cuban troops swarm the
streets of Managua by the scores, and the P.L.O. has established an embassy
there. Links between the Sandinistas, the P.L.O. and Libyans and others are
extensive.''

Nicaragua has been saying that its military measures are defensive, taken in
response to threats from the Washington and United States support for the
insurgents.

Mr. Weinberger said: ''The Nicaraguan leadership now makes it clear that they
are guided by Communist principles. There is really no debate about this. We
should not, therefore, be amazed when they act like the Communists we have
already known, when their rhetoric is utopian, and their actions brutal.''

Although the Reagan Administration often refers to the Sandinistas as Marxists,
they say that their ideology is based only partly on Marxism. They say that it
is also a product of Nicaragua's long history of conflict with the United
States, which sent troops to occupy Nicaragua early in the 20th century.

While White House officials said last week that the rebel forces in Nicaragua
numbered 10,000 to 12,000 troops, Mr. Reagan put the number at 20,000.

The President said that the rebels, in full knowledge of the difficulties, had
chosen to separate themselves from their families and home and to expose
themselves to the ''dangers of battle'' to liberate Nicaragua from a ''regime
loyal only to Communist powers.''

The President said that the goal of the United States was not a military
solution, but to provide the rebels with what they needed to force the
Nicaraguan Government to the bargaining table. Mr. Reagan said the Government
had refused to give ''serious consideration'' to proposals seeking internal
reconciliation that have been offered under a regional peace plan, called
Contadora.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 10, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. WILL PUBLISH RIGHTS REPORTS

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 315 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 9


The State Department is planning to publish a series of reports on Communist
countries where human rights violations often go unreported in the Western
press, United States officials said today.

The officials said countries that had escaped international scrutiny included
Albania, North Korea, Vietnam and Cambodia. There will also be reports on
countries such as the Soviet Union, Poland and Ethiopia, where the Western press
has access but where some abuses are not reported, the State Department said.

''There is a whole list of things we think deserve to be discussed,'' a senior
official said. He expected the reports to be used as source material by scholars
and others with an interest in such countries.

The official said rights abuses in non-Communist countries received a
disproportionate share of attention in the Western press.

Chile, South Korea, South Africa

''We are concerning ourselves constantly with situations in Chile, South Korea
and South Africa,'' the official said, adding that the Administration had
focused more attention on abuses in these three anti-Communist countries than
any others since taking office.

The first report in the series, which was issued May 20, concerned Cuba, a
country where, it said, ''freedom is abridged in almost every aspect of life.''

The official said that while there was public awareness about rights abuses in
South Korea, very little was known about its Communist neighbor to the north,
where, he said, the ''people are trained to be robots in the operation of the
state.''

The official said that in Vietnam, tens of thousands of people remained in
re-education camps 11 years after the war.

Cambodia is faced not only with Vietnamese military occupation but also with a
campaign by Hanoi to establish dominance over Cambodia through the resettlement
of 750,000 Vietnamese in that country, the official said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 10, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

52 Vietnamese Rescued

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 47 words

DATELINE: BONN, June 9


A West German rescue ship picked up 52 Vietnamese refugees today, including a
17-day-old baby from a fishing vessel adrift in the South China Sea, the relief
agency Cap Anamur said. The relief ship, the Cap Anamur II, rescued 77 refugees
in a similar operation two days ago.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 10, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Pentagon;
Navy Seeks to Save Its Autonomous Ships

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1013 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 9


Ever since the days of John Paul Jones, American naval officers have believed
that their service is different from other branches of the armed forces and
should be given the autonomy to operate on its own. In that belief, the Navy has
felt that no naval vessel or unit should ever be placed under the control of an
Army or Air Force officer.

That fundamental concept has been behind the Navy's resistance to efforts to
unify the leadership of the armed forces, beginning with the Defense Department
after World War II and most recently with plans to change the Joint Chiefs of
Staff.

Now a vote in closed session last week by a House Armed Services subcommittee
has set off a new inter-service struggle between the Navy joined by the Marine
Corps on one side and the Army and Air Force on the other. As the quarrel
develops, it may rival the conflicts of earlier years.

At issue is an amendment, unanimously approved in the vote by the Investigations
subcommittee, that would strengthen the authority of the nation's senior
combatant commanders by limiting the autonomy of naval forces serving under
their command, according to Congressional staff aides.

Those commanders, known as commanders in chief, or Cinc's, (pronounced ''sink''
in military jargon), are in charge of unified land, sea and air forces for all
four services in the Atlantic, Pacific, Europe and other regions.

The Cinc's operate under the control of the Secretary of Defense through the
Joint Chiefs of Staff.

In much of the debate in the House and Senate this year over proposed
legislation to reorganize the military structure, the need to give the
commanders in chief more authority has been emphasized, for these commanders are
responsible for war plans and operations.

Representative Larry J. Hopkins of Kentucky, the senior Republican on the
subcommittee who submitted the amendment, wants to put Navy commanders serving
under unified commanders on the same footing as those from the Army and Air
Force.

Mr. Hopkins says a version of the reorganization legislation already approved by
the Senate would allow the Navy to retain its autonomy. ''What I'm doing,'' he
said, ''is to make them the same as everyone else.''

If his proposal succeeds, it would give a commander in chief the authority to
deploy naval forces as he saw fit, to order them to coordinate their actions
with those of the other services and to engage an adversary according to his war
plan.

Several combatant commanders, including the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, Adm. William J. Crowe Jr., formerly commander in chief of Pacific forces,
have testified that they lacked sufficient control of forces supposedly under
their command.

In the war in Vietnam, Navy air operations were not under control of the Army
general in command of the war but of the commander in chief of the Pacific
Command, a Navy admiral in Hawaii. Thus there were at least two air wars being
fought, one by the Air Force in conjuction with ground operations and the other
by the Navy.

Noting Navy objections to losing autonomy, Mr. Hopkins asserted that national
security should take priority over the prerogatives of one service. ''We have to
make the services fight together,'' he said, pointing to inter-service rivalries
that hampered the 1980 rescue operation in Iran, the 1983 show of force in
Lebanon and the 1983 invasion of Grenada.

''I have nothing against the Navy,'' he added. ''I'm an old Marine. But the days
of separate battles are over.''

The Army and the Air Force favor the amendment because they want the Navy and
the Marine Corps to be fully integrated partners in a unified armed force.

For its part, the Navy is supported by the Marine Corps on this issue because
the Marine Corps has long feared that it could be absorbed into the Army. The
Marine Corps, which belongs to the Department of the Navy, started as a small
guard force but is today larger that the British Army and Royal Marines
combined.

A spokesman for the Secretary of Navy, John F. Lehman Jr., said Mr. Lehman was
reviewing the legislation for its impact on the Navy. In his five years as the
top civilian in the Navy Department, Mr. Lehman has been a vigorous defender of
Navy prerogatives.

The subcommittee's version of the reorganization bill is scheduled to go to the
full committee later this month and then to the floor of the House. If Mr.
Hopkins's amendment is upheld, a final battle would be fought in a House-Senate
conference to reconcile differences in the two bills.

The question of Navy autonomy is rooted in the days before World War II when the
Army and the Navy went about their missions with little coordination. The
success of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in Hawaii that brought the United
States into World War II in 1941 was attributed partly to a lack of Army-Navy
communication.

The massive battles of World War II, however, showed that campaigns by one
service alone were a thing of the past and that joint ground, air and sea
operations would be necessary. The Korean and Vietnam Wars reinforced that idea.

The National Security Act of 1947, which established the Defense Department as
the umbrella over the Army, Navy and the new Air Force, was based on the idea
that an armed force unified in its leadership would best protect the nation.

The 'Revolt of the Admirals'

But the Navy and its allies on Capitol Hill fought hard to keep the Navy as
autonomous as possible. Those advocates sought particularly to keep naval
aviation and the Marine Corps in the Department of Navy.

That dispute generated the ''Revolt of the Admirals'' in 1949, when senior Navy
officers in public bitterly opposed President Truman's directives to unify
service leadership. The revolt ended with several admirals dismissed but with
much Navy autonomy intact.

A reorganization urged by President Eisenhower in 1958 made inroads into Navy
autonomy but left it more independent of control by the Defense Department, the
Joint Chiefs of Staff and the unified commanders than the other services. That
has stood until now.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Rep. Larry J. Hopkins

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 11, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING;
Memories of Vietnam

BYLINE: By Wayne King and Irvin Molotsky

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 218 words


A close vote is expected today on a bill that would authorize the award of
Congressional Gold Medals to the three people who mounted the successful
campaign to establish the Vietnam Veterans Memorial.

Initially it appeared that the awarding of the medals to the three, Jan Scruggs,
Robert Doubek and Jack Wheeler, all Vietnam veterans, was a certainty. The
legislation passed the Senate without a dissenting vote, and in the House it has
259 sponsors, well over a majority.

A two-thirds vote is needed to bring the bill expeditiously to the House floor,
however, and strong opposition has developed. Some of the dispute hangs on the
issue of the importance of the honor itself, which is the highest civilian honor
that Congress can award and has been given 116 times in the past, to such
prominent Americans as George Washington, Douglas MacArthur, Jonas Salk and
Hubert Humphrey.

Opponents say the veterans' lobbying for four years to establish the memorial
does not put them in that league. Supporters point out that the medal has also
gone to Harry Chapin, a singer, and the trio of balloonists who crossed the
Atlantic.

Beyond the issue of the importance of the award, Congressional sources say there
is a residue of high emotion over the design of the memorial, and indeed of the
war itself.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 11, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CONGRESS;
Time for Politicians to Play With Expectations

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 935 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 10


In the world of politics, it is time again for the Great Expectation Game.

The rules are simple. Each political party tries to convince the opinion makers,
and the general public, that its expectations for the next election are really
quite modest. Therefore, if the party exceeds its stated goals, it can claim it
really ''won'' the election, no matter what the results actually say.

This year, the professional players are closely watching the House of
Representatives, where all 435 seats will be contested. The Democrats say they
are worried that they will pick up only 10 to 15 seats, and they cite historical
evidence to back them up.

Since World War II the Democrats have controlled an average of 253 seats in the
House, and that is precisely the number they elected in 1984. Accordingly, says
Representative Tony Coelho of California, the chairman of the Democratic
Congressional Campaign Committee, the party is just about at ''full strength''
in the House and has few obvious opportunities to knock off vulnerable
Republicans.

Joe Gaylord, executive director of the National Republican Congressional
Committee, retorts that if the Democrats win only about a dozen seats, that
would constitute a ''major victory'' for the Republicans. He can quote history
as well.

In this century, he points out, the midyear election following a President's
returning to office has always been disastrous for the incumbent's party. On the
average, the President's party has lost 48 seats in those elections, a
phenomenon known as the ''six-year itch.'' So anything less than a swing of
similar proportions would be ''defying history,'' Mr. Gaylord argues.

Figures Don't Lie

Who is right? Both camps can muster valid statistics. But they are selective
statistics.

Yes, the Democrats have held an average of 253 seats since World War II, but
that includes two elections, 1946 and 1954, in which the Republicans actually
controlled the House. In the last six Congresses, the Democrats have held an
average of 270 seats. So a gain of 17 seats might be a reasonable expectation.

Yes, the average effect of the six-year itch has been 48 seats, but that figure
includes three extraordinary years: 1958, a time of severe recession; 1966,
which followed the escalation of Vietnam, and 1974, an election colored by
Watergate. In 1926, two years after President Coolidge was returned to office,
the out party won only 10 seats.

If the two parties are already arguing over the meaning of the November
elections, they do not differ very much on the likely results. Most political
analysts agree that the makeup of the House will change very little, and that
reflects one of the most significant political trends of all.

In 1984, almost 95 percent of the incumbents who ran for re-election won. This
demonstrates, Mr. Coelho said, that ''we've taken the high peaks and low valleys
out of the election cycle.''

Today, House members are able to use advanced communications technology to make
themselves much better known back home and therefore to insulate themselves from
swings of political fashion.

''In the past, candidates at the House level didn't have the ability to develop
their own identity as they do today, and to separate themselves from a President
in bad times,'' said one Democratic strategist.

Trouble for Challengers

At the same time, aspirants for House seats have a difficult time getting the
kind of television exposure that would make them serious contenders. William
Schneider, a resident fellow at the American Enterprise Institute, said that in
most polls, only about 55 percent of the voters can identify the challenger in
their own Congressional district. The figure is 80 percent for Senate seats,
where the fatality rate for incumbents has recently been much higher.

House members have also immunized themselves from political infection by
funnelling more of their resources into personal services for their
constituents. A voter is more disposed to support a lawmaker who got Aunt
Sylvia's Social Security problem straightened out, no matter what his party
label.

Lawmakers have multiplied that advantage by voting themselves a host of valuable
perquisites, from free mailing privileges to free travel to their home
districts. The Republicans, who have been in the minority now for 30 years, say
they will never regain control of the House until they cut back services that
benefit incumbents, including their own.

''We are trying to get our members weaned off of that stuff,'' said one aide to
House Republican leaders.

From the Republican viewpoint, the Democratic majority has also entrenched
itself by controlling state legislatures and ''gerrymandering'' Congressional
districts to maximize their party's strength. These carefully crafted district
lines, said the Republian staff aide, have ''created invisible walls of
protection around Democratic seats'' and thwarted the ''natural swings that
ought to take place.''

The peculiar politics of 1986 also works against any significant shift in the
composition of the House. In 1984, the Republicans gained only 14 seats, despite
the sweeping victory of President Reagan, and as a result there are fewer
marginal Republicans on the Democratic hit list.

Besides, both parties agree that in 1986 there is no dominating theme, no
national trend that would cause large-scale shifts in either direction.

So there is no real argument about numbers: the Democrats should win a handful
of seats. But what does that really mean? That is the question that will consume
The Great Expectation Game for the next five months.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 11, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MERLE MILLER IS DEAD AT 67; A NOVELIST AND A BIOGRAPHER

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 524 words


Merle Miller, a former president of the Authors Guild who wrote best-selling
oral biographies of Harry S. Truman and Lyndon B. Johnson, died yesterday at
Danbury (Conn.) Hospital of an abdominal infection with peritonitis. He was 67
years old and lived in Brewster, N.Y.

Mr. Miller, born in Montour, Iowa, wrote almost a dozen books, including more
than half a dozen novels. His first, ''That Winter'' (1948), was considered one
of the best novels about the postwar readjustment of World War II veterans. His
other novels included ''A Day in Late September,'' set in suburban Connecticut
on a Sunday in September 1960, ''The Sure Thing'' and ''Reunion.''

But the oral biographies accounted for his greatest success. The first of them,
''Plain Speaking: An Oral Biography of Harry S. Truman,'' was published in 1974.
It was adapted from an abortive television series for which the former President
spent many hours in the early 1960's talking with Mr. Miller, the researcher and
writer for the project.

The Johnson biography, a book for which he conducted 180 interviews and
consulted almost 400 oral histories, was a best seller in 1980. Although he said
he began the biography disliking the former President, in part because Mr.
Miller was an outspoken opponent of the Vietnam War, he ended up appreciating
Mr. Johnson's parliamentary achievements and calling him ''one of the most
complex, fascinating Presidents of all time.''

'Only You, Dick Daring!'

In 1964, Mr. Miller and Evan Rhodes wrote ''Only You, Dick Daring! or How to
Write One Television Script and Make $50,000,000.'' The book, an account of the
authors' efforts to write a television pilot about a county agricultural agent,
was a satirical attack on network television, describing endless meetings,
conferences, rewrites and compromises to suit a succession of producers and vice
presidents.

In 1968, just as Mr. Miller's novel ''Warm Feeling'' was about to be published,
he wrote to reviewers disowning the book, a story about an attractive divorced
American woman's search for a new life in Europe. He said in his letter that he
had not edited the manuscript about to be published, and that when he had
submitted revisions to the publisher they had been rejected because they were
late.

''Most serious writers work slowly,'' he wrote, ''and, thus, miss deadlines,
sometimes several deadlines - publishers' deadlines, that is. A serious writer
cannot have any deadline but his own.''

In 1971, Mr. Miller wrote a widely discussed essay for The New York Times
Magazine, ''What It Means to Be a Homosexual,'' which, he said, brought him more
than 2,000 letters, many of them from other homosexuals thanking him for helping
to restore their self-respect.

Mr. Miller attended the University of Iowa and spent a year at the London School
of Economics. He joined the Army Air Corps in 1942 and served as an editor of
Yank magazine, in both the Pacific and in Europe, until his discharge in
September 1945. He worked briefly as an editor at Time and Harper's magazines.

The author recently completed a biography of Dwight D. Eisenhower.

There are no survivors.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Merle Miller (David W. Elliot)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 12, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
U.S. and Hanoi Resume Talks on the Missing

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 74 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 11


American and Vietnamese officials resumed talks in Hanoi today on the nearly
1,800 American servicemen listed as missing in action in Vietnam, ending a
two-month freeze caused by the raids on Libya by the United States.

The meetings are the second of six sessions scheduled this year dealing with the
identification of United States warplane crash sites, personnel data and
operation plans for recovering the remains of American servicemen.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 12, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

House Defeats Plan to Give 3 Vietnam Veterans Medals

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 149 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 11


The House today voted down a move to award Congressional gold medals to the
three veterans who led the effort to build the Vietnam Veterans Memorial on the
Washington mall.

Opponents of the plan, while praising the efforts of the three, said many others
had been involved in the project and, in any case, it was not appropriate to
award medals for the building of a monument that honors others.

Proposed as recipients of the medals were Jan Scruggs, Robert Doubek and John
Wheeler, who developed the idea for a Vietnam memorial and organized the
nonprofit Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund to push the project. The memorial,
bearing the names of the men and women killed in the Southeast Asia war, was
dedicated in 1982.

The vote for the bill to authorize the medals was 225 to 185, but under the
expedited procedure used to consider the measure a two-thirds vote was necessary
for passage.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 13, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

STATE OF EMERGENCY IMPOSED THROUGHOUT SOUTH AFRICA; MORE THAN 1,000 ROUNDED UP

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1654 words

DATELINE: JOHANNESBURG, June 12


South Africa's beleaguered white leaders today imposed a nationwide state of
emergency and detained hundreds of activists in an effort to crush dissent
before Monday, the 10th anniversary of the Soweto uprisings.

In the first day of the decree, the Government-controlled television said, more
than 1,000 people were detained.

The first response from opponents of the Government who are in hiding was that
the measure would spark violence. ''Removing responsible leaders of the people
has effectively paved the way for a blood bath in the country,'' said Murphy
Morobe, a spokesman for the United Democratic Front. Mr. Morobe issued his
statement from hiding.

Church and Labor Leaders Held

The United Democratic Front, which says it has a following of two million, is
the biggest nonparliamentary opposition group in the country. Some of those
detained today, along with church and labor leaders, were its supporters.

Over the last week, many black political activists have gone into hiding in
anticipation of the decree.

In one of the first prohibitions ordered under the decree, all nonresidents were
forbidden from entering Soweto, Johannesburg's sprawling black satellite, which
is home to up to two million people.

President P. W. Botha told Parliament in Cape Town that he had ordered the
emergency because ''I am of the opinion that the ordinary laws of the land at
present on the statute book are inadequate to enable the Government to insure
the security of the public and to maintain public order.''

''In fact,'' he said, ''the Government possesses intelligence regarding plans
which have been made by radical and revolutionary elements for the coming days,
which pose real danger for all population groups in the country.'' He offered no
details of these plans.

Police units raided three Johannesburg buildings housing labor, church and
political organizations that had committed themselves to mass defiance of
Government orders preventing commemorations of June 16, 1976 - the start of the
Soweto uprisings that left more than 570 people dead.

Mr. LeGrange had ordered a ban on all commemorations of June 16, a central day
on the calendar of black opposition to the Government. But church leaders,
including Bishop Desmond M. Tutu, the 1984 Nobel Peace Prize winner, had urged
their followers to defy the prohibition, while black labor federations came out
for a strike to mark the day.

The impression created by the decree, analysts said, was of a Government set
against conciliation with its black majority and ready to risk outsiders'
opprobrium in pursuit of a forceful settlement to its crisis.

In a move last month that brought international condemnation, South Africa
raided three black-ruled African countries, saying it was striking at
strongholds of the outlawed and exiled African National Congress.

South Africa lifted a decree establishing a partial seven-month state of
emergency March 7, after using the decree to detain between 8,000 and 12,000
people without trial.

Those measures, however, failed to halt the daily protests and violence that
have claimed far in excess of 1,600 lives since September 1984. The previous
emergency decree applied to districts close to the main cities of Johannesburg,
Cape Town and Port Elizabeth.

The decree issued today, which is far stronger than the one d lifted March 7,
covers the entire country and offers the authorities sweeping powers, including
an indemnity from prosecution and the right to arrest without a charge and to
search without a warrant.

Powers to Use Force

Moreover, the decree empowers any member of the police, the army or the railways
police to use any kind of force deemed necessary to force people who have
disobeyed orders to move away from any place. Curfews may be imposed, and it is
an offense to promote unlawful strikes, boycotts or protests.

As in the previous decree, the authorities barred television, radio and
photographic coverage of ''any public disturbance, disorder, riot, public
violence, strike or boycott.''

The prohibitions on what are called subversive statements seem certain to
tighten the censorship on the South African press since, some lawyers argue,
they prevent publication of comments by the Government's foes advocating
boycotts, sanctions or other protests.

Colin Eglin, leader of the white opposition Progressive Federal Party, issued a
statement saying, ''It is a sad day for South Africa when the Government admits
it cannot govern the country without the powers given to it in a state of
emergency.'' Other critics of the Government also said the decree was an
acknowledgement of failure to defuse black protest by political means.

A New Call for Sanctions

The decree coincided with the official publication in London today of a report
by a seven-member Commonwealth group saying sanctions were the last option
available to Western powers seeking to push Pretoria's white leaders toward
talks.

The report by the Commonwealth group, called the Eminent Persons Group, and the
South African emergency decree seemed to reflect two aspects of a nation in
crisis, analysts said, confronted by turmoil within its borders and by mounting
calls for ostracism and punishment beyond the country's frontiers.

From midnight until dawn today, security policemen raided the homes of political
activists, detaining people under a section of the Internal Security Act that
permits detention without trial for two weeks.

The state of emergency was publicly announced 12 hours after it came into force.
Among the first of its provisions to be made known was a withdrawal of all
official police information about violence in black townships.

Rand Close to Record Low

South Africa's currency, the rand, dropped to close to the record low of 35.45
United States cents it hit after the previous emergency decree was issued in
July 1985. Foreign exchange dealers said they did not believe the nation's
reserve bank had enough dollars to shore up the currency for long.

The emergency - the third since 1960 in South Africa - was imposed after
legislators of mixed and Indian racial descent blocked the passage of new
security laws through the segregated three-house Parliament. The laws would have
empowered Louis LeGrange, Minister of Law and Order, to detain people for six
months without charge or trial and to declare ''unrest areas'' - effectively,
local states of emergencies in areas deemed to be trouble spots.

According to lawyers and relatives, those detained included Saths Cooper,
president of the Azanian Peoples Organization, and Piroshaw Camay, secretary
general of the Council of Unions of South Africa. Both men are allied with the
Black Consciousness Movement, which, unlike the United Democratic Front, eschews
white involvement in its protest.

Others detained included Aubrey Mokoena, who leads a campaign for the release of
the jailed nationalist leader Nelson Mandela, and prominent clerics, including
the Rev. Smangaliso Mkatshwa, secretary general of the South African Catholic
Bishops Conference.

Anti-Draft Campaigners

The police also detained members of the End Conscription Campaign, a white
activist group that opposes compulsory military service for all white South
African men.

''The state today is faced with the duty of restoring law and order throughout
South Africa,'' the Government-controlled South Africa radio said in a a
commentary this morning before word of the emergency decree was made public.

By the time the last emergency decree was issued, in July 1985, months of
protest and violence had left more than 500 people dead. The tally of killing
rose during the seven months the emergency decree was in force. The killing has
continued unabated since then, reflecting, increasingly, battles in the
segregated black townships between Government-supported vigilantes and blacks
who call themselves radicals.

Looking to Monday, the Soweto anniversary, the authorities seemed to anticipate
wide protests if blacks were permitted to gather to recall events that broke the
image of immutable white power in South Africa.

The police today set up roadblocks on the approaches to Jan Smuts Airport in
Johannesburg and arrested at least one white political activist seeking to fly
to neighboring Zimbabwe.

A Pre-Emptive Move

Political analysts said the decree was imposed pre-emptively, rather than in
response to existing violence, which suggested a loss of official faith in
current powers of control.

In his speech to Parliament, Mr. Botha described his Government's program of
cautious racial change, which stands rejected by many black leaders, and linked
the African National Congress to widespread, internecine black violence.

''It is clear that black revolutionaries do not enjoy the spontaneous support of
the majority of blacks and that they consequently resort to these methods of
intimidation in order to gain control,'' he said.

Outside Criticism Predicted

''The Government,'' he said, ''is well aware of the fact that stricter security
action will elicit strong criticism and even punitive measures from the outside
world. The implications and the price of these have also been taken into
account.''

In a television broadcast tonight, Mr. Botha seemed to suggest his Government
thought the decree would speed demands for punitive sanctions. He also said the
decree resembled ''the choice between war and a dishonorable, fearful peace.''

''South Africans will not allow themselves to be humiliated in order to prevent
sanctions,'' he said. ''We are not a nation of weaklings. We do not desire it
and we do not seek it, but if we are forced to go it alone, then so be it.''

Referring to revolutionary takeovers in countries including Angola and Vietnam,
Mr. Botha said his Government would ''not allow our heritage of more than 300
years to be placed needlessly on the altar of chaos and decay.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of soldiers and police guarding Ecumenical Center in Durban,
South Africa (Reuters); photo of Rev. Beyers Naude (AP) (page A12); map of South
Africa highlighting Soweto (NYT) (page A12)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 13, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

POLITICS;
Democrats Strive for Accord on Foreign Policy

BYLINE: By PHIL GAILEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1059 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 12


After more than a decade of post-Vietnam disarray and nay-saying, Democrats are
struggling to build a new foreign policy consensus at a time when some analysts
contend that President Reagan and the Republican Party are losing political
control in this area.

Even some conservative Democrats have expressed dismay over the President's
hostility toward the unratified arms treaty negotiated with the Soviet Union in
1979. And on the question of providing military assistance to the rebels
fighting the Sandinista Government of Nicaragua, the President has been unable
to rally either public opinion or the Congress behind his latest aid proposal.

As they see signs of Mr. Reagan's faltering on this front, Democrats have begun
to lay down a thematic framework for redefining their stance on foreign policy,
perhaps the most vexing issue facing the party in its effort to fashion a new
political identity before the 1988 election.

On Wednesday, Senator Gary Hart of Colorado became the first Presidential
hopeful to weigh in with a comprehensive foreign policy view as part of his
effort to set the agenda for the 1988 debate.

'Enlightened Engagement'

Mr. Hart, in three speeches at Georgetown University's School of Foreign
Service, called for a policy of ''enlightened engagement'' that would adapt
United States foreign policy to ''the global diffusion of economic, political
and military power.''

In several key areas Mr. Hart offers a program that differs sharply from
President Reagan's foreign policy. He says, for example, the United States
should sign a nuclear test ban with the Soviet Union and agree to curb
development of Mr. Reagan's proposed space-based missile defense system in
return for Soviet concessions on arms control.

On Central America, Mr. Hart opposes aid to the Nicaragua rebels, but adds that
the United States would be justified in using military force to prevent
Nicaragua from subverting its neighbors or becoming a Soviet military base.

Over all, some party strategists say, Mr. Hart's foreign policy views seem to be
in line with the positions being drafted by the Democratic Policy Commission, a
panel created after the 1984 to review the party's policy stances, which is to
release its report later this month.

On the surface, at least, the party's different ideological factions seem to be
in basic agreement on some key national security questions: support for arms
control, the need for military reorganization and better strategic planning, and
more prudent spending of military dollars. Furthermore, the debate within the
party is strikingly low-key. Conservatives are talking more about human rights
and liberals are toughening their language on the Soviet threat.

It is on the larger questions raised by policy toward Nicaragua that the party
divides. Some analysts say Nicaragua could be a watershed issue for Democrats
because it underscores the central dilemma of the party's post-Vietnam foreign
policy: The role the United States should play in aiding anti-Communist
insurgents in developing countries.

Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware, one of the party's Presidential
aspirants, said in a recent speech that the greatest challenge facing Democrats
is to liberate their party from the ideological ''demons'' that have made it
difficult to offer alternatives to Republican foreign policy in the post-Vietnam
period.

Many Americans, he said, ''are afraid the Republicans are too tough, but they
think we are not tough enough, and they have tipped the scales in favor of what
they perceive as firmer hands.''

Moderates Assert Themselves

Since Vietnam, liberals have dominated the Democrats' foreign policy debates,
but since 1984 the party's moderate-to-conservative wing has begun to assert
itself in an effort to pull the party away from what it regards as
neo-isolationism.

''We need a foreign policy which neither renounces nor relies exclusively on the
use of force, a policy tempered, but not paralyzed, by the lessons of Vietnam,''
Charles S. Robb, the former Governor of Virginia, said in a recent speech.

Mr. Robb, a Vietnam veteran, is the new chairman of the Democratic Leadership
Council, an independent group of elected officials, mostly from the South and
West, that is attempting to move the party toward more centrist positions. But
even its members are divided on Nicaragua.

The two opposing views at the center of this debate are expressed by Mr. Robb
and Mr. Hart.

Mr. Robb: ''We need to apply all of our strength - not just military aid, but
also economic assistance or pressure - to win victories for democracy.'' Without
military pressure, he said, ''the Sandinistas, with access to increasingly
sophisticated weaponry from the Soviet bloc and Cuba, will have no incentive to
negotiate seriously and will be able to overcome their opponents by force.''

Mr. Hart: ''It is dangerous to imagine the Sandinistas have good intentions, but
it is naive to think they will swept away by the contras, and it is ultimately
foolish to claim that military force is our best means for controlling
Sandinista misbehavior.''

Search for a Middle Ground

Like Mr. Hart, most of the party's Presidential hopefuls oppose Mr. Reagan's
policy toward Nicaragua, as do, according to opinion polls, a majority of the
American people.

But many Congressional Democrats, fearful that public opinion could turn on them
if Nicaragua should become another Cuba, are hoping to find a middle ground that
ties further aid to political negotiations between the rebels and the Sandinista
regime.

The compromise that seems to have the most support in the House is one fashioned
by Representative Dave McCurdy, Democrat of Oklahoma. Mr. McCurdy, who has
supported aid requests in the past, is sponsoring a measure that would provide
military assistance to the rebels if, after a certain period, Nicaragua's
Marxist Government refused to begin negotiations with the insurgents.

Until Democrats overcome the public perception that they are unwilling to use
military force to protect the country's security interests, said Senator Biden,
they are not likely to prevail in the foreign policy debate. ''The fact is there
are several arrows: diplomacy, military force and economic power,'' he said.
''The Democrats need to make it clear that they are willing to employ all
three.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Charles Robb (AP); photo of Sen. Gary Hart (NYT)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 13, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FILM: 'BACK TO SCHOOL,' WITH RODNEY DANGERFIELD

BYLINE: By NINA DARNTON

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 681 words


RODNEY DANGERFIELD is definitely an acquired taste.

Aficionados will be delighted with his performance as Thornton Mellon, a
self-made millionaire who goes back to college with his son in ''Back to
School,'' which opens today at the UA Twin and other theaters. Those who find
him a bit hard to swallow will continue to marvel at how his nervous mannerisms,
bulging eyeballs and loud-mouthed joviality manage to endear him to loyal fans
who, it seems, will laugh at just about anything he does.

The film is a good-natured potpourri of gags, funny bits, populist sentiment and
anti-intellectualism. Thornton Mellon, who made his fortune in the rag trade as
owner of an expanding chain of ''Tall and Fat'' stores has not been spoiled by
success. Although he has married and divorced a social-climbing gold digger, he
has not done anything extreme such as improving his taste or manners, and he is
still the same beer-guzzling, fun-loving guy he always was. Learning that his
son wants to drop out of college, he decides to cheer him up, rebuild his dorm
room into a mini-Caesar's Palace and buy both of them a first-class education.

His son rebels. The father parties and plays while the boy goes to the library
and tries to make it on his own, proving that you just can't do anything with
kids these days. When Thornton is assigned term papers, he hires experts like
the writer Kurt Vonnegut Jr. to ghostwrite them. Everything is for sale, not
only college admission, for the price of a new business school, but also Mr.
Vonnegut, who went for an undisclosed price.

Mr. Dangerfield's characterization uses many of the bits that made him famous
and also adds an appealing warmth. Thornton Mellon is pot-bellied, crass and
unpolished. ''With the shape my body is in,'' he says, ''I could donate it to
science fiction.''

But this time he beats out the educated, aristocratic snobs who put him down and
is even invited to give the college commencement address. ''It's a jungle out
there,'' he says. ''So my advice is don't go. Live at home. Let your parents
worry about it.'' Alan Metter, who directed Mr. Dangerfield's ''Rapping Rodney''
music video, has peppered the film with some interesting characterizations.
Keith Gordon plays a winning and sincere Jason Mellon, the irrepressible
millionaire's affectionate but confused son. Robert Downey Jr. is very funny as
Jason's rebel roommate, Derek. Sam Kinison does an amusing bit as a crazed
Vietnam veteran who is a history teacher, and Ned Beatty is good as the
spineless college administrator, ''Dean Martin.''

But the director unfortunately allowed Sally Kellerman, an actress who can do
much better, to mug and pose almost every moment she is on screen. Playing
Thornton's sexy English literature teacher, Miss Kellerman pouts her lips,
lowers her eyelids and tries much too hard. The result is less like a comic
characterization by a real person and more like an animated pin-up ''Back to
School'' is rated PG-13 (''Special Parental Guidance Suggested for Those Younger
Than 13''). It contains language that may not be suitable for young children.

CAMPUS FOLLIES - BACK TO SCHOOL, directed by Alan Metter; screenplay by Steven
Kampmann, Will Porter, Peter Torokvei and Harold Ramis; story by Rodney
Dangerfield, Greg Fields and Dennis Snee; director of photography, Thomas E.
Ackerman; edited by David Rawlins; music by Danny Elfman; produced by Chuck
Russell; released by the Orion Pictures Corporation. At UA Twin, Broadway at
49th Street; Gemini Twin, 64th Street and Second Avenue; Loews 34th Street
Showplace, between Second and Third Avenues; Loews 84th Street Six, at Broadway;
UA East, First Avenue and 85th Street; Olympia Quad, Broadway and 107th Street.
Running time: 90 minutes. This film is rated PG-13.

Thornton Melon...Rodney Dangerfield; Diane...Sally Kellerman; Lou...Burt Young;
Jason Melon...Keith Gordon; Derek...Robert Downey, Jr.; Philip Barbay...Paxton
Whitehead; Valerie...Terry Farrell; Coach Turnbull...M. Emmet Walsh;
Vanessa...Adrienne Barbeau; Chas...William Zabka; Dean Martin...Ned Beatty.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 14, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM VETERANS IN CHICAGO PARADE CHEERED BY CROWDS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 413 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, June 13


An estimated 200,000 people marched today in what sponsors called the largest
parade of Vietnam veterans ever held, and a half million spectators cheered
them.

As the parade wound through downtown Chicago, the crowd threw tickertape and
kisses at the veterans and waved banners with such mottos as ''Honor the
Warrior, not the War.''

The veterans, from as far away as Australia, came to town for a Flag Day weekend
highlighted by the parade and the dedication Thursday of a copy of the Vietnam
Memorial wall commemorating the 58,000 Americans who were killed in the war.

Many veterans, clad in camouflage uniforms, marched with their wives and
children. Some rode in bamboo cages as reminders of the treatment endured by
many prisoners of war. Parents holding photos of sons who were killed and widows
carrying portraits of husbands walked in place of their missing relatives.

The marchers cheered as they filed by Gen. William Westmoreland, Gov. James
Thompson, Mayor Harold Washington and other dignitaries on a reviewing stand,
but it was obvious that the veterans were moved most by the crowd that stood 8
to 10 deep in places along the 2.8-mile parade route.

Deputy Police Chief Carl Dobrich provided the estimate of the number of marchers
and spectators.

''This is our welcome home, something we missed on our original return,'' said
Chuck Sanders, president of the chapter of Vietnam Veterans of America in La
Crosse, Wis. ''We thought that by putting aside Vietnam when we came home, we
could deal with our problems. That did not work.''

Col. Kenneth A. Plummer, vice-chairman of the parade committee. said, ''The
public is finally giving Vietnam veterans the recognition they deserve and it is
a healing process for both the vet and the public, a public which is assuaging
its guilt toward the Vietnam vet.''

Shirley Calusinski of Chicago was one of those crying on the curb when her son
Kenneth marched by. ''He was in Vietnam and it is something we never talk about.
I am crying because I feel like a healing just took place and now it will all be
okay.''

Even some veterans and civilians who had opposed the war joined in the welcome
home, which came 13 years after the last American troops left Vietnam.

Marilyn Katz, a public relations consultant, was among the anti-war activists
who praised the veterans today, saying, ''This parade recognizes them as humans
who went through a horrible experience, who need to be reintegrated back into
society.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of William Westmoreland leading marchers and Tom Stack and Bob
Wieland (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 14, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

REV. DANA GREELEY, 77, DIES; UNITARIAN UNIVERSALIST LEADER

BYLINE: By JOAN COOK

SECTION: Section 1; Page 32, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 366 words


The Rev. Dana McLean Greeley, a Bostonian who was first president of the
Unitarian Universalist Association and minister of the First Parish in Concord,
Mass., died of cancer yesterday at his home in Concord, Mass. He was 77 years
old.

Mr. Greeley, who was a leader in the civil rights and world peace movements, was
active in the church for more than 60 years. The denomination has 178,000
members in more than 1,000 congregations in North America.

Mr. Greeley served as the last president of the American Unitarian Association
and the first president of the Unitarian Universalist Association, a liberal
religious denomination formed in 1961 by the merger of the American Unitarian
Assocation and the Universalist Church of America. He remained in the post for
two four-year terms.

Before his election to the post, Mr. Greeley was minister of the Arlington
Street Church in Boston for 23 years. He had previous pastorates in Lincoln,
Mass., and in Concord, N.H.

Joined Selma Rights March

He took strong stands on the ethical and moral issues of his time. In 1965 he
headed a contingent of Unitarian Universalist ministers in the civil rights
march in Selma, Ala., and he was an outspoken opponent of the war in Vietnam.

He served as president of the International Association for Religious Freedom
from 1969 to 1972 and was the principal founder of the World Conference of
Religion and Peace. In the latter effort he worked with John Cardinal Wright,
Rabbi Maurice Eisendrath and Bishop John Wesley Lord to establish and promote
the organization, which now has offices in New York, Geneva and Tokyo.

He was the author of several books including, ''A message to Atheists,'' ''25
Beacon Street and Other Recollections'' and ''Know These Concordians.''

He was born in Lexington, Mass., and graduated from Harvard College in 1931 and
from Harvard Divinity School in 1933.

He is survived by his wife, the former Deborah Allen Webster; four daughters,
Faith Scovel, Rosamond Hamlin, Cynthia McElwain and Penelope Elwell; a brother,
Roland; and two sisters, Anne Dutka and Ellen Bryant, and 10 grandchildren.

A memorial service will be held July 19 at the First Parish in Concord.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of the Rev. Dana McLean Greeley

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Hanoi Gives U.S. Data On Missing Americans

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 9, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 131 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 14


Vietnam has turned over more information on 21 Americans listed as missing in
action in the Vietnam War and has promised to investigate reports that some
American soldiers are alive there, an American official said today.

A four-man American negotiating team, from the United States Joint Casualty
Resolution Center, based in Hawaii, returned to Bangkok from Hanoi today. The
Vietnamese suspended the talks after the American bombing raid on Libya on April
15, but negotiations resumed Wednesday.

The American official, Lieut. Col. Joe Harvey, who heads the American team, said
officials of Vietnam had provided ''additional information on the status of its
investigation'' into the cases of 21 missing Americans. These are among 70 cases
Hanoi had announced it was investigating.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

JACKSON, TO CLASS, TELLS OF INJUSTICE

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 28, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 480 words


The Rev. Jesse Jackson told the graduating class of Medgar Evers College in
Brooklyn yesterday that they faced a world imbued with much the same climate of
injustice and inequality - in large part because of the Reagan Administration -
as 23 years ago, when Medgar Evers, the civil rights worker, was slain in
Mississippi.

In such a world, Mr. Jackson added in his commencement address, ''many of us are
experiencing an ethical collapse, a spiritual withdrawal, and escaping this
reality through drugs, alcohol, sex without love, making unwanted babies and
turning on each other with violence.''

He told the more than 300 graduates, and their families and friends, to take a
hard look at their own communities. ''Know the truth,'' he said, paraphrasing
the Bible, ''and the truth will set you free.''

Statistics on Crime

He presented a battery of statistics to the audience, who sat in hushed
attention in the fenced-in yard outside the four-story, red brick college, a
branch of the City University, in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn:

''Black-on-black murder is the leading cause of death in black males ages 15 to
44. One black in 40 will be murdered.

''Nationally, the homicide rate is 10 times higher for black men than white men
and 5 times higher for black women than white women.''

He said that ''more blacks lost their lives from black-on-black murder in 1981
than black men killed in the 12 years of war in Vietnam.''

In pursuing their dreams in the world he so starkly portrayed, Mr. Jackson urged
the graduates to find inspiration in the legacy of Mr. Evers - ''a martyr in the
struggle for justice and human dignity.'' Mr. Evers was shot to death in
Jackson, Miss., on June 12, 1963, after leading an antisegregation drive as head
of the local office of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored
People.

'We Must Fight Back'

''We must fight back,'' he told them. ''We must turn to each other and not on
each other.''

He called on the graduates to fight drug abuse and teen-age pregnancies within
their communities. ''Brothers, you're not a man because you can make a baby,''
he said, ''but because you can protect, provide, raise and love a baby. And
sisters, young men do not make babies by themselves.''

Mr. Jackson also said that a strong reaction against affirmative action had
become rampant during the Reagan Administration, with black enrollment falling
at major universities and blacks underrepresented on the staffs of television
networks and major newspapers. ''It appears that the quest and the vision of
equality have been lost,'' he said.

With the graduates on their feet and applauding, Mr. Jackson, who received a
special citation from the community college, concluded with an impassioned call
for excellence against the odds. ''This is your day!'' he told them. ''Use what
you've got! You can make it!''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of the Rev. Jesse Jackson during commencement speech at Medger
Evers College (NYT/John Sotomayor)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN NEW BEDFORD, UNION EFFORTS KEEP A PLANT ALIVE

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SERRIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 38, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1452 words

DATELINE: NEW BEDFORD, Mass.


At Morse Cutting Tools, some things have not changed much. The company still
makes twist drills, reamers, end mills, taps and countersinks in its red-brick
building here as it has done since the Civil War.

But some things will never be the same at the plant, known locally as ''The
Drill.''

The fact that Morse is open at all is widely acknowledged to be a result of the
efforts of Local 277 of the United Electrical, Radio and Machine Workers of
America. And if workers, union leaders and managers are correct in believing
that the plant has a good chance for survival, Morse Cutting Tools may a
textbook example of how unions can both combat and cooperate with management.

Once Owned by Gulf & Western

Four years ago, the union could find no common ground with the plant's owner,
Gulf & Western Industries Inc., resisting concessions that Gulf & Western said
were necessary to keep Morse open. Today, for a new owner, the workers have
agreed to forgo a pay increase, to give up some holiday and vacation time and to
limit incentive earnings. In return, they have won participation in stock and
profit-sharing plans.

In the intervening years, campaigning to save The Drill, union leaders reached
out to other unions, churches and community groups. They also won a pledge from
the city to take over the plant through eminent domain if Gulf & Western refused
to sell to a buyer that the city said was suitable.

Most important, said Ron Carver, an organizer for the electrical workers, the
union changed the focus of the debate over the plant's future from labor costs
to what the union said was disinvestment in the plant.

''The significance of this story is that communities need not accept plant
closings as inevitable tragedies,'' said Erica Bronstein, director of the Labor
Education Center at Southeastern Massachusetts University.

New Owner's Philosophy

Morse is now owned by James Lambert, an industrialist from Troy, Mich. He bought
Morse in August 1984, convinced that it could be made profitable and that
conglomerates often do not understand how to run smaller, specialized companies,
particularly old manufacturing companies.

Even Mr. Lambert acknowledges, however, that the plant's problems may be more
intractable than he first believed.

Gulf & Western has said it was burdened by antiquated operations at Morse along
with fierce cost pressures in the cutting tool industry. Furthermore, it has
disputed the union's charges that it was looking for an excuse to abandon the
plant and the community after stripping Morse of its assets and taking the
profits made in better years. Because Gulf & Western has not been involved with
Morse since the sale, a management spokesman declined to discuss the plant in
detail.

Long-Time Careers Saved

For now, at least, 375 jobs have been saved, 299 of them positions held by
members of the electrical workers' union. Many of the employees are older
workers who, government officials say, would have trouble finding other work in
the New Bedford area.

And for now, at least, 43-year-old Danny Pacheco will keep running a machine
that attaches staples to drills, 20,000 staples a day, 85 million staples in the
17 years he has worked at Morse. His feelings are clear: ''The U.E. is the one
that kept this plant open.''

The company, the first cutting tool plant in the United States, was highly
profitable for decades. It was founded in 1864 by Stephen Morse, who invented
the twist drill, a tool with revolving cutting edges that made the straight
drill obsolete.

Dispute Over Concessions

The Morse family sold the plant in 1946, and in 1968 it was purchased by Gulf &
Western. The growth in manufacturing brought about by the Vietnam War helped the
balance sheet, but by the early 1980s profits had fallen. In early 1982, Gulf &
Western demanded extensive concessions: reductions in wages, benefits, shift
premiums, holidays and vacations, as well as major work rule changes.

The union refused, saying management policies, not workers' wages, were at
fault, and thus began the New Bedford campaign.

In May 1982 the electrical workers went on strike at Morse. The union organized
soup kitchens, engaged in mass picketing, and, armed with studies by two
consultants that supported its arguments, worked diligently to form alliances
with other unions and nonunion groups. New Bedford shops were papered with
posters by Fred Wright, a union cartoonist who has since died. The posters
depicting Morse as a cow being milked by Gulf & Western.

The strike was settled in August 1982, when many of the proposed concessions
were rolled back.

But the company called back only 200 of the 500 workers employed when the strike
began. Customers lost during the strike did not return.

Search for a New Owner

In August 1983, Gulf & Western announced plans to divest itself of much of its
manufacturing enterprises. The union again organized a strong community campaign
to insure that a satisfactory buyer was found for the plant, which covers two
square blocks in a working-class area not far from the historic downtown center
of New Bedford.

The union says a key factor was getting a promise from Brian Lawler, who was
then Mayor, that if necessary he would use the city's powers of eminent domain
to save the plant.

Within two months, Gulf and Western agreed to sell to Mr. Lambert, who paid $12
million for the company in a highly leveraged purchase. Mr. Lambert has sent
executives to Europe to study its cutting-tool technology and recently agreed to
give union representatives participation as equals in management production
meetings.

Forecast of Profitability

The company has attracted new customers. Mr. Lambert said his losses of $980,000
in 1985 were substantially lower than the $5.2 million lost in the two years
before he purchased the company, adding that much of the loss was due to
interest on debts incurred in burying the company. He foresees breaking even as
early as 1987.

Mr. Lambert said of the his relationship with the union: ''We haven't had a
nickel's worth of disagreement.''

Rod Poineau, president of Local 277 at Morse, said of Mr. Lambert: ''He's really
decent. We can't even get into an argument.''

And Mr. Carver, the union organizer, said Mr. Lambert practiced ''the mysterious
Oriental management methods'' in which he ''treats workers as human beings.''

This is an unusual love fest, considering that it involves leaders of a union
that has a half-century history of militancy, 45 years of it at the Morse plant.

''We don't rush to give concessions the minute there's some problem,'' said
James M. Kane, national president of the union.

What Union Gave and Received

Nevertheless, the Morse workers in May accepted recommendations of their union
for major contract changes.

The workers agreed to forgo a wage increase of 28 cents an hour, to give up two
holidays plus three weeks of vacation this year, and to limit incentive
earnings. In return, Massachusetts, whose help had been requested by the union
and the company, is close to a decision on providing $1.5 million in aid.

The plant's wage structure is unchanged, with workers earning $7.94 to $11 an
hour in direct wages. Salaried workers must match what the union calls its
''contributions,'' and Mr. Lambert agreed to take a cut of $35,000 in his
salary, which was supposed to be $150,000 a year.

''We got high hopes,'' said Fred Galarzk, 44, who works in heat treatment at the
plant, an intensely hot area cooled only by a breeze through a window looking
out over this whaling port.

Roger Michaud, 57, a machine operator, says, ''I'll see the day I retire from
here.''

Praise From the Governor

Gov. Michael S. Dukakis says the fight at Morse, ''a Massachusetts success
story,'' is important because it is necessary ''to fashion an economic policy
for the state in which our older industries are accorded as much attention as
our emerging, technology-based industries.''

Union leaders said the Morse fight would be useful for other unions and
community groups.

One lesson, they say, is that workers must learn to see the early signs that a
company is considering pulling out of a community: lack of maintenance and
modernization at a plant, high management turnover, cutbacks in advertising,
reduction in research and development and the opening of other plants in other
states or in foreign countries at reduced wages.

''It's important unions take the offense,'' said Mr. Carver, the union
organizer. ''And that's what we did in New Bedford.

He said the union knew it was winning when a company executive asked, in
frustration: ''What's the matter with you guys? Can't you run a normal strike?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of James F. Lambert (NYT/Jack Spratt)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK INSPECTORS CITE 41 FOOD OUTLETS FOR HEALTH OFFENSES

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 42, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 400 words


The New York City Department of Health last week released a list of 41 food
establishments cited for violating the health code.

In addition, it listed seven restaurants that were allowed to reopen after
correcting earlier violations. The establishments are these: Violations
MANHATTAN Adonis Restaurant, 250 Grant St. (Chrystie St.).

Andrew's Coffee Shop, 333 Park Ave. S. (25th

St.). Annapurna Indian Restaurant, 243 E. 14th St. Benjamin of Tudela, 307
Amsterdam Ave. (75th St.). Broadway Deli, 1623 Broadway (50th St.). Captain Nemo
Restaurant, 137 W. 72d St. Clarke's Pub, 499 10th Ave. (38th St.). Dal Barone,
131 Duane St. (Church St.). The Food Collection, 70 W. 38th St. 400 Deli, 400 W.
57th St. Ideal Restaurant, 2825 Broadway (109th St.). Johnny's Pub, 123 E. 47th
St. Knickerbocker Club, 2 E. 62d St. New Vietnam Restaurant, 11-13 Doyers St.
(Pell St.). New York Cooking Center, 27 W. 34th St. Park Avenue Cafe, 118 E.
31st St. Sun Ta Gung, 9 Elizabeth St. (Bayard St.). Szechuan Cuisine, 30 East
Broadway (Catherine St.). Tagerts, 932 2d Ave. (50th St.). Tropoya Restaurant &
Pizzeria, 61 Murray St. (West Broadway). BRONX Skyview Coffee Shop, 5701
Arlington Ave. (Independence Ave.). Toy Sun Restaurant, 1621 Unionport Rd. (E.
Tremont Ave.). BROOKLYN Circles Cafe, 163 Joralemon St. (Clinton St.). Gus'
Donut Shop, 7122 Bay Pkwy.

Kings Plaza Diner, 4124 Ave. U (Hendrickson

St.). Lai Da, 552 Atlantic Ave. (4th Ave.).

La Cabana Fried Chicken, 680 Knickerbocker

Ave. (Cornelia St.).

La Cabana N1, 159 Graham Ave. (Montrose

Ave.). La Kitchen, 548 New York Ave. (Lincoln Rd.). Meisner's, 1312 55th St.
(New Utrecht Ave.). One Way Deli, 26 Court St. (Remsen St.). Richelieu
Restaurant, 2035 86th St. Yun Sham, 2307 65th St. (W. 5th St.). QUEENS Bagel
And, 47-04 Bell Blvd. Dunkin Donuts, 38-06 Junction Blvd. Fiddlers Green, 14-17
150th St. Madison Coffee Shop, 54-33 Myrtle Ave. Mt. Olympus Bagels, 33-15 30th
Ave. Poong Nyun Restaurant, 40-03 73d St. Village Luncheonette, 147-41 Union
Tpk. Yogurt Park, 96-14 Queens Blvd.  Reopened MANHATTAN Piccolo Italian
Restaurant, 6 W. 37th St. 7A Cafe, 130 E. 7th St. Siulam Kung Restaurant, 18
Elizabeth St. (Bayard St.). BROOKLYN Blimpies, 522 Nostrand Ave. (Macon St.).
Food Den, 563 Nostrand Ave. (Herkimer Pl.).

Sergio's Coffee Shop, 234 Butler St. (Nevins

St.). QUEENS Romanian Deli, 112-20 Queens Blvd.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Mary Vermilye Weds Owen Wister Minott

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 50, Column 2; Society Desk

LENGTH: 154 words


Mary Stephenson Vermilye and Owen Wister Minott were married yesterday at the
Manchester, Mass., home of the bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs. Peter H. Vermilye.
The Rev. Cynthia Kittredge, an Episcopal priest, officiated.

Mrs. Minott, a graduate of Concord Academy and Princeton University, received a
Master of Social Work degree from the Simmons College of Social Work, as did her
husband. She is clinical director of the Walpole (Mass.) Multi-Service Center.
Her father, who retired as chief investment officer of Citicorp, is chairman of
the Endowment Management and Research Corporation in Boston.

Mr. Minott, a son of Mr. and Mrs. Joseph A. Minott of Chestnut Hill in
Philadelphia, graduated from the Chestnut Hill Academy and Harvard College. He
is a family therapist at the West-Ros-Park Mental Health Center in Boston. His
father, a retired foreign service officer, last served as a counsel in South
Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SIEGE MENTALITY;
SOUTH AFRICA TIGHTENS THE VISE ON BLACK DISSENT

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1259 words

DATELINE: JOHANNESBURG


WITH its newest and most Draconian emergency decree, South Africa seemed to turn
a corner last week, abandoning recent efforts to placate hostile outsiders and
the restive black majority at home. Instead, as the state-controlled radio put
it, the nation's white leaders were braced for ''a showdown with the forces of
anarchy and revolution'' - presumably believing that the excision from society
of black radical leaders and other activists would stem the angers they sought
to articulate.

In the mood of crisis and defiance that followed Thursday's decree, and amid
mounting pressures from Western supporters, President P. W. Botha declared:
''South Africans will not allow themselves to be humiliated in order to prevent
sanctions.'' ''We are not a nation of weaklings,'' he added. ''We do not desire
it and we do not seek it, but if we are forced to go it alone, then so be it.''
(Pressure for sanctions, page 2.) The national emergency decree gives the police
and army total powers of arrest without charge and search without warrant.
Curfews may be ordered. Areas may be sealed off. People who disobey orders of
the security forces could, according to the Government Gazette, be shot. The
courts may not intervene, and censorship of reporting on anti-Government
activism became virtually total. Journalists were forbidden to photograph or
make sound recordings of violent protests or the actions of the security forces.

Ostensibly, the emergency was proclaimed to avert violence tomorrow, on the 10th
anniversary of the Soweto uprisings in which 570 people were killed. But the
provisions went far beyond the anniversary. At least 1,000 activists, church
figures and labor leaders were seized, reviving images of security police, white
men in uniform armed with guns and whips, knocking at the door at midnight,
bundling activists into waiting vans and police cells.

Circled Wagons

The Government's patience seemed to have snapped, after 20 months of violence in
which more than 1,600 people have died, most of them black. The reflex was to
revert to the laager, the Afrikaners' symbolic defense of circled wagons.

Yet the decree raised far-reaching questions: Why resort to force, when force
had failed to calm the violence that took root in the black townships in
September 1984? How could Africa's wealthiest, most industrialized nation have
crossed its latest and most repressive Rubicon, inviting deepened black anger
and international ostracism, after a decade of relatively sweeping political
advances? The answers seemed to lie in a tangle of ingrained reflexes among the
Afrikaner elite, and in black dynamism that, having sensed a wavering of white
resolve, was seeking the power Western democracies accord to majorities.

Enumerating his Government's reforms last week, President Botha mentioned the
legalization of black labor unions, the inclusion of nonwhites (but not the
black majority) in the segregated Parliament, promises to restore black
citizenship and the end of the pass laws that limited black movement.

'Inadequate' Laws

But converse interpretations were also possible. Certainly, nonwhites were
brought into Parliament, but in a junior position and in a manner that further
offended the more than 23 million blacks who are still barred from voting for
the Government that controls their lives. The Botha reforms - and their
shortcomings -seemed to have produced their own ferment, challenging the overall
control that many Afrikaners see as the prerequisite for survival as a white
tribe on a black continent.

''I am of the opinion that the ordinary laws of the land at present on the
statute book are inadequate to enable the Government to ensure the security of
the public and to maintain public order,'' Mr. Botha said, as he widened the
already pervasive security legislation.

The new regulations, said Helen Suzman, a veteran white opposition legislator,
constituted the most serious breach of civil rights South Africa had seen.
''Practically all protest of any kind outside Parliament will be under threat,''
she said.

The Government gave precedence to other concerns. The scope of the new
regulations seemed far wider than the partial decree affecting only some areas
from July 1985 to March 1986. Since that decree was lifted, the authorities have
cast themselves as facing the double threat of black radicalism, which they
equate with Soviet-inspired insurrection, and a new and harsh reaction among
extreme right-wingers.

Some analysts say Mr. Botha has been stung by right-wing taunts that accuse him
of betraying Afrikaner interests and that, confronted with endemic violence, he
has given free rein to those who seek the forceful solutions that have been the
Afrikaners' hallmark. Last month, South African commandos, sabotaging an
international effort at racial reconciliation, raided three black-ruled African
countries. They were striking, South Africa contended, at the outlawed and
exiled African National Congress. Then, Louis LeGrange, the increasingly
powerful Minister of Law and Order, outlawed all mass commemorations of the
Soweto anniversary, further angering blacks.

The white rulers seemed to believe that the battle against their black critics
was moving into a critical phase, threatening the future ofthe Afrikaners, who
trace their history to Dutch settlers who arrived in the Cape in the 17th
century.

''We have seen clearly what happened in Angola, as well as in Vietnam,
Nicaragua, Kampuchea, Afghanistan and Iran,'' Mr. Botha said, seeking to cast
his battle in terms of East-West conflict. ''We will consequently not allow our
heritage of more than 300 years to be placed needlessly on the altar of chaos
and decay.''

TOWNSHIP TURMOIL

Security forces in armored vehicles are patrolling in Crossroads, the squatter
camp near Cape Town. More than 50 people have been killed there, including at
least 20 last week, as several thousand pro-Government black vigilantes fought
with radicals and set fire to shanties to force them to move out. Witnesses,
including clerics, said the police seemed to be supporting the vigilantes. Since
May 1, 30,000 have lost their homes. The devastation was ''a nightmare,'' Bishop
Desmond M. Tutu said, after his effort at mediation failed to end the violence.

ANNIVERSARY OF AN UPRISING

FOR South Africa's blacks, the 10th anniversary tomorrow of the rioting in
Soweto evokes memories of white police officers using automatic weapons, of
hundreds dying. For its outnumbered whites, the outbreak on June 16, 1976, was a
brush with rebellion, a setback for the Afrikaner culture.

It began with a school boycott, then a march by 10,000 students protesting
Government orders to use the Afrikaans language, despised as a symbol of
apartheid, in some of their classes. The police said they were provoked by
blacks who dragged officials from their cars and set upon them with knives.
South African journalists said the police started the violence, firing first
with tear gas, then with bullets - on marchers who taunted them.

More than 1,000 policemen were sent into the enormous segregated township that
supplies labor for Johannesburg. Damage from rioting and the burning of
Government buildings, stores and buses totaled $34.5 million at Soweto and
spread to other black townships as well. As tensions rose, people once regarded
as moderates brandished the clenched-fist salute of black power. Two weeks
later, the authorities withdrew the controversial Afrikaans order. By then, at
least 570 people had been killed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of security forces patroling Crossroads in armed vehicles
(Reuters); Photo of President P.W. Botha (Agence France-Presse); Map locating
Crossroads

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AGENT ORANGE'S VICTIMS FIND SYMPATHY AT THE STATEHOUSES

BYLINE: By IVER PETERSON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 795 words


AS questions about the long-term effects of exposure to Agent Orange among
veterans of the Vietnam War have continued to be raised, a number of states have
begun attempting to help provide some answers.

The Massachusetts Agent Orange Commission released last week the results of an
informal survey it conducted among Vietnam veterans in the state who believed
they had been exposed to the defoliant and one of its highly toxic elements,
dioxin. The veterans reported very high incidences of birth defects, nervous
disorders and other ailments.

Other states, one of them New Jersey, have undertaken more scientific research
into dioxin contamination among veterans. Many state administrators say they are
responding to foot-dragging in Washington. ''With Gramm-Rudman at work there is
a very popular anti-veteran bias in Washington,'' says Joseph Bangert, director
of the Massachusetts program. ''That may fly on the national level but it won't
fly back in the states where the veterans are.''

Moreover, spokesmen for national veterans organizations maintain that the
Government would like to derail any broad, definitive Agent Orange studies to
avoid a deluge of expensive disability claims.

Some 150,000 veterans have already filed claims with the Veterans
Administration. So far, the V.A. has steadfastly refused to accept such claims
as proof of service-connected disability.

Government officials insist that Washington has hardly been idle. However, a
broad national study on the effects of Agent Orange exposure authorized by
Congress in 1979 remains stalled.

The study, to be coordinated by the Federal Centers for Disease Control, has
bogged down because, for one thing, many Government researchers now suspect that
fewer people had been exposed to the herbicide than they originally thought and,
for another, there have been bureaucratic disagreements over responsibilities
and procedures. A Federal panel is expected to decide soon whether a way around
the impasse can be found.

Last year the manufacturers of Agent Orange tried to force Washington to
contribute to a $180 million fund they agreed to set up to benefit totally
disabled Vietnam veterans and the families of those who have died. But a Federal
judge ruled that the Government was not liable because no proof had been offered
of a causal connection between the herbicide and injuries to veterans and their
families. The manufactuers, which continued to deny that Agent Orange was
harmful, said they agreed to the settlement, among other reasons, to avoid years
of trials and appeals.

While the long-term effects of the chemical are disputed, this much is known:
the Air Force sprayed upwards of ten million gallons of Agent Orange over
Vietnam and Laos between 1967 and 1972 in what was said to have been an attempt
to kill the canopy of jungle leaves that concealed enemy troop movements on the
ground. Precautions were taken to keep G.I.'s out of sprayed areas for several
days, officials say, but military records show that some troops entered
contaminated areas as soon as a day later.

In addition, the defoliant was widely used by ground troops to clear base
perimeters.

Altogether, 15 states have launched their own Agent Orange monitoring and
advocacy efforts. For the most part, the states have concentrations of veterans
large enough to apply political pressure on local legislators. Some state
programs have been limited because of a shortage of money. Massachusetts and New
Jersey are ranked the most active.

Some authorities say the programs aren't as objective as they should be and in
fact may complicate veterans' attempts to obtain compensation. Wayne Wilson,
director of the New Jersey program, defends his effort. ''I think we have put
together a research team that absolutely rejects the notion that our advocacy
roles will somehow bias our research. Researchers are particularly sensitive to
that charge and take those extra steps to make sure that doesn't happen.''

Within a few weeks, he said, New Jersey will have completed a study of 150
Vietnam veterans who were exposed to the defoliant. The study involves comparing
the levels of dioxin, using fat biopsies and blood samples, with the dioxin
levels of other former service men and women stationed elsewhere. Once those
data have been assembled, the next step will be to compare medical records to
see if any correlation exists between dioxin levels and long-term health
disorders.

THE BODY AT RISK

Damage to organs some scientists attribute to dioxin, a toxic element of Agent
Orange Skin lesions, itchiness and rash Liver damage and cancer Difficulty in
breathing Eye discharge Stained gums Bleeding from stomach, intestines, bladder
and kidneys Heart attacks Increased strokes Damage to testes

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HAWK VS. PENTAGON

BYLINE: By Gregg Easterbrook; Gregg Easterbrook is a national correspondent for
The Atlantic. His first novel, ''This Magic Moment,'' will be published in the
fall.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 24, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1352 words


ON THE MEANING OF VICTORY Essays on Strategy. By Edward N. Luttwak. 315 pp. New
York: Simon & Schuster. $18.95.

EVEN the finest writer on public policy occasionally sets down words he would
dearly love to take back. Assembling a collection of articles, as Edward N.
Luttwak does in ''On the Meaning of Victory,'' may indicate the courage to have
one's declarations tested by time, or the vanity to think one's every utterance
worth preserving, or a little of both. Usually it's a little of both, and this
case is no exception.

The author, a military affairs analyst affiliated with Georgetown University's
Center for Strategic and International Studies, a Washington think tank, has
three distinctions. First, Mr. Luttwak is a self-described hawk quite popular in
conservative political circles, yet he argues tirelessly that the Pentagon is a
bureaucracy run wild: it is out of touch with actual conditions, its weapons are
unreliable, its tactics muddled by lowest-common-denominator committee
structures, its strategic vision absent altogether. Second, in spite of all
this, Mr. Luttwak also serves as a Pentagon consultant.

Third, he is the author of two of the best books of contemporary American public
letters - ''The Grand Strategy of the Soviet Union,'' an argument that we really
should be worried about the Russians; and ''The Pentagon and the Art of War,'' a
devastating indictment of the Department of Defense's inability to do anything
other than spend money.

Mr. Luttwak's continued presence as a Pentagon consultant - he also has close
ties to the Israeli defense establishment - stems partly from his advocacy of
ground forces as central to success in war. Air Force aircraft and Navy
carriers, with their zillion-dollar gizmos and global sweep, may attract the
attention of Congress and the news media; but armies hold territory and
determine the outcome of military contests. Since the end of World War II, the
United States Army has suffered an inferiority complex both in budget politics
and strategic argument. Mr. Luttwak is one of the Army's few intellectual
champions. He may, for example, criticize the service's overuse of technology in
its M-1 Abrams tank, a sort of land-based B-1 bomber; but the fact that he
accords as much significance to infantry and other grunt-level topics as he does
to geopolitics warms certain hearts within the Pentagon.

Running through ''On the Meaning of Victory'' is Mr. Luttwak's belief that the
United States should comport itself as a traditional great power: either put up
or shut up when it comes to use of force. This view is unpopular on the left for
obvious reasons, and curiously, often unpopular on the right. Many conservatives
pound the table about how it's time to get tough, but suddenly remember they are
late for an appointment when specific uses of force are proposed; after being
named Secretary of Defense, Caspar W. Weinberger lobbied against American
military involvement in Lebanon and elsewhere. This faction fears that military
blunders in the field will jeopardize the climate for more defense spending
increases. It is a position Mr. Luttwak has no use for, knowing as he does that
if the military is blundering now, giving it the means to commit more expensive
blunders in the future is no solution.

The author exhibits a near-fixation with exaggerated denunciations of Jimmy
Carter, Carter-bashing having been a prerequisite for conservative career
advancement in the late 1970's and early 1980's, when these articles were being
written. Mr. Carter pursued a ''strategy of weakness.'' O.K., so Jimmy Carter
was no Rambo. But he pushed through the cruise missile, the medium-range
Pershing II missile, the M-1 tank, the M-2 infantry-fighting vehicle, the F-18
fighter-bomber, the AH-64 attack helicopter and other major programs Ronald
Reagan merely inherited; he laid the keels for five of the current seven
Trident-class submarines; and asked Congress for 200 MX missiles, where
President Reagan settled for 50.

It is a popular refrain among neoconservative and New Right pundits that during
the Ford and Carter years 10 countries were swallowed by Communism (South
Vietnam, Cambodia, Laos, Ethiopia, Nicaragua, South Yemen, Mozambique, Angola,
Grenada and Afghanistan), whereas since President Reagan assumed office no
country has gone over and one - Grenada - has come back. Yet since this setback
for Soviet interests occurred during a period when Russia has become the world's
greatest military power -as Mr. Reagan himself has said - it scrambles all
claims to a direct relationship between military power and political success.

Thus one would expect a book titled ''On the Meaning of Victory'' to tell
readers what victory ''means'' in a decade of Soviet military superiority. But
it does not. The ostensible subject of the book is rarely referred to in the
text. In one article Mr. Luttwak does reject the view, fashionable in some
academic circles, that military might has diminishing returns in the modern
world. I tend to think he's right. Yet our superior power during the 1960's did
not deter the Russians from invading Czechoslovakia. And if the Russians really
are strongest now, it has not helped them market Marxism or prevail in
Afghanistan, a country where the obstacles to victory would seem less
overwhelming than they were for us in Vietnam. (Afghanistan is adjacent to the
Soviet Union, rather than half a world away; the Kremlin has no press corps or
Congress to contend with.) SOME articles stand the test of time very well. One
calls for a military reform movement several years before this phrase was
common. Another makes a persuasive case that management-school theory and
systems analysis has corrupted United States military thinking. In addition, the
firepower and technical features of a weapon, Mr. Luttwak says, could be
measured for display on charts and graphs; subjective issues like strategy,
tactics, ethics and leadership defy computerization. Systems analysis leads to
weapons such as the F-15 interceptor aircraft, which are ''efficient'' when
viewed individually - any one F-15 is better than any one Soviet fighter - but
flawed operationally. F-15's are growing so expensive that one of them may end
up matched against five Soviet fighters and lose, though two or three reasonably
priced American fighters, with features slightly below the level of wonder
weapon, might win.

In this regard, it is refreshing to note a military story with a happy ending.
The fiscal 1987 Air Force budget includes a major shift from the present version
of the F-16 fighter to a lower-tech, lower-cost version that can be acquired in
greater numbers. This ranks among the few times in the modern era that the
Pentagon has moved to reduce the complexity of a major system. It is just the
type of progress military reformers such as Edward N. Luttwak have been
advocating, and deserve great credit for helping bring about. SHOULDN'T WEST
POINT TEACH WAR? It is precisely in our technological-managerial age that the
technological-managerial education given to our young officers has become less
and less useful, if not actually counterproductive. Why should four years of
electrical engineering or economics prepare a young man to lead others in
combat? Why not teach war and tactics instead? . . . In due course, those who
remain in the military career can receive all the education they need, but only
after they have done their junior duty in the realm of combat.

Once upon a time, when this nation was young and primitive, it made eminent
sense to use West Point in order to provide skills that civil society so greatly
lacked. And in a nation of pioneer farmers, urban craftsmen, and frontiersmen,
it was right to believe that the status of the leader could best be assured by
teaching him social graces, bourgeois manners, and book knowledge. But in our
suburban society, where half the population receives some kind of higher
education, it is the skills and aptitudes of war that are missing and it is
those that the academies should provide. - From ''On the Meaning of Victory.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Edward N. Luttwak (Dalya Luttwak)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM, EAST AND WEST

BYLINE: By Linsey Abram; Linsey Abrams's most recent novel is ''Double Vision.''
She teaches at Sarah Lawrence College.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 806 words


SHALLOW GRAVES Two Women and Vietnam. By Wendy Wilder Larsen and Tran Thi Nga.
291 pp. New York: Random House. $16.95.

WENDY WILDER LARSEN, an American poet, spent 1970-71 with her husband, a
journalist, in Saigon, South Vietnam, where she met Tran Thi Nga, the bookkeeper
in her husband's office. ''Shallow Graves,'' begun after the two women were
reunited in the United States in 1975, tells Wendy Larsen's own story of her
year as a teacher of English literature, as well as Tran Thi Nga's life story,
beginning with her birth in China in 1927 and ending with her present life in
Cos Cob, Conn., where she and her family maintain an uneasy relationship with
American culture. The book was written in English as a verse novel, or truyen, a
Vietnamese form, and though at first the enterprise seems a curious amalgam of
choices, this reader was soon won over. Mrs. Nga's story reads like a
Shakespeare play; the people in it are reflected to us in both everyday and
tragic dimensions, as they adapt - or fail to - to the larger demands of history
and change.

The least successful part of the book is Wendy Larsen's own story. Ironies are
pointed up that now, in 1986, function only as sad and obvious truths: that by
1970 we had turned Saigon into a little American colony, that the Thieu regime
was hopelessly corrupt and that many Americans in Vietnam ignored their
country's complicity in that corruption. Further, such details as that Ba Larsen
(as Wendy Larsen was called) was wearing ''a light-blue Lilly Pulitzer dress''
and references to ''gin-and-tonics that sweated like soldiers'' can only serve
to make the reader uneasy about the author's point of view. In sections of less
subjective reporting, Wendy Larsen is at her best. She includes such telling
cultural indicators as this ''Bar-Girl's Song to a GI'': I love you beaucoup.
You love me titi. You give me baby. I give you V.D. (''Titi'' is pidgin for
''petit.'') We are indebted to Wendy Larsen for bringing to us, and for her part
in creating, the story that follows her own. Tran Thi Nga's travels over 50
years are both literal and figurative - from China, where she was born the
daughter of a mandarin loyal to the Vietnamese emperor Bao Dai, back to the
family's ancestral home in North Vietnam, then to China again as the wife of one
of Chiang Kai-shek's generals. After Mao's victory, home was again Hanoi until
the 1954 Geneva agreement, which divided the country at the 17th parallel and
made people choose between living in the North or the South. Only a part of her
family chose to move to Saigon as Mrs. Nga did. There she made her home as a
working woman - against the wishes of her family - until leaving for the United
States just days before the last South Vietnamese Government fell.

Like some re-enactment of ''Beauty and the Beast,'' Mrs. Nga's marriage to the
Chinese general is just one episode from a remarkable life. When the family
protests that she is too young, the general kidnaps her father, returning him
only after she has accepted his proposal. To stall, the family then demands an
immense dowry and gowns for the bride that it should take weeks to make, all to
no avail: Chinese soldiers went with pistols into the homes of the seamstresses
forcing them to sew the dresses. They were ready by evening. But it would be a
mistake to suggest that the value of ''Shallow Graves'' lies only in the wonder
with which we regard this personal odyssey. More important is the history of one
Vietnamese family, traced for 50 years, that helps illuminate the larger history
of a country. Unlike Wendy Larsen's, Mrs. Nga's story is told without irony - a
rhetorical device that is effective only when describing a world thought to have
rules. Her autobiography is a testament to the fact that change in human lives
can be relentless and beyond commentary: One day when I opened the gate for
Father to go out, there were corpses collapsed against the wall. I fainted.
Father offered the soldiers money to remove the corpses. Sometimes they took
bodies that were still alive. People would call from the carts, ''Don't take me.
Don't take me. I'm not dead yet.'' Much of the literature about Vietnam that has
preceded this book has been about the war itself, whose atrocities seemed, quite
rightly, to dwarf all other realities. Perhaps only now, 13 years after the last
United States troops left Vietnam, are we able to see part of the larger human
landscape that this war destroyed. Though we might wish to forget our
involvement in Vietnam, these women's stories remind us of the depth of our
entanglement with the culture of a small nation halfway around the world. That
both authors are now Americans suggests that we must claim ''Shallow Graves'' in
two ways: both as a story about Vietnam and as a part of the history of our own
country.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Tran Thi Nga and Wendy Wilder Larsen (Joel Sternfeld)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DIVIDING UP THE LOSSES

BYLINE: By Alan Brinkley; Alan Brinkley teaches American history at Harvard
University.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 23, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1074 words


THE DREAM OF DELIVERANCE IN AMERICAN POLITICS By Mona Harrington. 308 pp. New
York: Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95. ''THE American promise is in trouble,'' Mona
Harrington warns in this ambitious and intriguing book. We face social and
economic problems of great danger and staggering complexity; yet we deal with
those problems by relying on simplistic and inadequate assumptions. Above all,
we are crippled by our attachment to a longstanding and, in Miss Harrington's
view, dangerous myth: the belief ''that human relations are, by their nature,
harmonious, that serious conflict in human societies is unnatural and
unnecessary,'' and that a series of relatively simple adjustments can establish
a ''beneficent natural order'' in which all discord will be peacefully resolved
''without loss to any legitimate interest.''

Although virtually all Americans believe in the myth, different groups embrace
very different ideas about how to achieve the ''deliverance from evil'' it
promises. Miss Harrington, a lawyer and political scientist who lives in
Cambridge, Mass., identifies three conflicting philosophies, each of which
reflects the interests of a distinct economic constituency. Agrarians and others
on the fringes of the modern industrial economy take a ''localist'' approach to
public issues, seeking to return authority to communities and individuals and to
restrain large bureaucracies and other forces they cannot control. Wage earners
embrace a ''majoritarian'' view of politics and insist that ''the proper locus
of authority is the great majority of the country's people, counted not locally
but nationwide.'' And business interests, ''managers of capital,'' take a
''functionalist'' view of public life; they generally distrust both ''localist''
and ''majoritarian'' solutions and believe that harmony can be achieved by
locating authority in the hands of experts and scientifically designed
institutions.

Through most of the 20th century, Miss Harrington argues, these three great
interests have operated as reasonably coherent and consistent political forces.
The competition among them - as each has attempted to impose its own vision of
deliverance on its rivals - has shaped (and crippled) both domestic and foreign
policy.

As evidence, Miss Harrington points to a series of major domestic and
international developments - ranging from Woodrow Wilson's New Freedom to Ronald
Reagan's so-called revolution - and measures each of them against the
ideological stances she has identified. Unsurprisingly, she finds that most of
the people and events she describes fall neatly into one or the other of her
categories. Woodrow Wilson, Franklin Roosevelt and Lyndon Johnson are
majoritarians. Henry Cabot Lodge, John Foster Dulles and Henry Kissinger are
functionalists. William Borah, Barry Goldwater, George Wallace and Ronald Reagan
are localists. The Democratic reform crusades of the Progressive era, the 1930's
and the 1960's were ''majoritarian'' ventures. The foreign policy of the early
cold war was the creation largely of ''functionalists.'' The Vietnam War was a
''majoritarian'' crusade, undertaken in uneasy alliance with functionalists. The
''Reagan revolution'' is a localist reaction against the supposed excesses of
both the majoritarian and functionalist pasts.

In form, at least, ''The Dream of Deliverance in American Politics'' is a
largely historical work; and it is in some senses an impressive effort. One of
the purposes of writing history is to try to find patterns in the complexities
of the past, and Miss Harrington has made an intelligent attempt to categorize
and explain the bewildering vagaries of 20th-century public policy. Only rarely,
however, does her analytical formula offer a satisfactory explanation for the
actual events it attempts to explain. No one familiar with the ideological
complexity (if not incoherence) of the New Deal, for example, or with the
anguished and confused process by which the United States first made and then
abandoned its commitment in Vietnam, or with almost any other major policy
initiative of this century will be able to accept her simple, straightforward
analysis of the motives of decision makers.

Miss Harrington's categories do suggest some of the powerful symbolic languages
from which individuals draw when they attempt to explain the world to themselves
and to others. But real people in real situations seldom think in neatly
structured ''localist,'' ''functionalist'' or ''majoritarian'' terms. They flail
about. They draw from one set of ideas, then from another, then from several
different and even irreconcilable ideologies at once. More often than not, they
produce decisions that have no single, identifiable philosophical rationale.
MISS HARRINGTON does not, in fact, seem very interested in serious historical
analysis. Her research is largely confined to obvious published sources, and she
offers no information about the events she describes that will not already be
familiar to anyone with even passing knowledge of them. And that suggests that
her real purpose here is not, in the end, historical. It is prescriptive. She is
pleading for an approach to the public world that not long ago had considerable
support but that now has fallen into some disrepute: the recognition of limits
and complexity. We must, Miss Harrington insists, abandon our unrealistic
assumption that all problems are soluble, that all conflicts are artificial,
that unlimited growth and abundance will provide for all needs without
sacrifice. We must shed our myths, our ''dream of deliverance,'' and face up to
a complex world of limited resources, intractable problems and perpetual
conflicts among contending interests whose differences cannot be reconciled
without compromise and sacrifice. ''We have always asked how we can achieve a
condition of mutual gain,'' she writes. ''We must now begin to ask how we can
decently allocate the pain of unavoidable loss.''

Whatever the limitations of this book as history, then, it has considerable
power as exhortation. It offers a provocative and at times eloquent appeal for a
new approach to politics - an approach that Americans have always resisted, one
that we currently seem to be repudiating with particular fervor. But without
such a new approach, Miss Harrington insists, our predicaments will grow
steadily worse; and we will, in the end, lose not only our chance to prevail but
our ability to survive.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Mona Harrington (Eliza Gagnon)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LOVE IN HEAVY ARMOR

BYLINE: By Mary Gordon; Mary Gordon's latest novel is ''Men and Angels.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1760 words


HALF THE WAY HOME A Memoir of Father and Son. By Adam Hochschild. 198 pp. New
York: Viking. $15.95.

The only child of older parents leads an unreal life. From the start he is
worshiped like the Christ Child; he has made his parents, by his very birth,
prodigious. The mother stands out among her equals, a living river of fecundity
that mocks the curse of age. The father can be seen by his coevals as the man
they fear they can no longer be. The child is long awaited, or a windfall for
which his parents never dared to hope. He is the subject of enormous
expectations and fears. He looks with awe at the parents of his friends: less
kind perhaps, less patient, certainly less tired. A father coaching Little
League, a mother running down a hill become for him the emblems of a glamorous
and easy joy. He sees how his friends need not fear quite as he does for their
parents; mortality does not brush quite so near these others, nor the glaring
eye of fate so certainly approach. The pressures exhaust him, and yet only with
his parents is he truly happy; try as he may he is not himself among the
commoners. Yet he envies his friends their easy lot, as Isaac must have envied
the sons of others, not led up the mountain, not the living symbols of their
fathers' worth before the Lord.

All these burdens were Adam Hochschild's, and more. He was the child of a frail
and loving mother who bore him at the age of 42 and of a father, 50 when Adam
was born in 1942, who controlled Amax Inc., one of the largest mining companies
in the world. But Mr. Hochschild did not follow his father into the corporation.
Rather, he became a reporter for The San Francisco Chronicle and worked for
Ramparts magazine; in 1974 he co-founded the left-wing magazine Mother Jones.
''Half the Way Home'' is largely the story of Mr. Hochschild's relationship with
his father, and if the reader choked with anxiety about mortgage payments and
doctor bills thinks this book has nothing to tell him or her, he or she is
wrong. For Mr. Hochschild illuminates, with a rare tact, the situations of
fathers and sons, and he avoids the traps of sentimentality and rancor both.

Harold Hochschild, Adam's father, was a German Jew whose father arrived in New
York in 1886 and made a fortune in metals. The Hochschilds did not mix with
their Jewish neighbors, and in marrying Adam's mother, with her perfect WASP
connections, Harold realized his dream of being included in the social register.
He married Mary Marquand when he was 48 and she was 40; their son speculates on
the unlikeliness of their marriage, which was nevertheless extremely happy. Mrs.
Hochschild sounds like a devoted and imaginative mother. But she could not
protect her son from his father; what is more, she didn't even try. She papered
over Adam's terror of Harold with a genial repression, and in doing so betrayed
her son. For he had to believe the justice of his father's criticisms if the
mother who adored him went along with them.

Harold Hochschild tormented his son from the best of motives. He believed that
the world was a difficult place and that his son was born to run it. Everything
became a form of training; nothing was left to chance. The excursions that were
meant to constitute father-and-son outings are chilling to read about. All those
places that Harold rightly surmised ought to be pleasant - the Staten Island
Ferry, the New York piers - were prisons for the paralyzed son, who couldn't
wait to get home. Then there were the required thanks, upon which Harold placed
an inordinately high premium. ''I think he also had the unspoken hope that on
one of these trips I would say 'I'm glad we did this' or 'I love you.' I seldom
gave him that satisfaction; my taciturn resistance was the one weapon I had
against him. When I sometimes slipped in my stubbornness, I knew it registered,
for I would hear from my mother, always the eager intermediary, 'Father was so
pleased yesterday when you put your arm around him.' ''

The reader observes in horror this frozen dance of father and son - and mother
on the sidelines: the rapt, encouraging observer. Harold seems to be a man for
whom spontaneity was impossible. Watch him at his exercise: ''At 6:15 each
evening, Father swam across the lake and back. He swam by a never-changing
routine, stepping into the water instead of diving, shifting from breaststroke
to sidestroke to backstroke to crawl at regular intervals. As a safety
precaution, someone followed in an electric-powered boat, cruising noiselessly
some yards behind him.''

Mr. Hochschild beautifully captures the magic of a mountain lake at dusk, and
the poignant sorrow of father and son: ''It was the time of day when the lake
was at its loveliest, its surface a calm, dark mirror for the mountains. Sounds
echoed across it: the splash of his hands in the water, a murmur of voices and
laughter on shore; the wind had quieted; all was at peace. Father was in the
water, so I could not talk to him, but I could still be close to him, fulfilling
some obligation and perhaps, after all, some wish.''

Some of the strongest moments in the book occur when Mr. Hochschild is evoking
Eagle Nest, the family estate in the Adirondacks. The natural pleasures of the
setting were enhanced by its becoming, in the summers, a little Russia. Harold's
sister, Gertrude, surprised the family by marrying - also late in life - Boris
Vasilievich Sergievsky, a White Russian pilot-adventurer whom Harold suspected
always, but who brought the lame and soulful Gertrude joy. And brought joy and
life to Eagle Nest as well, for he contrasted with the Prussian-hearted Harold
in a way that could only do a boy's heart good. Unfortunately, Mr. Hochschild
does not succeed in making Boris real to us: his many lives, his dancing,
singing, womanizing become the exploits of a character, whereas the grim,
methodical round that is Harold's life rings out in somber truth.

Eagle Nest was lovely, but for the Hochschilds even vacations were no vacation.
Harold let no opportunity go unused if it could be a corrective for his son's
behavior. He invented an odd ritual called Getting the Beer, in which Adam had
to bring in bottled beer on a tray and serve the guests - a gesture symbolic at
best in a house where servants numbered in the double digits. It all smacks of
those Renaissance manuals for the training of princes: you are to rule the
world; to be served, you must know how to serve. Adam's worst sin in his
father's eyes was talking too much at table; this could cause him to be summoned
to his father's study in the morning and told, in perfectly modulated tones,
that he had bored the guests. Only after his father's death did Mr. Hochschild
come to understand that much of Harold's behavior stemmed from his discomfort
with his Jewishness. In going over his father's papers, the author found a memo,
written in 1940, speculating on the possibilities of a great pogrom in America,
and suggesting that if this were to happen, the shortcomings of Jews themselves
would be at fault:

''He talks about Jews who are too 'loud,' about low ethical standards in
Jewish-dominated trades. He declares: 'It is an unhappy fact, acknowledged by
members of what may be termed the Jewish intelligentsia to each other but not to
Gentiles, that a large proportion of the Jews in America are not properly
educated to American business and social standards. . . . Jews should lose no
opportunity to convert the better-bred and better-educated Gentile minority to a
friendlier attitude. . . . If Jews can win the respect or at least the tolerance
of such Gentiles, the spread of active anti-Semitism will be impeded.' '' MR.
HOCHSCHILD is saddened by his father's racial self-hatred rather than simply
censorious about it. And this tone, of sadness for the obstacles his father
threw up for himself, is the triumph of the book. It would have been easier for
Mr. Hochschild to write a memoir whose message was, ''Isn't it wonderful that I,
son of a multimillionaire, with the world at my feet, saw the light, and instead
of being Secretary of State have founded Mother Jones.'' But he is exceedingly
modest and evenhanded about his political education, which began when, as a
teen-ager, he visited South Africa and observed the results of his father's
company's enterprises.

The enterprises that paid for Eagle Nest and first-class hotels and restaurants
condemned the black people he saw to lives of inhuman labor. It would indeed
have been easy to present himself as the hero of the piece and his father as the
villain, but he does not. He grants his father all the complications of his
complicated nature: Harold was an ecologist, responsible for some of the most
effective environmental legislation in New York State. He was an early opponent
of the Vietnam War and a lifelong supporter of Communist China. At the end of
his life, through his love for his grandchildren, he was able to relax enough so
that his son could approach him. But not too close. ''Half the Way Home'' does
not end with a dramatic reconciliation scene in which father and son understand
all, but with a quiet and extremely moving description of a son's vigil at his
father's deathbed. Adam puts his head on his father's chest to determine if he
is still breathing, and tells the nurse he hears a heartbeat. But no, she tells
him, it is not his father's beating heart he hears, it is his own.

'FATHER WAS ALWAYS REASONABLE'

''Sit down, Adam. I'll be with you in a moment.''

A shuffle of papers; a signature on a document; at last Father put the work on
his desk aside, and leaned back in his chair.

''I've been meaning to talk to you, Adam, about something that happened
yesterday. I thought it was quite rude when you were talking so much at the
table last night. Couldn't you see it was preventing people from having their
own conversation?''

It didn't last long. No spanking. No beating. No raised voice. Maybe just two or
three minutes of talk. Father's words were always carefully chosen, balanced,
never casual, as if each phrase had been inspected and been found irrefutable
before he permitted it to exit his lips.

I couldn't bring myself to look at him. I craved for an earthquake to bring the
session to an end. What made it so much worse was that Father was always, it
seemed, fully reasonable. He spoke in a voice which carried in it the full
weight of his authority, of his wide reputation for morality, a voice whose very
quietness contained the expectation of unquestioning obedience.- From ''Half the
Way Home.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Harold Hochschild with son, Adam, 1948

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 16, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam Urges the U.S. To Cooperate in Search

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 114 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 15


Vietnam said today that the remains of 10 Americans could probably be found, and
urged the United States to be ''really cooperative'' so that the fate of nearly
1,800 Americans listed as missing in Vietnam could be resolved.

The Vietnam News Agency said Hanoi had provided preliminary information on 21
missing Americans in a meeting between American and Vietnamese representatives
there last week.

The agency said the remains in 10 of the cases probably could be found, but no
confirmation existed in the other 11 cases.

The unconfirmed cases could mean that oral reports, possibly from villagers,
about missing Americans in certain areas proved unfounded after investigation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 16, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

VERDICT MIGHT NOT LIFT VEIL FROM BLOODY DAY IN RADICAL ERA

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1251 words

DATELINE: SAN RAFAEL, Calif., June 15


Final arguments are to begin Monday in the murder trial of Stephen M. Bingham, a
Connecticut-born son of privilege and wealth who is accused of touching off a
bloody spasm of violence at San Quentin Prison 15 years ago.

As the trial nears an end, many people who have followed the case, a celebrated
cause among radical activists of the 1960's, say chances appear to be growing
slim that it will provide conclusive answers as to what happened at San Quentin
on Aug. 21, 1971, when the black revolutionary leader George Jackson, two other
inmates and three guards died.

In 1971 Mr. Bingham was a lawyer active in a variety of radical causes in the
San Francisco area, including efforts to improve conditions for black prisoners.
He is accused of smuggling an automatic pistol, two clips of ammunition and a
wig into the prison and giving them to Mr. Jackson, a leader of the Black
Panther Party whose book about prison life, ''Soledad Brother,'' had made him a
celebrity.

After Mr. Bingham left the meeting, ostensibly held to discuss legal matters,
guards discovered the gun and ammunition hidden beneath the wig on Mr. Jackson's
head and he used the weapon in an unsuccessful escape attempt, the prosecution
asserts. Mr. Jackson and the five others were killed in the ensuing gun battle.


A Graduate of Yale

Mr. Bingham, a Yale graduate and member of a prominent Connecticut family who is
now 44 years old, disappeared after the incident and lived as a fugitive in this
country and abroad for 13 years until surrendering to the authorities in 1984.

His accounts of life on the run, of moving from country to country in what he
called a ''nightmare'' of isolation from his family and friends, constantly in
fear of capture, produced some of the most compelling testimony at the trial.

In interviews on the eve of the closing arguments, the prosecutor and the leader
of Mr. Bingham's defense team each expressed confidence that he would prevail
when jurors begin deliberations, probably June 23.

The prosecutor, Assistant District Attorney Terry Boren, said: ''I think the
evidence went in fairly well, especially given the fact it's a 15-year-old case.
I think the evidence has endured and it warrants a conviction.''

But M. Gerald Schwartzbach, the leading defense lawyer, said: ''I think the case
they presented proved Steve is innocent and fortified our contention that
something was amiss in law enforcement regarding George Jackson.''

Murder Plot Is Alleged

This was a reference to Mr. Bingham's contention that the violence at San
Quentin was the result of a plot by somone in law enforcement to murder Mr.
Jackson, a theory that Mr. Boren ridicules.

Virtually every day since the trial began April 7, Mr. Bingham has had the
support in the courtroom of his father, Alfred, a retired Connecticut judge, and
dozens of other people, many of whom were active with the former fugitive in
radical causes in the 1960's and whose hair, like Mr. Bingham's, is beginning to
turn gray.

In conversations with reporters, Mr. Bingham and many of his supporters have
spoken of the trial in terms that suggested that it was not he alone who was on
trial, but the rightness of their battles in the 60's on behalf of what they
regarded as social reform, and that to a great extent his acquittal would
vindicate their commitment.

Tale of a Fugitive

In testimony, Mr. Bingham denied giving the gun to Mr. Jackson and tried to
strengthen his claim of innocence by saying that after leaving San Quentin he
had not fled, but had had a leisurely lunch and otherwise went about his normal
business.

He said he fled in the evening after hearing news reports that the police had
conclusive evidence that he had smuggled a weapon into the prison.

''I knew I was innocent,'' he asserted. ''I knew they had no evidence,
conclusive or otherwise. I knew they were lying.'' He said he decided to leave
because he thought guards had assassinated the black leader and might try to
kill him, too.

After hiding with friends in San Jose, about 60 miles south of here, Mr. Bingham
said he took a bus to Los Angeles to see a friend who had helped get draft
resisters to Canada in the Vietnam War era.

From Los Angeles, he said, he went to Las Vegas, Nev., where another friend used
chemicals to straighten his curly hair and gave him almost $3,000, a birth
certificate, a Social Security card and other identification papers in the name
of an apparently deceased Utah man, Robert Dale Boarts, a name he would use for
the next 13 years.

Mr. Bingham said he next flew to Philadelphia, where a friend helped him get a
passport within 24 hours based on a fraudulent application in which he said a
family emergency required him to leave the country immediately. From there he
said he flew to Europe, traveling in Czechoslovakia, Austria, Yugoslavia, Italy
and other countries before settling in Paris, where he said he studied
documentary film-making, worked at odd jobs and met a woman whom he later
married.

In 1977, 1978, and 1982, he said, he traveled secretly to the United States,
each time going to Canada first from Europe. For about six months before his
surrender, he said, he lived in San Jose, working as a house painter.

''I was able to live another life,'' Mr. Bingham said of his life on the run,
but he said he was always fearful of being identified. ''It took years to
overcome the fear,'' he said.

No Direct Tie to Gun

No evidence was introduced at trial tying Mr. Bingham directly to the gun used
in the escape attempt, nor was there any substantive evidence that showed how
Mr. Jackson might have got the gun if Mr. Bingham did not give it to him.

Neither the prosecution nor the defense has subpoened a witness who both sides
acknowledge could provide pivotal testimony. Thus, the case will apparently go
to jurors without potentially important evidence from this woman, Vanita
Anderson, then a Black Panther.

The prosecutor argues that Mr. Bingham brought the gun, wig and ammunition into
San Quentin concealed inside a tape recorder and briefcase that had been given
to him by Miss Anderson, who now works as an instructor at a Los Angeles junior
college and refuses to talk about the case to reporters.

Question of Immunity

Mr. Boren asserts that Miss Anderson, who had been refused access to the prison
that day, was the original source of the gun, bullets and wig he contends that
Mr. Bingham gave to Mr. Jackson.

The prosecutor, noting he has no evidence that Miss Anderson knew that there was
contraband in the tape recorder and briefcase, said it would be useless to call
her as a witness because she would invoke her right not to testify because of
possible self-incrimination. She did this, he said, when the case was originally
investigated in 1972.

Mr. Schwartzbach argues that Miss Anderson could help establish Mr. Bingham's
innocence by testifying that she did not give him the gun, wig and bullets. But
he says it would be useless for him to subpoena her as a witness. ''The reality
is, anybody in a position like Vanita Anderson would be insane to testify
without a grant of immunity, and we cannot offer her that,'' the defense lawyer
said.

Regardless of the merits of the lawyers' views, many of the people who have
attended the trial say that Miss Anderson's absence as a witness appears to have
weakened the prosecution's case and added to the mystery.

''This case,'' Mr. Schwartzbach said, ''is a case of questions rather than
answers.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Stephen M. Bingham (UPI)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 16, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Still Caught in the Yellow Rain

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 542 words


Admitting error is hard for everyone, and apparently close to impossible for
governments led out on a limb by flawed intelligence analysis. Such is the case
with ''yellow rain,'' the alleged biological warfare agent the Reagan
Administration repeatedly accused the Soviet Union of supplying for use in
Southeast Asia.

Yellow rain has turned out to be rather more mundane stuff than the deadly
Soviet poison it was alleged to contain. It is, as the Administration will burst
before admitting, the excrement of jungle bees. The sticky spots retrieved from
supposed attack sites in Laos and Cambodia are yellow because they are full of
digested pollen grains. They rain down from an invisible source because the bees
often fly too high to be seen.

Hmong refugees ascribe certain of their many illnesses to yellow rain, a folk
tale eagerly swallowed by credulous Western experts seeking evidence of chemical
attacks. The State Department accused the Russians of supplying Vietnam with
yellow-rain weapons in 1981 after a laboratory detected minute amounts of
trichothecenes - fungus-made toxins - in yellow-rain samples. Allies were
encouraged to test the samples or gather their own, and their mumbled assents
were eagerly welcomed in Washington as corroboration - not least because the
U.S. Army's chemical lab had failed to detect toxin in its 80 samples.

Though performed several years ago, the results of these allied analyses emerged
only last month, making plain why they produced such reluctant comment. The
British Ministry of Defense said its tests of 1983 had failed to detect
trichothecenes in ''alleged chemical warfare'' samples supplied by American
authorities. Though the Ministry says it believes for other reasons that
chemical attacks ''probably did take place in Southeast Asia,'' its studies
''neither support nor contradict'' the thesis that yellow rain is bee feces.

Even less supportive was the word from Canada's Department of External Affairs
that it had detected trichothecenes. Trace amounts were measured in the
bloodstreams of 5 of 280 Thais examined - but the subjects were chosen from the
general population, not presumed victims of attacks. The five infected persons
almost certainly acquired the toxins by eating fungus-tainted food. And that
discredits the State Department's contention that fungus toxins in its samples
of yellow rain had to be man-made because such toxins do not occur naturally in
Southeast Asia.

Yet instead of conceding a goof, the White House struggles to save face. ''Our
conclusion that chemical weapons use has occurred in Southeast Asia is based on
evidence collected several years prior to 1984,'' when the Canadian samples were
gathered, says spokesman Edward Djerejian. But nature doesn't work that way. If
trichothecene-making funguses were naturally present in Asia in 1984, they were
present also before the Reagan Administration took office.

The Administration can admit that yellow rain is bee excrement, and that it has
made an intelligence blunder, or it can doggedly march on, unsupported by its
own Army or allies, with the thesis that yellow rain is an agent of biological
warfare. It has so far found retreat too preposterous to contemplate. But its
posture is more so.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 16, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THE EUROPE THAT KURT WALDHEIM GREW UP IN;
To Condemn Is Human

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 327 words


To the Editor:

Menachem Z. Rosensaft is certainly not alone in believing that ''all those who
cheered Adolf Hitler on and allowed his government to function were also
guilty.''

It is a wide circle of guilt that stretches from Kurt Waldheim to the corpses at
Bitburg to an entire generation of a nation. What would have been an appropriate
course of action to exonerate these people in our eyes? They could have had the
moral vision to commit what in their time and place would have been considered
treason. We can be thankful that innocence is less hard for us to come by.

On the other hand, Washington and Jefferson were slaveowners, and slavery is
surely a great evil. To bring a tardy justice and make sure it never happens
again, let us vilify, not glorify them in our history books.

Let us not forget our planes that bombed civilians in Cambodia and Vietnam.
Those of us who agree that this was wrong must also come to the conclusion that
not only the soldiers on the planes, but also all our troops in Vietnam were
murderers. Add to that all our politicians and officials, and indeed any
civilian who didn't raise his or her voice against the slaughter. Or does
collective guilt work for others, but not for us?

Of course, our soldiers are blameless, and we are in no position to pass moral
judgments on Presidents who lived 200 years ago. An apology for Nazism is not
intended here either. Forgiving has never implied condoning, as surely as
blaming has never implied redemption in either the accuser or the accused.

The point is that when we indict an entire generation of a nation we ignore the
mystical tragedy of war that in human history has led millions astray. Despite
the still-fresh sores of our losses, we must not teach our children to see evil
in men's natures, for we are all made of the same fabric. If we teach them thus,
like a self-fulfilling prophecy, the evil will arise in their own hearts.WILLIAM
GADEA Brooklyn, June 6, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 16, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MAP SOURCE: 38 degrees 53' NORTH, 77 degrees WEST

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 927 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 12


Politicians and bureaucrats here often seem to lose their way. But a case can be
made that they really have no excuse. More maps are produced in the Washington
area than perhaps any other place on earth.

They are cranked out by the thousands by Government agencies and private
concerns, increasingly from information provided by satellites and computers,
often with colorful detail, sometimes behind closed doors. Their users range
from motorists and tourists trying to find some distant city or resort to
military field commanders and astronauts.

''This is probably the map capital of the world,'' said John B. Garver Jr.,
chief cartographer of the National Geographic Society, perhaps the best known of
the major producers.

Geological Survey Has 65,000

Another major producer is the nation's largest civilian map-making agency, the
United States Geological Survey, with headquarters in suburban Reston, Va. It
has an inventory of 65,000 published maps in varied scales, covering all of this
country and parts of Antarctica and, with a yearly budget of $400 million,
employs 10,000 people. Its customers include hunters and fishermen and hikers,
civil engineers, road builders, oil companies and city planners.

Still another major maker, the Defense Mapping Agency, prepares almost all the
maps and nautical and aeronautical charts for the Armed Forces. The head of the
agency, Maj. Gen. Robert A. Rosenberg of the Air Force, says that ''no military
unit, from an infantry squad to a warship or a fighter plane or a missile, can
function without the products of our agency.''

Every space shuttle mission has used the agency's maps to plot its global orbit,
to help with celestial navigation and to find sites on earth. In addition, the
mapping agency prepares computerized data for the electronic guidance systems
used by the winged jet propelled cruise missile, the Pershing 2 missile and
other ''smart'' weapons.

Many of These Are Secret

The Defense Mapping Agency has 10,000 employees in more than 50 places around
the globe and an annual budget of $750 million. Although some of its maps are
sold to the public, many more, containing extraordinary detail of foreign
countries, are for restricted distribution.

The miliary agency also helps determine the names that appear on all Government
maps. It provides most of the staff for the United States Board on Geographic
Names, a panel of representatives from nine Federal agencies who decide such
questions as when Cambodia should be labeled Kampuchea, or when Saigon becomes
Ho Chi Minh City.

The third major Government map-making agency in Washington is the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, a part of the Commerce Department. It
produces thousands of nautical charts of America's harbors, coasts and
waterways, as well as the standard aeronautical charts used by airplane pilots
and air traffic controllers.

NOAA also conducts field surveys to establish the longitude, latitude and
elevation of reference points throughout the United States. These ''geodetic
control'' points are used as the basic geographic framework for all mapping and
charting.

Weather and Parks and All

In addition, special maps showing specific types of information are produced
here by many other Government agencies, including the National Weather Service,
the Census Bureau, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Federal Highway
Administration, the Bureau of Indian Affairs, the National Park Service, the
Forest Service and the Fish and Wildlife Service.

In the last 15 years, according to Federal officials, two developments have
revolutionized the making of Government maps.

One is the increasing use of satellites to generate images of the earth. These
pictures yield a wealth of data about land use and contours, the distribution of
population, and the sites of buildings, highways, railroads and other features.

The other big change is the use of computerized data to produce maps. The
Geological Survey and the Defense Mapping Agency store immense amounts of
geographic data in digital form, information that can then be recombined to
produce maps to a customer's specifications. Using this technique, officials
said, it would be easy to produce a map showing just interstate highways, rivers
and lakes of more than threesquare miles. #2 Noted Private Makers The Washington
area is also home to two private organizations whose maps are better known to
many Americans than those of the Federal Government. The National Geographic
Society in downtown Washington sends maps regularly to its 10.5 million members.
And the American Automobile Association, based in suburban Falls Church, Va.,
distributes 30 million sheet maps and 200 million ''strip maps'' to its motor
clubs each year.

Kenneth R. Porter, director of cartographic services for the automobile
association, says it employs its own staff of ''road reporters'' to drive over
major highways in the United States, Canada and Mexico. They check times and
distances, look for changes in routes and route numbers, and scrupulously
observe a speed limit of 55 miles an hour, according to Mr. Porter. Using their
information, the auto association revises all its maps at least once a year.

At the National Geographic, one of the biggest problems is deciding which place
names to include on maps. ''The biggest complaint we get,'' Mr. Garver said,
''is that we left off somebody's home town. We don't like to do that. We don't
like to offend any of our members. On the other hand, we have to avoid clutter
on the map.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of John B. Garver Jr. (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 16, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NORMAN LEAR STARTS OFF MUSEUM LECTURE SERIES

BYLINE: By THOMAS MORGAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 758 words


Almost a decade after ''All in the Family'' and its offspring ''Good Times,''
''Maude'' and ''The Jeffersons'' left prime-time television, the impact of those
shows and their creator, Norman Lear, will be the subject this week of a
television retrospective at the Museum of Broadcasting.

The situation comedies - all produced and many of them written by Mr. Lear -
dealt with issues that, at the time, were not considered suitable entertainment:
conflict among members of different racial and ethnic groups, the Vietnam War,
homosexuality and the changing roles of women.

Starting Seminar Series

''The shows of Norman Lear have had a major effect on programming, and we
thought it would be fitting for him to start off a new seminar series,'' said
Dr. Robert M. Batscha, president of the Museum of Broadcasting. ''What he did
that was significant was to inject social commentary and social awareness into a
regular situation-comedy series. When you see contemporary shows on social
issues, they harken back to the ground-breaking work of Norman Lear, for example
the shows 'Benson' and 'Kate and Allie.' ''

Beginning tomorrow and continuing until Friday, Mr. Lear will conduct four
seminars at the museum addressing his work in early live television, writing and
producing adult comedy for television, the evolution of television syndication,
as well as independent production and the impact and future of the medium. The
seminars are underwritten by a $200,000 grant from Mark Goodson, a producer and
creator of television game shows. Tickets are available at the museum, 1 East
53d Street.

''All in the Family'' aired on CBS in 1971 after CBS and the other networks
ignored the series for three years because they feared it was too controversial.
Although many critics initially attacked the series, saying that bigotry was not
funny, at the program's zenith in the mid-1970's as many as 40 million
television viewers laughed each week at the prejudices, malapropisms and
misadventures of Archie Bunker and his family. The program secured a place in
television history, staying in the top 10 for 8 seasons. Programs like ''All in
the Family,'' and ''Maude'' exploited the foibles and fears of conservatives and
liberals alike.

Introduced Social Issues

Speaking from Los Angeles last week, Mr. Lear said: ''I didn't know this when I
started with 'All in the Family,' but that show was the first to make social
issues integral to evening-television sitcom. All the way through 'All in the
Family' and 'Maude' and 'Mary Hartman, Mary Hartman,' I was asked what made me
think I was right to insert a point of view in shows. That was never my
intention. It was to entertain. If it wasn't funny, it wouldn't work.

''We followed a whole bunch of shows like 'Father Knows Best,' 'Leave It to
Beaver,' 'Green Acres' and other shows of the 60's,'' he said. ''They were all
fine shows, but you would think by watching them that America had no blacks, no
racial tension, that there was no Vietnam. As people asked me about the points
of view, I thought, 'My God, by omission, look at the points of view of the
earlier shows: wall-to-wall television comedy that would let you think there
were no problems in the 1960's.' ''

Mirror of the Times

Mr. Lear said he produced the programs as a mirror of our times and of our own
prejudices. The topics and issues raised in his comedies were the stuff of real
life. For example, Mr. Lear said that his father, a rather intolerant man,
asserted his position as head of the household by ordering his mother to
''stifle'' herself, much in the same manner that Archie Bunker silenced his
long-suffering wife, Edith.

''The story lines grew with the times,'' said Mr. Lear, who has formed a new
company called Act III Communications that produces films. He also owns
''Channels,'' a communications magazine, and he is exploring television-show
production. ''In the early 70's, there was a lot of conflict and anger against
the establishment, the Vietnam War, from women against men. Wherever there is
conflict and confrontation, there is comedy. I'm beginning to think that serious
comedy would work again. Not 'All in the Family,' but more shows in which the
foolish liberal and foolish conservative had a lot to fight about.

''I know that the President has us smiling and happy again,'' said Mr. Lear, who
has long been identified as a supporter of liberal causes. ''But I sense around
the country that the anger is showing again. The issues of the 80's are still
political and social.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Norman Lear (Tony Esparza)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 17, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CANDIDATE WITHDRAWS IN MASSACHUSETTS

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 682 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, June 16


A Republican candidate for Governor announced tonight that he would drop out of
the race because of his false claim that he had been a captain in the Army
Special Forces in Vietnam.

Royall H. Switzler, a Republican State Representative from suburban Wellesley,
said, directing his statement to the voters, ''I cannot reasonably expect your
support'' in view of his ''dishonesty.''

Mr. Switzler's decision throws into confusion the Republican campaign against
Gov. Michael S. Dukakis, a popular Democrat who is completing his second term.
It also adds to the troubles facing the state Republican Party at a time when
the party nationally has prospered with the Presidency of Ronald Reagan.

No Republican has been elected to a statewide office in Massachusetts since
1972, and the Republicans are fielding candidates for only about one-third of
the 200 seats in the Statehouse and Senate this fall.

G.O.P. Hopes Were Up

But Republican Party leaders had thought that this year at last they had put
together a relatively attractive team of contenders for the other statewide
offices: Lieutenant Governor, Attorney General, Treasurer and Auditor. But
Nicholas Nikitas, the Republican candidate for Lieutenant Governor, said,
''We're all hurt'' by a series of embarrassments, including Mr. Switzler's
disclosures.

Joyce Hampers, the Republican candidate for Treasurer, who switched parties last
year, said, ''I didn't join the Republican Party because I wanted to be laughed
at.''

Miss Hampers, a former head of the state Revenue Department, said she did not
feel Mr. Switzler's difficulty would affect her campaign. ''But it does bother
me as a Republican,'' she said. Alluding to the other problems in the party, she
added, ''When we cowboys draw the wagons in a circle, we are supposed to shoot
out, not in.''

Among the embarrassments to the Republicans has been the situation of Gregory S.
Hyatt, the other Republican candidate for Governor. His nomination papers for
the Sept. 16 primary election have been challenged by the Democratic State
Committee after objections by some voters that their names had been forged. The
state Ballot Law Commission is scheduled to hear the Democrats' charges at a
meeting next week.

Preference for Switzler

Many Republicans were already uneasy about Mr. Hyatt. In April his former
employer, a contractors' association, charged that he did not work hard, talked
on the telephone to himself and on two occasions was discovered naked in his
office by a female assistant.

Mr. Hyatt has strongly denied these assertions, but at the state Republican
Convention several days later Mr. Switzler was drafted to run and was given the
party's endorsement over Mr. Hyatt.

If Mr. Hyatt's candidacy is ruled invalid or he withdraws, which a number of
Republicans have called for, the State Republican Committee could pick another
candidate to run against Governor Dukakis in November. But whatever happens the
names of both Mr. Switzler and Mr. Hyatt will remain on the Republican primary
ballot in September because the deadline for withdrawing has passed.

At the convention in April Mr. Switzler was chosen largely because he had
established a reputation as a tireless and moralistic state legislator willing
to battle any odds for causes he espoused.

Surprise to Switzler Backers

But earlier this month he surprised his supporters by disclosing that he had
been a sergeant in the peacetime army in Korea, not, as he had earlier claimed,
a captain in the Army Special Forces in Vietnam.

Asked about statements he had made in the state Legislature that he had seen
Americans die in Vietnam, the 47-year-old Mr. Switzler replied, ''Ive seen
people die in Vietnam on TV.''

Questions about the signatures on Mr. Hyatt's nomination papers arose after
Helen Paragamian, the assistant town clerk of Belmont, found her name on his
list. ''It was a forged signature,'' she said, ''way off from my writing.''

The discovery prompted her to call several friends whose names also appeared on
his papers, and they too denied signing the documents.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Royall H. Switzler (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 17, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

PROSECUTOR WHO TOPPLED PHOENIX PUBLISHER IS FACING MISCONDUCT CHARGE

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1148 words

DATELINE: PHOENIX, June 13


With a plot that might have been devised by Shakespeare, a public drama
involving two powerful figures continues to unfold in the desert heat here. Like
Hamlet plotting against Claudius, the first player exacted revenge upon the
other, only to bring grief upon himself in the process.

Last Dec. 26 Darrow Tully, ''Duke'' to friends, the flamboyant and powerful
publisher of the newspapers The Arizona Republic and The Phoenix Gazette,
resigned after the disclosure that his war record as fighter-pilot hero in Korea
and Vietnam was fake. At the time he was supposedly being shot down in Korea,
Mr. Tully, who later billed himself as a retired lieutenant colonel, was
actually selling ads for a newspaper in West Virginia.

Now, the man who brought down Mr. Tully, Thomas E. Collins, the combative and
tough-talking Maricopa County Attorney, has been accused by a county grand jury
of ''corrupt misconduct'' in purportedly using his public office as prosecutor
to conduct a personal vendetta against the publisher. The prosecutor, a
Republican and an ex-Marine, is scheduled to appear Tuesday in Maricopa County
Superior Court to respond to the noncriminal charge, which could lead to his
removal from office.

Subplot: The New Publisher

The story has many a complex subplot, for the man promoted to replace Mr. Tully
as publisher by Phoenix Newspapers Inc. is Pat Murphy, one of Mr. Tully's
bitterest enemies at the newspapers. Now Mr. Murphy, a former columnist,
denounces the prosecutor: ''Tom Collins had no more right to misuse his public
trust than Duke Tully had to misuse his.''

Through his personal assistant, Mr. Collins declined a request for an interview.
His lawyer, A. Melvin McDonald, said he planned to challenge the legal
''sufficiency'' of the accusation, which is a kind of civil version of an
indictment. ''My sincere belief is that he will be fully vindicated when all the
evidence is brought out,'' he said.

The case will be heard by Judge Allen G. Minker, who was brought in from remote
Greenlee County. Mr. Collins has asked the county to pay for his defense.

Charges Against Newspaper

The grand jury began to investigate the matter only days after Mr. Collins
disclosed the facts about Mr. Tully's war record at a dramatic news conference
in the prosecutor's office last December. The newspapers, he charged, had been
engaged in an ''orchestrated smear campaign'' against him with articles about
questionable travel expenses, his vigorous prosecution of operators of X-rated
video stores and allegations of obstructing a criminal investigation for
political reasons.

Mr. Tully immediately resigned; he is now publisher of The Williston Daily
Herald in North Dakota.

The grand jury charged that Mr. Collins used a county investigator and county
stationery to delve into Mr. Tully's war record, and called the news conference
in office hours at the prosecutor's office. ''The investigation was not a
criminal investigation conducted because of some suspected criminal violation,
but was a private personal investigation by the County Attorney conducted with
the intent to discredit, embarrass and humiliate'' Mr. Tully, the jury
concluded.

There were no criminal charges lodged against Mr. Tully.

''The Tully case is very clear - there is no apparent allegation of criminal
activity,'' said Louis Rhodes, executive director of the American Civil
Liberties Union office here, which has long been at odds with Mr. Collins over
his pornography prosecutions. ''You cannot go and investigate a private citizen
- it goes beyond the scope of what an elected official can do.''

Fascination With the Military

Like Mr. Tully, Mr. Collins, a former police officer who was first elected in
1980, is obsessed with military things. His hobby is building model airplanes
and he likes to present hand-made reproductions of the aircraft they flew to
friends who were military pilots. According to one story, he wanted to make such
a gift for Mr. Tully and learned of his phony war record while doing research on
which planes Mr. Tully piloted.

Admirers say Mr. Collins has greatly strengthened law enforcement in the county,
Arizona's largest. His use of Arizona's racketeering law appears to have cleared
video stores of many X-rated tapes, and the store owners are suing to block him.
One of his chief financial backers in his election campaigns is Charles H.
Keating Jr., chairman of the board of the American Continental Corporation and
founder of Citizens for Decency Through Law, a national antipornography group
that is based here. Mr. Keating refused comment.

Prosecutor's Motivations Assailed

Mr. Collins's detractors are not so reticent. Myrna Parker, a former assistant
prosecutor in his office who has resigned, calls him a ''hot-headed'' man with
''poor judgment.'' She said his pursuit of pornography was ''completely
politically motivated'' to satisfy Mr. Keating. Critics say Mr. Collins has
become an embarrassment to the Republican Party, which dominates Maricopa County
politics, and may be in political trouble.

The Collins matter, meanwhile, has refocused attention on the two newspapers. As
publisher, Mr. Tully quickly entered the Arizona power elite in a way that could
happen only in a state where there are few natives. In his eight years as
publisher, Mr. Tully cut a swaggering figure, attending social functions in a
full-dress military uniform covered with medals, apparently all purchased at
surplus stores. He swung his weight around in the community and reshaped the
newspapers with a combative style that offended many who worked for him.

Changes at Newspapers

''Duke was a man who loved grandeur, he had to have adulation and acceptance,''
said Mr. Murphy, the new publisher. ''He did this through boasting. He was not a
journalist. He did not have the confidence of the newsroom.'' Still, Mr. Murphy
said Mr. Tully had forced through essential technical improvements at the
papers, introduced editions aimed at specific regions within the state, and
raised salaries.

Since Mr. Tully's exit, the publisher's job has been divided into two, with Mr.
Murphy responsible only for the news departments, not for business matters.

One of Mr. Murphy's first acts was to eliminate a policy imposed by Mr. Tully
under which staff members were forbidden to fraternize with employees of New
Times, a Phoenix weekly that frequently twits the larger papers. The change was
welcomed by Michael G. Lacey, editor of New Times. ''He's being very gracious
with us,'' Mr. Lacey said. ''He's made a point of burying the hatchet.''

Mr. Murphy said his top priority was building an aggressive news organization
based on ''informed risk-taking.'' He said the grand jury accusation against Mr.
Collins was ''unfortunate for us because we have to go through this whole story
again - it's a chapter we'd just as soon forget.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Darrow Tully; Photo of Thomas E. Collins (Marie Boargmann;
Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 17, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

JUSTICES DENY APPEALS IN NORFOLK BUSING CASE AND ON A LIBEL SUIT

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 835 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 16


The Supreme Court today preliminarily cleared the way for Norfolk, Va., to end
its busing of elementary schoolchildren for desegregation purposes this fall.

The Court, acting on a case that could have nationwide implications, denied a
request by black parents for an interim order to block school officials, pending
further review, from dismantling a court-ordered busing plan that has been in
effect for 15 years.

This action seemed to suggest the Court was unlikely to require later that
busing be reinstituted.

But the case, Riddick v. School Board, No. 85-1962, is not over yet, because the
Court has not yet decided whether to hear the black parents' appeal of a lower
court's decision upholding the city's plan.

The Justice Department has supported the Norfolk plan as a model for localities
that want to end court-ordered busing and has expressed hope that lower court
decisions upholding the plan will set a major national precedent.

Blacks Sue to Block Plan

The black parents who sued to block the Norfolk plan said it would resegregate
the schools by assigning almost 40 percent of black elementary students to 10
virtually all-black schools near their all-black public housing projects.

Two lower Federal courts upheld Norfolk's plan on the ground that once the city
was found in 1975 to have successfully desegregated its schools under court
orders, it was free to dismantle busing and assign students to schools near
their homes.

The black parents argued in their Supreme Court appeal that the logic used by
the lower courts could have ''enormous and sweeping impact,'' amounting to ''a
charter for the resegregation of the public schools of the South.''

Norfolk adopted the plan in part to stem ''white flight'' by placing most white
students in white majority schools. The Supreme Court has rejected such
arguments against busing in other cases, but unlike the Norfolk case, these
cases involved school systems that had not been found to have ended past
intentional segregation.

Justices Thurgood Marshall and Harry A. Blackmun said today that they would have
required continuation of the busing plan pending further review. Justice John
Paul Stevens said he would have expedited the case while reserving judgment on
whether to require continuation of busing in the meantime.

Herbert Loses Appeal Bid

In another action today the Court turned down a retired lieutenant colonel's
last appeal in his highly publicized $44 million libel suit against CBS News for
suggesting he had lied about war crimes in Vietnam.

The facts of the 12-year-long case, which attorneys on both sides said was one
of the longest-running libel suits in modern history, were disputed to the end.

The ''60 Minutes'' program in 1973 questioned Lieut. Col. Anthony B. Herbert's
assertion that the Army had relieved him of his command in the Vietnam War
because of his efforts to expose atrocities.

He contended that the broadcast, and a subsequent article in the Atlantic
Monthly by Barry Lando, the producer of the broadcast, had falsely and
maliciously portrayed him as a liar.

In its unsigned order today, the Court declined to hear an appeal from a Jan. 15
decision by a panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second
Circuit, in Manhattan, to dismiss the case without a trial.

The appellate panel said that even though two statements in the broadcast might
have been conscious or reckless falsehoods, they could not be the basis of a
libel judgment because they were ''subsidiary'' to broader assertions in the
broadcast that could not be proved knowingly or recklessly false.

The Supreme Court's refusal, without comment, to hear the appeal has no weight
as a precedent and does not necessarily constitute an endorsement of the
somewhat novel legal ground on which the appellate court rested its decision.

Ronald E. Guttman, associate general counsel for CBS Inc., welcomed the Court's
decision not to disturb the ''well-reasoned'' ruling of Judge Irving R.
Kaufman's opinion for the appellate panel. Mr. Guttman said the broadcast was
''a very good piece of journalism'' and was true except for ''some minor
inconsistencies'' of detail.

Michael P. McDonald of the American Legal Foundation here, which was established
to help libel plaintiffs and which represented Mr. Herbert in seeking Supreme
Court review, today termed Judge Kaufman's opinion ''an abomination.''

The case, Herbert v. Lando, No. 85-1685, had been to the Supreme Court once
before, producing a major libel precedent. In 1979, reversing a ruling written
by Judge Kaufman, the Court ruled that the First Amendment did not protect
journalists sued for libel by public figures from being compelled to explain why
they had made specific news judgments.

That decision led to several years of pretrial exchange of information by the
parties, which the appellate panel found had failed to produce evidence that
would justify the conclusion that the defendants had knowingly or recklessly
libeled Mr. Herbert.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 17, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN SEEKS BIPARTISANSHIP ON CONTRAS

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 758 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 16


President Reagan, appealing for bipartisan support of aid to the Nicaraguan
rebels, said today that a newly deployed Soviet reconnaissance plane used by the
Nicaraguan Government had given the Sandinistas ''a significant advance in its
military and intelligence capabilities.''

At the same time, Mr. Reagan told a group that supports his effort to win $100
million in aid for the rebels that the Nicaraguan Government carried out a
major, unprovoked attack earlier this year against thousands of Miskito Indians
who had fled into neighboring Honduras. The President said the attack took place
shortly after a vote in the House last March against his aid package for the
rebels.

The House is expected to reconsider the question of aid for the rebels around
June 26. Mr. Reagan told supporters of the package that ''repression'' against
labor unions, dissidents, poltical opponents and enterepreneurs had accelerated
since the last House vote.

Uncertainty on Fate of Aid

''The regime, for all its youth and designer glasses, is doing its best to turn
Nicaragua into an Eastern European-style Communist dictatorship,'' Mr. Reagan
said. ''And this is absolutely inconsistent with the values and traditions of
the Americas, and we're not going to let it happen.'' The reference to
''designer glasses'' was to a purchase of expensive spectacles by President
Daniel Ortega Saavedra of Nicaragua late last year while in New York.

Mr. Reagan made his comments as White House officials expressed uncertainty
about the fate of the aid package for the rebels, who are known as contras. A
White House official said the Administration had not yet gathered enough votes
for victory. The request includes $70 million in military aid and $30 million
for nonmilitary purposes. The House rejected the request in March, but the
Senate approved it.

Today Mr. Reagan, in an effort to present the question as a nonpartisan one,
appealed to the ''spirit of cooperation'' among Democrats and Republicans.

Call for Bipartisanship

''Some historians believe the trauma of the Vietnam war irreparably destroyed
the spirit of cooperation,'' he said. ''Well, I think otherwise. I think America
is leaving the Vietnam syndrome behind.

''I expect the upcoming vote on aid to the Nicaraguan freedom fighters will
signal the re-emergence of bipartisanship in areas of national security, and an
end to the pessimism and disunity of the last decade,'' Mr. Reagan said.

The President said that the Soviet Union, ''after a brief rest,'' had stepped up
its provision of weapons to the Nicaraguan Government. He said the Russians had
resumed direct arms shipments to Nicaragua for the first time since 1984.

Pointing to a photo blowup behind him of an AN-30 reconnaissance aircraft, Mr.
Reagan said that ''another significant step has been the arrival in Nicaragua of
a reconnaissance aircraft with highly sophisticated equipment, which gives the
Communist regime a significant advance in military and intelligence
capabilities.''

''There's little room for doubt,'' said Mr. Reagan. ''The Communists show no
intention of compromise, no intention of keeping their promises of democratic
pluralism or or refraining from aggression from their neighbors.''

Earlier Fighting Recalled

Mr. Reagan also said that after the House vote last March, Nicaraguan forces
made ''an unprovoked assault'' against Miskito Indian villages, apparently in
retaliation for their opposition to the Government.

''This bloody operation triggered a panic that led to an exodus into Honduras of
nearly 11,000 villagers,'' Mr. Reagan told the group of private supporters of
the aid package. He said the assault took place at the same time as a Nicaraguan
cross-border raid on contra bases just inside Honduras and ''was just as
important'' in underscoring the ''authoritarian'' nature of the Nicaraguan
Government.

Reached at the Nicaraguan Embassy, Manuel Cordero, minister-counsellor, said,
''I don't have anything in particular on the military reconnaissance plane. I
have asked Managua for a response on that and they are checking.

Charge Termed 'Absurd'

''In the matter of the Miskito Indians,'' Mr. Cordero said, ''I think the
charges that we are persecuting the Miskito Indians are absurd. There have been
reports by prestigious international human rights organizations attesting to the
contrary.'' He cited a report by Americas Watch, a human rights group.

Mr. Reagan's speech today was an attempt to seek Democratic votes and appeal for
a ''consensus'' on the issue.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 17, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CITY HALL INTERNS GET A BAPTISM BY SCANDAL

BYLINE: By CRYSTAL NIX

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 853 words


When the 19 government interns began their jobs with the Koch administration
last September, some were optimistic about careers in public service, and others
arrived with questions and doubts.

But few of the young people, participants in the city's Urban Fellows program,
expected to step into a government that would be shaken by a municipal
corruption scandal that, by the end of the spring, had toppled or stunted the
careers of at least 10 politicians and public officials. One of them, Donald R.
Manes, the Queens Borough President, killed himself in March as the scandal
closed around him.

It was an unusual baptism into the world of public service for nascent and
aspiring public servants. It did not dull their year in government or dent their
enthusiasm, most said. But as events unfolded through the winter and spring in
the three agencies involved - the Parking Violations Bureau, the Taxi and
Limousine Commission and the Health and Hospitals Corporation - the interns
began to wonder and to ask themselves questions.

'Makes You Question' Motives

''When you see people who are your role models involved in corruption scandals,
it makes you question what the motives of people in public service are,'' said
Linda Gibbs, who works in the city's Office of Economic Development through an
Urban Fellowship. ''It bothered me on a personal level.''

A native of Albany, Miss Gibbs said she knew nothing of the Democratic machine
in the Bronx and Queens. Nor was she familiar with any of the political figures
involved until their names began appearing in the press.

''I was amazed,'' she said. ''It makes you feel corruption is very widespread,
particularly because it's by people on such powerful levels.''

The Urban Fellows program began 17 years ago and is financed by the city. The 19
fellows work for a year as regular staff members of city agencies and have an
option of attending graduate school partly fi-nanced by the city. Some of the
fellows have ended their internships and are moving on to other jobs or to
graduate schools. Others have taken jobs with the city.

The fellows interviewed who worked in agencies directly tainted by controversy
said the scandal had a disconcerting affect.

One such fellow, Judy Gallent, 22 years old, worked as an analyst in the Health
and Hospitals Corporation. She also grew up in Queens and knew of Mr. Manes.

''He did a lot of good things for Queens,'' Miss Gallent said. ''It was a real
tragedy. When people violate the public trust it's awful, especially public
officials because the public had faith in them. I know it sounds ridiculous and
idealistic, but I really believe that.''

Some Expectations Fulfilled

Some of the fellows, those far removed from the points in government where the
scandal struck, said they would round out their first year of public service
with some of their best expectations fulfilled.

''When you're working within government with good people it alters the
perceptions one could have of New York City or city government,'' said Angelita
Anderson, 24, who was an intern in the Office of Management and Budget. She
recently began working permanently as a systems analyst in the office.

Other fellows said they had arrived at City Hall without illusions.

''In the private sector there is a great deal of dishonesty,'' said Harry Tilis,
22, a special assistant to the Commissioner of Correction. ''But the public
sector is just held up to a higher level of scrutiny - as it should be.

''I wasn't surprised, but neither did I expect it. I don't know why I wasn't
outraged. Maybe because it hasn't affected my agency, and I work with honest
people. Or maybe I don't know enough about city government.''

Committed to Careers

Others spoke of ''lowered expectations'' that developed after Vietnam and
Watergate.

''We have internalized or accepted a lot of public cynicism toward public
officials,'' said Trish Peyser, 22, a special assistant to the Police
Commissioner, Benjamin Ward. ''We grew up in a time where people constantly were
dismayed by what elected officials were doing.''

Most of the interns, however, said they were still committed to careers in
government.

''It motivates me to play a bigger role in public service instead of not dealing
with it,'' said Loretta Au, who worked in the Department of Correction at
Montefiore Rikers Island Health Services. ''I think I can contribute a better
perspective and stronger morals and standards.''

Miss Au plans to began medical school at the University of Florida in September
and then work in the public sector.

In general, most of the interns new to public service said the scandal had made
them think about the issues of public trust and the responsibilities that come
with a public mandate. One of the interns said the events of the last few months
had made him examine his own motives.

''I worry about that a lot,'' said David Mat, who worked for the Board of
Education. ''It's hard to stay honest in politics. As long as I keep worrying
about it, I think I'll stay honest. It's when you stop thinking about it that
the problems start.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Harry Tilis and Angelita Anderson, City Hall interns
(NYT/Ruby Washington; Chester Higgins Jr.)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 17, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, JUNE 17, 1986

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 850 words


International

Millions of blacks boycotted jobs in South Africa in a subdued protest to mark
the 10th anniversary of the Soweto uprisings. The authorities reported eight
more blacks killed overnight in township violence and ordered the most sweeping
curbs on press coverage since the hard-line Nationalists came to power in 1948.
[Page A1, Column 6.]

Pretoria defiantly rejected an appeal from President Reagan for restraint and an
end to the South African emergency decree, according to White House officials.
They said President P. W. Botha had reacted in a manner they termed
''obstinate.'' [A1:4-5.]

European foreign ministers put off a decision on whether to impose new sanctions
against South Africa in response to the state of emergency imposed there last
week. The postponement was apparently a result of the opposition of the British
and West Germans. [A8:1-3.]

A Soviet arms-control plan, although signaling a shift in Moscow's position on
American medium-range weapons and sea-launched cruise missiles, still contains
some problems for the United States, Administration officials said. Mikhail S.
Gorbachev decribed some aspects of the latest Soviet proposals, but omitted key
details. [A1:1.]

The President met with Afghan rebel leaders, but turned down their request to
extend them diplomatic recognition, the White House said. Other reasons for
continued tension between the rebels and the Administration are Washington's
backing for United Nations-sponsored peace talks without the rebels'
participation and the Administration's refusal to provide them with
sophisticated weapons, such as Stinger missiles. [A7:1.]

National

The F.T.C. accused R.J. Reynolds of having illegally misrepresented and
understated the health risks of smoking. The Federal Trade Commission charged
that the tobacco company in advertisements published last year misrepresented
the purpose and results of a study financed by the National Institutes of
Health. [A1:2.]

A Navy analyst who confessed to spying for Israel lost his security clearance in
1981 because of emotional problems but won its restoration after threatening to
file a grievance against superiors, according to a Reagan Administration
official. The official said Navy investigators were trying to determine to what
extent the Navy was swayed by the grievance threat. [A1:3.]

Telephone service is recovering gradually from the confusion that followed the
breakup of the Bell System on Jan. 1, 1984, according to consumer groups and
industry and government officials. But the main problems continue to be
obtaining new service and having repairs performed. [A1:1-3.]

A Republican candidate for Governor of Massachusetts who acknowledged he had
falsely claimed to have been a captain in the Army Special Forces in Vietnam
announced he was withdrawing from the race. The candidate, Royall H. Switzler,
said that in view of his ''dishonesty'' he could not expect voters' support.
[A16:1-3.]

A crazy-quilt pattern of growth next to decline seems to be developing in the
nation's older industrial states. The conflicting trends were a major cause of
concern at the Midwest Governors Conference. [A16:1-2.]

The Government has halted a grant of $1 million for a private group organized to
fight drug abuse. Officials said the organization, the National Partnership to
Prevent Drug and Alcohol Abuse, had spent more than $700,000 of the grant and
there were allegations that most of this was spent on salaries and travel. Nancy
Reagan is the honorary chairman of the partnership. [A24:4.]

Metropolitan

The rink concrete was diluted, a flood cleanup was delayed for two months and
one end of the rink was designed to be six inches lower than the other, but no
single cause and no single contractor or New York City official was responsible
for the city's failure to renovate the Wollman Memorial Rink in Central Park, a
report said. The report was prepared and made public by City Comptroller
Harrison J. Goldin.[A1:4-6.]

Blue Cross-Blue Shield won a 9.7 percent increase in monthly medical insurance
rates for 2.4 million individual and small-group subscribers in the New York
metropolitan area. The increase, to take effect July 1, is the smallest increase
granted by the state since 1978. [B3:1-3.]

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 18, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Thailand Reports Rise In Vietnamese Refugees

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 128 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 17


The number of Vietnamese ''boat people'' reaching Thailand in the first five
months of this year climbed by nearly 20 percent over the comparable period last
year, a spokesman for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees said
today.

Some of the refugees told officials on arrival that they were fleeing from a new
census in Vietnam that was intended to find and identify men who were evading
military service. Other refugees said that worsening economic conditions were
behind their decision to flee.

Though figures for Thailand lead the region - with 2,094 arrivals in 187 boats
from January through May compared with 1,772 arrivals in 109 boats in the
similar period last year - other countries around the South China Sea have also
reported increases.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 19, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HOUSE VOTES BILL TO CUT OFF INVESTMENT IN SOUTH AFRICA; STRIKES BY BLACKS
MULTIPLY;
EMBARGO ON TRADE

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1345 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 18


The House, in a surprise development, approved and sent to the Senate today a
measure imposing a trade embargo and requiring complete divestment by American
companies and citizens of their holdings in South Africa.

The measure, approved by voice vote, would require the severing of all economic
ties with South Africa and would oblige the approximately 280 American companies
doing business there to halt operations within 180 days. It would impose a full
embargo on trade, allowing only the import of certain materials if the President
certified that they were of strategic importance.

The vote is certain to increase political pressure not only on the Pretoria
Government but also on the Reagan Administration, which has vigorously opposed
further economic penalties against South Africa.

Possibility of Confrontation

The measure is unusual in that sanctions against foreign governments are usually
initiated by the President, as was the case when he ordered oil companies to
halt operations in Libya, using his emergency powers. If the bill became law the
President would be charged with enforcing the sanctions, but as Mr. Reagan
opposes such moves he could decline to carry out the measure, leading to a
possible confrontation with Congress.

At the United Nations today, the United States and Britain vetoed a Security
Council resolution that would have imposed limited economic sanctions against
South Africa.

Edward P. Djerejian, a deputy White House press secretary, said the House vote
would have no impact on the President's opposition to tougher economic
sanctions.

Sanctions 'Adamantly Opposed'

''Our position on that remains the same,'' he said. ''We are adamantly opposed
to punitive economic sanctions.''

The architect of the measure was Representative Ronald V. Dellums, Democrat of
California.

''What we did today is going to give a tremendous boost to the momentum of the
anti-apartheid movement in this country,'' he said. ''I'm still shocked it
happened.''

After the vote, Representative William H. Gray 3d said, ''This demonstrates the
House and the American people wanted the strongest possible sanctions against
South Africa.'' The Pennsylvania Democrat was the sponsor of a less severe
sanctions measure that the House debated throughout the day and was anticipating
voting on.

But in a move that stunned both supporters and opponents, the measure proposed
by Mr. Dellums requiring a full trade embargo and complete divestment was
adopted as a substitute by voice vote. Republican opponents hurriedly conferred
on strategy and decided not to call for a roll-call vote. The measure itself was
then quickly passed by voice vote.

Opponents of the measure suggested that its harshness would make it easier for
President Reagan to veto it and more difficult for supporters to override a
veto.

''Sanctions are dead,'' said Representative Mark Siljander, a Michigan
Republican, who opposes sanctions. ''We lost the battle but won the war.'' The
severe sanctions approved today could also make it less likely that such a bill
will be approved in the Senate, which has yet to take up the matter.

Backers of Sanctions Exult

Supporters of increasing economic pressure on the Pretoria Government were
exultant at today's turn of events.

Representative Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn, described the vote as
''the American answer'' to the state of emergency imposed in South Africa last
week by President P. W. Botha. ''It sends the strongest signal possible,'' he
said.

The House had spent the day debating a more modest measure that was approved
last week by the House Foreign Affairs Committee. That measure would have
imposed economic penalties in two stages, the first requiring an end to all new
loans and investments as well as banning the import of coal, uranium and steel
from South Africa. In a year's time, if certain conditions including the release
of the imprisoned anti-apartheid leader, Nelson Mandela, had not been met, the
sanctions would be increased.

The measure approved today would impose within 180 days of enactment a total
embargo on trade with South Africa, except for the import of minerals if the
President certifies they are of strategic importance. The 280 American companies
that would have to cease operations employ about 66,000 people, according to the
House Foreign Affairs Committee staff, and do about $1.8 billion in business
annually.

Landing Rights Affected

In addition, landing rights for South African Airways in this country would be
suspended, thus ending the five-times-a-week flight from Johannesburg to New
York.

Many American companies have already begun to draw down their investments in
South Africa without any Government pressure to do so.

The United States is South Africa's largest trading partner, with imports and
exports from that country valued at $3.43 billion in 1985.

In today's debate, Mr. Siljander said he was opposed to apartheid, but did not
believe crippling the South African economy was the answer. ''Will the sanctions
in this bill stop the killings there?'' he asked.

'The Smell of Blood'

Representative Lynn Martin, an Illinois Republican, said she would support
sanctions because ''I believe in South Africa today, there is a smell of blood
and I believe there comes a time when we must stand up as a nation and be
counted.''

The consideration of increased penalties against South Africa comes 10 months
after Mr. Reagan reluctantly imposed a series of limited economic penalties
against South Africa by executive order. Both the House and Senate last year
passed versions of a sanctions bill. Mr. Reagan, who had threatened to veto any
such measure, abruptly reversed himself and issued the executive order when it
became apparent that some form of legislation would be enacted over his veto.

The sanctions imposed by the President prohibited most new loans to the South
African Government and banned the import of Krugerrands, the South African gold
coins.

There are currently five countries with which trade is virtually banned: Libya,
Cuba, Cambodia, North Korea, and Vietnam. In those instances, the President
would have to certify he was suspending trade under various acts that grant him
emergency powers due to national security considerations. ---- U.N. Resolution
Vetoed UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., June 18 -The United States and Britain vetoed a
Security Council resolution today that would have imposed limited economic
sanctions against South Africa.

The resolution, initiated because of a complaint by Angola, would have condemned
South African attacks against that country, demanded the withdrawal of South
African troops and requested United Nations members to help Angola and other
African countries ''strengthen their defense capabilities against South Africa's
acts of aggression.''

New investments in South Africa, sales of computer equipment and contracts in
nuclear technology would have been banned under the resolution.

Twelve countries voted in favor of the resolution, which was sponsored by Congo,
Ghana, Madagascar, Trinidad and Tobago and the United Arab Emirates. France
abstained.

Speaking after the vote, the American delegate, Herbert S. Okun, said the United
States could not accept mandatory sanctions or military aid to Angola.

''The goal of this council should be to quell intransigence, not to fuel it,''
he said.

Angola's chief delegate, Elisio de Figuereido, opened the debate Monday by
accusing South Africa of carrying out a June 5 attack on oil installations and
Cuban and Soviet ships in Namibe, a southern Angolan port city.

After today's vote he said: ''The position of the United States and the United
Kingdom should come as no surprise, but I must admit to a feeling of frustration
and despair, when two permanent members of the Council, guardians of the United
Nations Charter, see fit to defy it and violate their mandate.''

South Africa's chief delegate, Kurt von Schirnding, attributed the attacks to
Angolan rebels and denied South Africa had taken part in them.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Rep. Ronald V. Dellums (NYT)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 19, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Books: Of Bias and War

BYLINE: By Herbert Mitgang

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 507 words


WAR WITHOUT MERCY: Race and Power in the Pacific War. By John W. Dower. 399
pages. Illustrated. Pantheon Books. $22.50.

FOUR and a half decades after

Pearl Harbor, ''War Without Mercy'' is one of the most original and important
books to be written about the war between Japan and the United States. More than
any official history and beyond any novel written by American or Japanese
authors, John W. Dower's book explains how the prejudices and deceptions of
racial and national pride - in both countries - were an underlying cause of the
Pacific War.

Read today, when the United States and Japan are military allies and trading
partners, the ironies abound. No American home is without an appliance
containing parts that are made in Japan; no town is without Japanese cars. But
look at the caricatures of the late enemy in ''War Without Mercy.'' Even the
great British political cartoonist, David Low, put monkey faces on the Japanese
and had them swinging from coconut trees. Leatherneck, the Marine monthly,
showed pictures of Japanese with louse faces and crawly bodies.

The Japanese, too, lived with illusions and biases against what they considered
the soft and inferior Westerners. In a section of the book called ''The War in
Japanese Eyes,'' a cartoon from Manga, an official magazine, shows a young
Japanese combing ''dandruff'' from her hair - described in the caption as
''extravagance, selfishness, hedonism, liberalism, materialism, money worship,
individualism and Anglo-American ideas.'' Japanese cartoonists depicted
President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill as half-horse, half-badger,
dressed in a costume combining the Almighty Dollar and the piratical skull and
crossbones.

Professor Dower, who teaches Japanese Studies at the University of California,
San Diego, writes: ''Apart from the genocide of the Jews, racism remains one of
the great neglected subjects of World War II.'' The author shows how both the
Germans and Japanese, in their propaganda for home consumption, exploited the
condition of the blacks in the United States. ''Racism within the Allied camp
was, however, a volatile issue in and of itself regardless of what enemy
propagandists said. Although only a few individuals spoke up on behalf of the
persecuted Japanese-Americans, both the oppression of blacks and the exclusion
of Asian immigrants became political issues in wartime America.''

The book's significance goes beyond World War II; it also has meaning for the
other two Asian wars that engaged Americans, in Korea and Vietnam, when enemy
soldiers were dehumanized by the use of such racist names as ''gooks'' and
''slopes.'' Here were echoes of the ''Yellow Peril'' of the sensational American
press at the turn of the century. Professor Dower concludes that the racist
attitudes were sublimated after Hiroshima and Nagasaki: ''That vicious racial
stereotypes were transformed, however, does not mean that they were dispelled.
They remain latent, capable of being revived by both sides in times of crisis
and tension.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of John W. Dower (Kana Dower)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN DISCLOSES A 'SERIOUS EFFORT' BY SOVIET ON ARMS

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1043 words

DATELINE: GLASSBORO, N.J., June 19


President Reagan said today that the Soviet Union had begun to make a serious
effort toward arms control that could represent a turning point in relations
between the two countries.

Addressing a high-school commencement in this town, where President Johnson and
Aleksei N. Kosygin, then the Soviet Prime Minister, met in 1967, Mr. Reagan said
recent events had created a potentially positive atmosphere between himself and
the Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev.

''I am committed - utterly committed - to pursuing every opportunity to discuss
and explore ways to achieve real and verifiable arms reductions,'' the President
told the graduating class of Glassboro High School in its crowded gymnasium.
Among those present was Gov. Thomas H. Kean of New Jersey.

Tribute Paid to Russians in War

In an unusually positive speech, Mr. Reagan paid tribute to Soviet suffering
during World War II and voiced a yearning for a summit meeting and for an accord
to cut nuclear weaponry.

White House aides said the positive tone was intended as a signal to the Soviet
Union that the United States was serious about arms control.

Beyond this, officials said, the speech was meant to ease concerns in Congress
and among the European allies over Mr. Reagan's decision to abandon agreed
limitations in the unratified 1979 strategic arms treaty.

Reflecting the unhappiness in Congress, the House of Representatives and the
Senate Armed Services Committee today approved similar resolutions urging Mr.
Reagan to stay within the 1979 arms control limits. [Page A6.] Silent on 1979
Arms Treaty Mr. Reagan did not mention the abandonment of the 1979 treaty in his
speech here, but he has made clear, and implied again today, that future efforts
to reduce arms would hinge largely on Soviet behavior.

Although the Soviet response to American arms control proposals earlier this
year was disappointing, Mr. Reagan said, ''in recent weeks there have been fresh
developments.''

''The Soviets have made suggestions on a range of issues, from nuclear power
plant safety to conventional force reductions in Europe,'' he said.

''Perhaps most important, the Soviet negotiators at Geneva have placed on the
table new proposals to reduce nuclear weapons. We cannot accept these particular
proposals without change, but it appears that the Soviets have begun to make a
serious effort.''

''If both sides genuinely want progress, this could represent a turning point in
the effort to make ours a safer and more peaceful world. We believe that
possibly an atmosphere does indeed exist that will allow for serious
discussion.''

Speaking ''from the heart,'' Mr. Reagan said that the world had cherished the
years of relative peace since World War II and that both the Soviet Union and
the United States were mindful of the devastation of war.

''The Soviets suffered even more painfully than we,'' he said. ''As many as 20
million people in the Soviet Union died, and the western third of the country
was laid waste, parallel, if you will, to the destruction of all the United
States east of Chicago.''

Mr. Reagan urged Mr. Gorbachev to resume preparations for a summit meeting. They
were canceled after the American air strike against Libya in April, when the
Soviet Union called off a meeting between its Foreign Minister, Eduard A.
Shevardnadze, and Secretary of State George P. Shultz.

''I have indicated to General Secretary Gorbachev my willingness for our
representatives to meet to prepare for the next summit,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''The
location is unimportant. What matters is that such a meeting take place in
mutual earnestness so that we can make progress at the next summit.''

Last November in Geneva, the two leaders agreed to meet this year in the United
States and in 1987 in the Soviet Union. Negotiations have been stalled, although
Mr. Reagan sent a recent letter to Mr. Gorbachev urging him to agree to a
Shultz-Shevardnadze meeting to prepare for a summit meeting.

The Soviet position has been that a summit meeting requires a suitable
atmosphere as well as progress in arms control negotiations.

In recent arms proposals, the Russians offered to make cuts in offensive nuclear
weapons if the Americans agreed to adhere to the 1972 antiballistic missile
treaty for at least 15 more years.

The Soviet Union also dropped its insistence that American fighter-bombers in
Western Europe and on aircraft carriers be included in a treaty on strategic
arms.

The United States contends that these so-called forward-based systems are not
strategic arms, a term usually reserved for long-range, intercontinental nuclear
weapons. The Soviet Union proposed that the forward-based systems be frozen at
present levels, and this has been called unacceptable by American officials.

The Soviet Union is also understood to have abandoned a call for a ban on all
nuclear-armed sea-launched cruise missiles with ranges of more than 600
kilometers (370 miles). But American officials said the Soviet offer would allow
such missiles only on submarines, and not on surface ships.

The Glassboro setting for Mr. Reagan's speech, in the words of White House
officials, was appropriate because the town symbolizes a period of improved
Soviet-American ties.

President Johnson and Prime Minister Kosygin met here in June 1967 at Glassboro
State College to discuss the Middle East, the Vietnam war, efforts to curb the
spread of nuclear weapons, and limits on antiballistic missiles.

Mr. Reagan, who flew here from Washington by helicopter, was welcomed by a crowd
of several hundred seated in tiers in the high-school gymnasium.

''I have come here today to say that the Glassboro summit was not enough, that
indeed the Geneva summit was not enough, that talk alone, in short, is not
enough,'' he said. ''I have come here to invite Mr. Gorbachev to join me in
taking action - action in the name of peace.

''Today, historians have concluded that the Glassboro summit was not, in fact,
one of the most momentous - no major breakthroughs were made or agreements
reached,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''Nevertheless, the two men met. They were frank.
They worked to understand each other and to make themselves understood. In this
alone, I would submit, they taught us a great deal.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of student Ruth Lockbaum hugging President Reagan, after giving
him a jacket, at Glassboro High School, in New Jersey (NYT/Paul Hosefros)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE TALK OF GLASSBORO;
FOR GLASSBORO, A BRIEF VISIT IS ENOUGH

BYLINE: By DONALD JANSON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1089 words

DATELINE: GLASSBORO, N.J., June 19


President Reagan spent barely an hour here today, but for the 130 graduating
seniors, their parents, friends and thousands of others on the grounds of
Glassboro High School, it seemed to be enough.

''It's neat,'' said Troy

McAuliffe, one of the seniors. ''I'm glad he picked Glassboro of all the high
schools in the country.''

Striding into the packed gymnasium to speak at a commencement already under way,
the President received a prolonged standing ovation.

The President stepped to a podium decked with yellow chrysanthemums after
hearing Elizabeth Langworthy Volz, the class valedictorian, call for ending the
arms race and halting terrorism in this country as well as abroad ''so we can
live in a world at peace.''

''I'm honored and excited to have the President here even though I don't always
agree with all his policies,'' Miss Volz, who will be studying chemistry at
Swarthmore College in the fall, said in an interview.

After his 30-minute speech, Mr. Reagan shook hands with the graduates as they
mounted the platform and filed past him to receive their diplomas. Well down the
alphabet, Mary Ann Travis drew cheers when she kissed the President on the
cheek. A few others followed suit. Less than an hour after he arrived, the
President left to re-board his helicopter after delivering good wishes to a
crowd in the school's athletic field the police estimated at 10,000. Many had
waited there for more than three hours to hear the president's words piped to
the field from the gymnasium.

In the week since the White House announced the visit, this community of 14,000
people near Philadelphia has been preoccupied plans for Mr. Reagan's appearance.
''Excitement reached a crescendo today,'' said Nicholas A. Mitcho,
Superintendent of Schools.

''It's been building for a week,'' said Michael P. Toscano, assistant
superintendent. ''All this attention is wearing us down. We won't know what it's
like to concentrate on education again.''

Glassboro is a residential town, its citizens ranging from professors at
Glassboro State College to executives at Mobil and Dupont and other nearby
plants to blue-collar workers. Each summer the community has with an infusion of
seasonal farm workers from Puerto Rico who pick the peaches, apples and
vegetables grown on surrounding farms.

''Glassboro is a microcosm of America,'' Mr. Toscano said.

But for many years the borough's economy was based on glass manufacturing
plants, a heritage preserved in the town's name. Immigrants from Dornhagen,
Germany, established the Stanger Glass Works here in 1779 because of the quality
of the sand, the abundance of oaks to fuel glass furnaces and the proximity of
Philadelphia for shipping the finished product.

The glass industry here peaked in the last century. Only an Owens-Illinois plant
remains on the outskirts of town.

But the Glassboro glass industry did add a word to the national lexicon before
it faded. E. C. Booz, a Philadelphia whisky distributor, commissioned a bottle
with a depiction of a log cabin and the Booz logo for use in the 1840
presidential election campaign, in which William Henry Harrison defeated Martin
Van Buren. The bottle was so widely used that a bottle of whisky came to be
known as a bottle of booze.

Today Glassboro's biggest employer and landholder, with 200 acres in the
3.5-square-mile borough, is Glassboro State College.

President Reagan's visit has renewed talk of a previous Presidential visit, in
1967 when President Lyndon B. Johnson and Aleksei N. Kosygin, then the Prime
Minister of the Soviet Union, held a summit meeting over three days at the
college, across the street from the high school. The White House said Glassboro
was chosen for today's graduation speech in large part because the President's
theme would be peace and the town was already known for its role in
Soviet-United States relations.

The two leaders met here 19 years ago at Hollybush, the campus home of Glassboro
State College presidents.

Robert D. Bole, then dean of the college, wrote a book, ''Summit at Holly
Bush,'' about the peace-making effort, noting that Richard J. Hughes, then
Governor of New Jersey and a friend of Mr. Johnson and Thomas E. Robinson, then
the college president, selected the location as midway between Washington and
New York, where the Soviet Prime Minister was attending a United Nations General
Assembly meeting.

President Johnson and Mr. Kosygin announced after a lengthy meeting in the
Hollybush library June 23, 1967, that they had made progress toward peaceful
relations and would resume discussions two days later. They returned to
Glassboro two days later with three items on the agenda: nuclear arms control,
the Vietnam War and the recently completed Six Day War in which Israel had
wrested territory from Arab countries.

At the end of the day the announcements of the two leaders to the crowd waiting
on Whitney Avenue ''were no longer upbeat,'' Professor Bole recalled. And that
night in a news conference in New York, Mr. Kosygin said the summit meeting had
brought peace no closer unless the United States followed up by persuading
Israel to pull back and by stopping its Vietnam bombings.

There were exceptions. At Angelo's Diner on Main Street, where the Reagan visit
had been a prime topic for staff and customers all week, Hubert Ross said the
hardware store where he worked was closing early today because of the visit.

''I'm going fishing,'' he said. ''I can't stand crowds.''

And Amy Baer, a high school junior who lacked priority for tickets to the
graduation that went instead to the press and the President's entourage, said,
''I'm really glad the President wanted to come, but it has meant we can't see
our friends graduate.''

While the President's visit seems to have the town's undivided attention for the
moment, the prospect of drought and severe curtailment of water use is a matter
of much greater long-range concern here.

Mayor William L. Dalton said rainfall has been so short for this time of year
that the underground aquifer supplying the town's wells is threatened with
contaminating salt incursion as ocean water creeps up the Delaware Bay and
Delaware River.

''The Borough Council is talking to nearby boroughs and townships in joint
efforts to educate people on how to conserve water, in a search for new water
sources and in an effort to come up with a plan acceptable to the state so we
don't have the state imposing restrictions on us,'' Mayor Dalton said. ''We just
don't want Big Brother in our pockets.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Glassboro High School graduates (NYT/Paul Hosefros)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM REAGAN'S SPEECH AT JERSEY SCHOOL

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1639 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 19


Following are excerpts from a speech by President Reagan today to the graduating
class at Glassboro High School in New Jersey, as made public by the White House:

In June of 1967, President Johnson flew from the White House to Glassboro - just
as I have done today - to hold a summit meeting with Soviet Premier Kosygin. The
meeting was scheduled to last one day. But the two men talked for more than five
hours, then held a second meeting two days later. If you were to research the
meeting in your school library, you would find that U.S. News wrote, ''Among the
problems they discussed were some of the world's biggest: Vietnam, the Middle
East, and the proliferation of nuclear weapons.''

Today, historians have concluded that the Glassboro summit was not, in fact, one
of the most momentous - no major breakthroughs were made or agreements reached.
Nevertheless, the two men met. They were frank. They worked to understand each
other and to make themselves understood. In this alone, I would submit, they
taught us a great deal.

This brings me to the international scene and our relations with the Soviet
Union. It is important to begin by distinguishing between the peoples inside the
Soviet Union and the Government that rules them. Certainly we have no quarrel
with the peoples - far from it. Yet we must remember that the peoples in the
Soviet Union have virtually no influence on the Government.

We must remember that the Soviet Government is based upon and drawn from the
Soviet Communist Party -an organization that remains formally pledged to
subjecting the world to Communist domination.

The Power of the State

This is not the time to delve deeply into history, but you should know that the
emergence of the Soviet Union is in many respects an expression of the terrible
enchantment with the power of the state that became so prominent in the first
half of our century. In his widely-acclaimed book, ''Modern Times,'' Paul
Johnson has argued just this point - that modern ideologies had exalted the
state above the individual.

This rise of state power affected my life as it did the lives of many of your
parents and nearly all your grandparents. In the late 1920's, I graduated from
high school full of hope and expectation - like you today.

Then, just as I had established myself in a career - just as my generation had
established itself - we were at war. We fought valiantly and well, but not
without a sense of all that might have been. In the end representative
government defeated statism - indeed, Japan, Germany, and Italy, once our deadly
enemies, all soon became thriving democracies themselves and are now our staunch
allies. But not the Soviet Union. There statism persists.

What then are we to make of the Soviet Union? My own views upon the character of
the regime are well known, and I am convinced that we must continue to speak out
for freedom, again and again making the crucial moral distinctions between
democracy and totalitarianism. So, too, I am convinced that we must take
seriously the Soviet history of expansionism and provide an effective counter.

Committed to Arms Control

At the same time, we must remain realistic about and committed to arms control.
It is indeed fitting to pay particular attention to arms negotiations in these
days, for if the Soviet Union proves willing, this can represent a moment of
opportunity in relations between our nations.

When I met Mr. Gorbachev last November in Geneva, he and I agreed to intensify
our effort to reduce strategic arms. We agreed on the next steps - negotiating a
50 percent reduction in strategic nuclear forces, and an interim agreement to
cover intermediate-range missiles. And we both spoke of the ultimate goal of
eliminating all nuclear weapons.

By Nov. 1, we had presented new strategic arms reduction proposals designed to
bridge the gap between earlier Soviet and American proposals. Our proposal would
have achieved a 50 percent reduction in strategic nuclear forces in a manner
both equitable and responsible.

Then, in mid-February we proposed a detailed, phased approach for eliminating an
entire class of weapons - the so-called longer-range intermediate-range weapons,
or I.N.F.'s - by 1990. And we repeated our offer of an ''open laboratories''
exchange of visits to facilities performing strategic defense research. Until
recently, the Soviet response has been disappointing in a number of ways.

Suggestions by Soviet Union

But in recent weeks, there have been fresh developments. The Soviets have made
suggestions on a range of issues, from nuclear power plant safety to
conventional force reductions in Europe. Perhaps most important, the Soviet
negotiators at Geneva have placed on the table new proposals to reduce nuclear
weapons. We cannot accept these particular proposals without change, but it
appears that the Soviets have begun to make a serious effort.

If both sides genuinely want progress, then this could represent a turning point
in the effort to make ours a safer and more peaceful world. We believe that
possibly an atmosphere does indeed exist that will allow for serious discussion.

I have indicated to General Secretary Gorbachev my willingness for our
representatives to meet to prepare for the next summit. The location is
unimportant. What matters is that such a meeting take place in mutual
earnestness so that we can make progress at the next summit.

On the first day of meetings, Mr. Gorbachev and I took a little walk together.
He happened to mention that there was a great deal in the Soviet Union he wanted
me to see; I answered that I wished he could visit the United States. Next thing
you knew, we had agreed to meet here in 1986 and in the Soviet Union in 1987.
Now, that wasn't so hard, was it?

In this essay on peace, then, we can assert that the time has come to move
forward. Let us leave behind efforts to seek only limits to the increase of
nuclear arms and seek instead actual arms reductions - the deep and verifiable
reductions that Mr. Gorbachev and I have agreed to negotiate.

Mutual Assured Destruction

Let us leave behind, too, the defense policy of Mutual Assured Destruction - or
MAD, as it's called -and seek to put in its place a defense that truly defends.
Even now we are performing research as part of our Strategic Defense Initiative
that might one day enable us to put in space a shield that missiles could not
penetrate - a shield that could protect us from nuclear missiles just as a roof
protects a family from rain.

And let us leave behind suspicion between our peoples and replace it with
understanding. As a result of the cultural exchange agreement Mr. Gorbachev and
I signed in Geneva, the Soviet Union has already sent to our Nation the Kirov
Ballet and an exhibition of impressionist paintings. We in turn will send to the
Soviet Union scholars and musicians - indeed, the Russian-born American pianist,
Vladimir Horowitz, has already performed in Moscow.

And we hope to see a large increase in the number of everyday citizens traveling
between both countries -just last week at the White House, I met high school
students your age who will visit the Soviet Union this summer. Surely it is in
our interest that the peoples in the Soviet Union should know the truth about
the United States. And surely it can only enrich our lives to learn more about
them.

This brings us at last to our conclusion - if I may, then, a few final thoughts.
From the heart. I have tried to speak to you today of freedom and peace because
as your President it is my duty to do so, and because in my lifetime I have seen
our nation at war four times.

Casualties of World War II

During the Second World War, hundreds of thousands of Americans died - including
friends and relatives of mine, including friends and relatives of your families.
Perhaps some of you have pictures in your homes of great-uncles you never knew,
soldiers who fell fighting.

The Soviets suffered even more painfully than we. As many as 20 million people
in the Soviet Union died, and the western third of the country was laid waste -
parallel, if you will, to the destruction of all the United States east of
Chicago.

All the world has cherished the years of relative peace that have followed. In
the United States, we have seen the greatest economic expansion and
technological breakthroughs known to man - the landing on the Moon, the
development of the microchip. But our greatest treasure has been that you, our
children, have been able to grow up in prosperity and freedom.

It falls to us now - as it soon shall fall to you - to preserve and strengthen
the peace. Surely no man can have a greater goal than that of protecting the
next generation against the destruction and pain of warfare that his own
generation has known.

Reducing Nuclear Weapons

There can therefore be no more important task before us than that of reducing
nuclear weapons. I am committed - utterly committed - to pursuing every
opportunity to discuss and explore ways to achieve real and verifiable arms
reductions.

What our two nations do now in arms control will determine the kind of future
that you - and, yes, your children and your children's children - will face. So
I have come here today to say that the Glassboro summit was not enough, that
indeed the Geneva summit was not enough -that talk alone, in short, is not
enough. I have come here to invite Mr. Gorbachev to join me in taking action -
action in the name of peace.

My friends, let us dare to dream that when you return for your own son or
daughter's graduation, you will do so in a world at peace, a world that
celebrates human liberty, and a world free from the terror of nuclear
destruction. And let us work - first my generation, then soon, very soon, your
own - to make that dream come true.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SIDNEY LENS DIES; ACTIVIST OF LEFT

BYLINE: By JOAN COOK

SECTION: Section D; Page 23, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 424 words


Sidney Lens, a writer, union organizer and senior editor of Progressive
Magazine, died of cancer Wednesday at the University of Chicago Medical Center.
He was 74 years old and lived in Chicago.

Mr. Lens became a writer for Progressive Magazine, a populist monthly started in
1909 by Robert M. LaFollette Sr., of Madison, Wis., in the early 1950's. He
became a contributing editor of the magazine in the late 1960's and was named
senior editor in 1978. He was a prolific writer and a powerful speaker,
traveling about to college campuses addressing students on a variety of
political issues.

Mr. Lens was one of the organizers of the first Conference on Socialism and
Activism held in New York last year. In 1976 he was a founder of Mobilization
for Survival, a national peace group, and earlier was co-chairman of the New
Mobilization to End the War in Vietnam. In 1962 he was a peace candidate for
Congress.

Although he was a disciple of A. J. Muste, a democratic socialist who was a
prominent pacifist, Mr. Lens belonged to no political party.

'Never Put Labels on Himself'

''Sid never put labels on himself - he was a man without political
affiliation,'' his wife, a former Chicago schoolteacher, said in a telephone
interview from Chicago yesterday.

Mr. Lens was the author of numerous books, including ''Left, Right and Center,''
portraying the shortcomings and excesses of labor bureaucracy and ''business
unionism'' and advocating a new political party with labor as its nucleus
(1949); ''The Counterfeit Revolution,'' an analysis of the sources of Stalinist
strength (1952); ''Radicalism in America, a history of radicalism from
pre-Revolutionary time to the present (1966); ''The Military-Industrial
Complex,'' (1970), and ''Poverty, Yesterday and Today'' (1974).

He was born in Newark. His father, a pharmacist, died when he was 3 years old
and his mother supported the family by working as a seamstress in New York's
garment district. After graduating from high school, he got a job as a writer of
advertising for Hecht Brothers, a New York department store, where he became
involved in organizing the workers at the beginning of the Depression.

He went on to organize sitdown strikes for the United Automobile Workers in
Detroit, and was largely responsible for ridding the Chicago local of the retail
clerks union of the Capone mob's influence.

Other than his wife, the former Shirley Rubin, there are no immediate survivors.

A memorial service will be held at 2 P.M. Sunday at the Chicago Historical
Society.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Sidney Lens (UPI)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 21, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
Coming to Terms

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 971 words


HALF THE WAY HOME. A Memoir of Father and Son. By Adam Hochschild. 198 pages.
Viking. $15.95. To the world, Harold Hochschild was not only an enormously
successful businessman (the head of Amax Inc., one of the largest mining
concerns in the world) but also the consummate gentleman - charming, generous
and fluent in the worlds of business, politics and the arts.

To his son, Adam, however, Harold Hochschild seemed a fearsome presence - a
judgmental patriarch, the threat of whose disapproval hung darkly over his
entire childhood; and as he recounts in this memoir, he would spend his entire
life trying to come to terms with him.

By turns nostalgic and regretful, lyrical and melancholy, ''Half the Way Home''
creates a deeply felt portrait of a man and a boy, and like Geoffrey Wolff's
''Duke of Deception'' and Frank Conroy's ''Stop-Time,'' it also provides an
extraordinarily moving portrait of the complexities and confusions of familial
love. While it pushes the reader into memories of his own experiences in that
eternal, summertime world of childhood and adolescence, the book also remains
firmly grounded in the specifics of a particular time and place, conjuring them
up with Proustian detail and affection.

Certainly the world that Adam Hochschild grew up in was a rarefied and hermetic
one: in Manhattan, family members saw the city through the windows of a
penthouse and a limousine; at Eagle Nest, their country retreat in the
Adirondacks, they defined their days through meticulously scheduled bouts of
horse riding, water-skiing and dining. There were governesses, maids, cooks and
chauffeurs at home; and abroad, in Europe, Africa and the Soviet Union, a host
of company functionaries to attend to everyone's needs.

If Adam's father was skilled at making his way about the world, however, he was
ill-equipped to deal with simple emotional matters at home. Decorous,
self-conscious and almost willfully formal, he loathed displays of spontaneous
affection, was embarrassed by birthday presents and celebrations and was almost
incapable of articulating his private feelings. And clearly something of this
uneasiness infected his relationship with his only child. ''There was always a
stiffness in the air between us,'' Adam writes, ''as if we were both guests at a
party and the host had gone off somewhere before introducing us.'' Efforts, on
Adam's part, to appeal a paternal edict were met with chilly dismissals; a
lengthy copy of his journals, sent as a letter to his parents, was returned to
him by his father, edited in blue pencil for errors of grammar and style.

In fact, when it came to communicating with his son, Harold Hochschild seems to
have tried to use the same methods he used with such success in his business
dealings - that is, heavy applications of will and lots of methodical planning.
He organized outings, set up boxing matches and scheduled father-and-son
luncheons, hoping each time to win an acknowledgment of love, or at least a
gesture of appreciation. Each time, however, Adam would withhold the desired
response: in part, because he felt it was the only way to withstand his father's
inexorable will; in part, because the dominant emotion he felt toward his father
was fear - fear of his disapproval, fear of not meeting his expectations and
fear of somehow being exiled from the circle of his family's love.

Sometimes this fear would become so intense that young Adam would experience a
kind of nauseous dread; his greatest terror was that his mother - his protector,
comforter and intermediary with the world -would die, and leave him alone with
his father. In trying to explain the sources of this fear, Adam Hochschild tells
how his father took him to the hospital for a painful ear operation when he was
5 years old, and how that experience falsely imbued his father's presence with
danger. He tells how his father used to reprimand him for talking too much or
not talking enough, and how these lectures - always delivered in the most
reasonable tones - left him feeling guilty and inadequate. For all this
theorizing, Mr. Hochschild never fully succeeds in accounting for the fierceness
of his estrangement - but in the end, the very confusion he feels becomes part
of this story of missed connections and unexpressed emotions.

As he is the first to point out, Adam Hochschild spends the better part of his
early manhood trying to separate himself from his father and his father's way of
life. After a visit to South Africa awakens him to the injustices of racism, he
becomes increasingly active politically. He joins the civil-rights movement, he
demonstrates against the Vietnam War, he gets a job as a reporter for Ramparts
magazine and helps found Mother Jones. Gradually, he finds, his ''life's course
felt less a denial - I will not be the crown prince of Eagle Nest - and more an
affirmation.'' And as he does so, he begins to understand that his father's
chastisements actually cloak an underlying desire to reach out, that his
aloofness is less a choice than a product of a problematic and unresolved
relationship with his own father.

And while Adam's father continues to chide him - sending him letters filled with
suggestions about everything from work to marriage - he, too, begins to mellow
as the years go by. He begins exchanging jokes with his son, visits him and his
family in California, and even hands out gift subscriptions to Mother Jones, as
an unspoken gesture that he approves, perhaps even takes pride, in his son's
vocation.

There are no tearful reconciliation scenes between father and son - just as
there were never any declarations of overt hostility - but by the time Harold
Hochschild lies dying in a hospital bed, Adam has been able to move toward an
acceptance of this difficult man, and even to acknowledge his own love.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Adam Hochschild (Michael Jang)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 21, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT NEW YORK;
BOOM TIMES FOR VENDORS OF STARS AND STRIPES

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. GEIST

SECTION: Section 1; Page 31, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 964 words


''It's crazy, crazy,'' mumbled Mel Flamm, an American-flag salesman too busy
this week to stop and talk much, hustling from one customer to the next in the
showroom of AAA American Flag Company in the garment district.

American-flag manufacturers and dealers in New York say that sales of Old Glory
throughout the country are setting records. They say that Americans are not only
buying more flags, but also larger flags and costlier, higher-quality flags -
the latter, they say, because owners are flying them more and want them to hold
up.

''Everybody's a patriot,'' said Mr. Flamm, ringing up the sale of a 3- by-5-foot
nylon unit. He and others in the business attribute the rising sales, in part,
to the excitement over the Statue of Liberty centennial celebration this Fourth
of July weekend. But they agreed there is more to it than that.

''The upswing began,'' said Michael Liberman, president of the Valley Forge Flag
Company in Rockefeller Center, ''with the low-volume sales of the Watergate era
being reversed by the 1976 Bicentennial celebration.'' He added that 1977 and
1978 were good years, but that the real flag boom began in November 1979, when
Americans were taken hostage in Iran.

''That was the turning point for patriotism and flag sales,'' he said, ''almost
as great as another Pearl Harbor.'' Flag sales have set records each year since,
he said.

''We ask ourselves how to keep flag sales rolling,'' said Mr. Liberman, ''and my
only answer is to let Ronald Reagan have a third term.''

''I always maintained,'' he said, ''that our sales were independent of the stock
market and the economy, but with Reagan, the strong economy seems to be part of
an overall good feeling that instills patriotism and sells flags.''

The flag dealers said they were not certain whether Mr. Reagan is the cause of a
surge in patriotism - and flag sales - or the result of it. As Mr. Liberman put
it: ''Would Mr. Reagan have been elected if the hostages were not taken?''

Flag sales continued to rise, and boomed in 1984 because of the Olympics and the
Presidential election, events that always cause sales to rise, and were at
record highs last year for some reason. Annin and Company, of Verona, N.J.,
which claims to be the nation's oldest and largest flag manufacturer, reports
its American-flag sales at a high of about five million so far this year.

Irving Zand, a World War II veteran and resident of the Midwood section of
Brooklyn, came into AAA American Flag, at 40 West 37th Street, to buy a flag
this week.

''I don't know what it was,'' he said, paying $40.83 for a nylon unit. ''All of
a sudden, my conscience began bothering me. America has offered me so much, and
has given so much to the rest of the world. The rest of the world sneers at us.
I figured it was time to show the flag. I'll put it right smack out in front,
you bet!''

Another man purchased a flag from a clerk, Gail Hersh, who wore star-shaped
earrings and a red and white striped miniskirt. ''I just like to hear Old glory
snapping in the wind,'' the man said. ''It's music to my ears.''

One flag salesman recalled the lean years in the late 1960's and early 70's when
flag dealers had to rely on schools and post offices for the bulk of their
sales. Customers recalled the burning and mutilating of the flag to protest the
Vietnam War and construction workers in hard hats clashing with protesters to
protect the flag. ''It shows you what a powerful symbol the flag really is,''
one customer said.

''New York is now a city of immigrants,'' Mel Flamm said, ''and everybody is
patriotic about some place, so we carry every flag imaginable.'' Even Sao Tome e
Principe? he was asked. ''Cotton or nylon,'' Mr. Flamm replied.

If one happens to be in the market for, say, the official flag of the Rotary
Club of Barbados - long may it wave - Mr. Flamm has it.

Ian Flamm, his son and the company's vice president, told of a recent run on
Libyan flags, with buyers asking questions about the relative combustibility of
nylon and cotton flags. Sales personnel noted that nylon might give off an
unpleasant odor and stickier soot. The Afghan community in New York buys a lot
of Soviet flags for burning, Ian Flamm said.

A messenger arrived to buy Chinese flags. ''Cotton or nylon?'' asked the clerk.
''Mainland or Taiwan?''

The messenger was not certain, and Mel Flamm said he had better be, ''because if
mainland flags are in the centerpieces at a Taiwan banquet at the Waldorf, World
War III will break out.''

Mel Flamm, who noted that rentals of American flags are up dramatically this
year, said he was called upon recently to deliver 10,000 American flags in four
days for a parade in Washington. He proudly said he did it, ''buying up every
broom handle on the Eastern seaboard'' for poles.

''Everything in our patriotic line is moving,'' Mr. Liberman said. ''The
P.O.W.-M.I.A. flag is a good item this year. We've sold thousands of those. And
our commemorative Statue of Liberty flags are selling out. We won't have to eat
them for breakfast the way we often do with these one-shot deals.''

''This Fourth of July thing is so big I forgot Flag Day!'' said Mr. Flamm.
''Patriotism is out of control,'' added his son, noting they had sold ''miles of
bunting!

''Some of these guys,'' said Ian Flamm, referring to corporate customers, ''want
to put their company logo right on the American flag.'' He said he would not do
it.

The 20- by 30-foot American flag was always the largest most companies stocked
until recent years, when businesses began buying many of the 60- by 90-foot
models.

''Many are using the flag as a promotional item,'' said Michael Kartzmer,
national sales manager of Abbot Flag Company on Dey Street in lower Manhattan.
''Why? Patriotism is the bottom line.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Mel Flamm with display of flags and banners (NYT/Marilynn K.
Yee)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 22, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HEADLINERS;
Over Where?

SECTION: Section 4; Page 9, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 125 words


State Representative Royall H. Switzler was probably right on the money last
week when he told voters he was dropping out of the Massachusetts gubernatorial
contest because ''I cannot reasonably expect your support.'' Mr. Switzler, who
sought the Republican nomination, recently admitted that he had lied when he
said he had seen combat in Vietnam as a captain in the Army Special Forces;
actually, he conceded, he had served in peacetime Korea as a sergeant. His
departure from the gubernatorial race left Massachusetts Republicans in a bit of
a quandary. The other leading candidate for the nomination, Gregory S. Hyatt,
saw his campaign falter when a former employer said a female assistant had twice
discovered Mr. Hyatt naked in his office.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Royall H. Switzler

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              305 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 22, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE REAGAN LEGACY

BYLINE: By Bernard Weinraub; Bernard Weinraub is a White House correspondent for
The Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 13, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4898 words


HE COMPARES HIS legacy to F.D.R.'S. and if Franklin D. Roosevelt's impact on the
nation remained powerful years after his departure, Ronald Reagan believes -and
numerous politicians, academics and economists agree with him - that his impact
will prove just as far-reaching.

''Like F.D.R., may I say I'm not trying to destroy what is best in our system of
humane, free government, I'm doing everything I can to save it,'' President
Reagan remarks. As if expressing his own credo for the Presidency, Mr. Reagan
recently said of F.D.R., ''He gave confidence to the people. He never lost faith
in this country for one minute.''

While it seems evident that Mr. Reagan's legacy will be seen as having both
positive and negative aspects, it is clear that his impact, like F.D.R.'s, rests
in large part on restoring the primacy of the Presidency as an institution after
nearly two decades of White House disarray marked by Vietnam, Watergate and the
hostages in Iran.

''First of all, he has contributed a spirit of good will and grace to the
Presidency and American life generally and turned the Presidency into a vigorous
and forceful instrument of national policy,'' says Senator Edward M. Kennedy,
who, nonetheless, criticizes Mr. Reagan's economic, social and civil-rights
policies.

Says Gov. Mario M. Cuomo of New York, ''What he's reminded me of is the
importance of a leader being perceived as a force. By his personal conduct when
he's shot, when he's told he has cancer, when he goes to Normandy - the way he's
deported himself has been a moral instruction to my children.'' By virture of
Mr. Reagan's victories, says Mr. Cuomo, the Presdient has ''generated a whole
new introspection on the part of the Democratic Party.'' He adds, ''The results
can only be positive.''

Perhaps even more significant for national politics after Ronald Reagan, the
President has not only strengthened the conservative movement, he has also
institutionalized it. Stuart E. Eizenstat, who was President Carter's chief
domestic policy adviser, observes, ''What Reagan and his people have done is
place a whole generation of conservative to right-wing people with no experience
and given them not only a taste of power but experience in running a government,
just as F.D.R. did with Democrats, who then stayed on through the 60's and 70's.

''Conservatives are in levels now that run deep in government and, unlike the
people who came in with Eisenhower, Nixon and Ford who didn't have Bernard
Weinraub is a White House correspondent for The Times. a burning ideology and
saw it as their obligation to do public service, this group has a much more
long-term commitment to staying on and shaping government,'' says Mr. Eizenstat.
''Any Administration in the future - Democrat or Republican -will have to face a
bureaucracy considerably shifted to the right, and very consciously so.''

Adds Representative Jack F. Kemp, who views himself as an ideological, if not
Presidential, heir to Mr. Reagan, ''There used to be a mean streak in the
Republican conservative movement. Conservatives were viewed as not very
concerned about people. If he hasn't removed that permanently, he's ameliorated
it.''

Peggy Noonan, a departing White House speechwriter and a vocal conservative,
says, ''The first thing a successful President has to do is capture the
imagination of the people. In lightening the tax burden of the citizenry, by
ending the age of limits and beginning the age of growth, and by instituting a
more down-to-earth and less-enthralled approach to the Soviet Union, Ronald
Reagan communicated this historic message: We have nothing to fear but fear
itself.''

That phrase, one of F.D.R.'s best known, underlines the fact that, in speeches,
President Reagan himself often stirs memories of F.D.R. - in talking about
welfare as ''a subtle destroyer of the human spirit,'' about the value of
prayer, about restoring the autonomy of state and local governments, even about
the benefits of United States-Saudi Arabian friendship.

Nearly six years into the Reagan Presidency -and on the verge of obtaining a
sweeping restructuring of the tax code that has been the cornerstone of his
second term - Mr. Reagan's comparison with F.D.R. seems unerringly accurate. His
two remaining years in the White House leave him vulnerable, of course, to an
unexpected international crisis or a domestic economic slide that could darken
his Presidency. But now, as historians, economists, politicians and his own
associates begin examining the Reagan legacy, F.D.R. and R.R., as some senior
aides refer to him, seem perfectly - if ironically - matched. In the words of
Charles O. Jones, former editor of the American Political Science Review and a
professor at the University of Virginia, they are ''bookend Presidents - one in
the direction of more government, and trying to make system work, and this one
trying to make it work in the sense of less government. They're both radical,
but in totally different directions.''

On the face of it, the idea of a link between between Ronald Reagan and Franklin
D. Roosevelt may seem not only tenuous but also incongruous. After all,
Roosevelt began the New Deal, and Mr. Reagan effectively ended 50 years of
social-welfare expansion that had been engendered by that New Deal. The
Roosevelt programs grew out of a need to assist the millions of citizens
shattered by the Depression; under Mr. Reagan, hunger has increased, according
to a number of studies, despite the nation's economic upturn, and the poverty
rate is higher than it was in the 1970's, while budget cuts have resulted in the
permanent loss to 700,000 families of all or part of their benefits. (Liberals
concede that some of the cuts may have been warranted, and that the prospect of
restoring aid to these poor and moderate-income families after Mr. Reagan leaves
office seems improbable. If the President leaves a single legacy, it is that he
appears to have almost totally eliminated for years to come any discussion of
new social-welfare initiatives.) Roosevelt weighted the judiciary toward
liberalism, while Mr. Reagan - in what may emerge as one of his most significant
legacies - has begun reshaping the Federal bench with judges of a conservative
bent who ''will have an enduring impact for years to come,'' says Prof. Susan R.
Estrich of the Harvard Law School. She points out that many of the Reagan
appointees appear to have been deliberately selected for their youth. ''Reagan
will be out of the White House in two years, but we'll be arguing before these
guys for the next 20 or 30 years,'' she says. By the time he leaves office, Mr.
Reagan will have probably named more than half of the 761-member Federal
judiciary. Their impact will probably be felt most in criminal justice,
civil-rights policy, the social agenda - including abortion, prayer in school
and women's rights -and business regulations.

Roosevelt stabilized the economy, while Mr. Reagan's fiscal policies (centering
on a deep tax cut and a sizable military buildup) have increased already-huge
budget deficits that have helped devastate important sectors of the economy.
Most visibly - and permanently - thousands of families have left their farms,
numerous rural banks have been forced out of business and thousands of other
businesses that deal with farmers have collapsed. The farm belt's debt crisis
will shadow Midwest states years after the Reagan Presidency ends.

Beyond this, 40 percent of income tax dollars go for interest on the national
debt - a debt now standing at $2 trillion, almost half of it amassed during the
Reagan years. And even though the White House has endorsed efforts to reduce the
annual deficits (through the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings bill), economists say that
the huge accumulation of debt will weigh on the economy for many years. This
burden is likely to cause interest rates to remain unusually high, distort the
value of the dollar, cause American industries continued difficulty in their
competition with foreigners, and constrain the Government's ability to help the
unemployed and the poor.

On a personal level, F.D.R. was consumed by his work in the Oval Office, working
deep into the night, while Mr. Reagan leaves the Oval Office by 6 P.M.,
positively enjoying his job as Chief Executive (unlike Jimmy Carter) and never
complaining about the loneliness of making tough decisions. To many political
figures, including Democrats, Mr. Reagan will have an enduring impact on future
Presidents in the way he has managed the Presidency, the way in which he adheres
to two or three specific goals, such as cutting taxes or raising defense
spending, without appearing overwhelmed by the job, as Jimmy Carter did; his
personal confidence; his ability to distance himself from crisis or bad news;
his successful efforts (with a skilled staff) to plan the day around television
opportunities and assure a flow of positive symbols and images.

N A CHILLY MARCH evening last year, Ronald Reagan left the White House for a
local hotel to address the 12th annual Conservative Political Action Conference
dinner. The mood was festive, and the President quickly warmed to the partisan
crowd.

The tide of history, Mr. Reagan said, was now moving irresistibly in the
direction of conservatism after 50 years of liberal drift. Republicans were no
longer defenders of the status quo, but creators of a future marked by less
regulation, lower taxes and economic growth.

Beyond that, he said, perhaps the greatest triumph of modern conservatism has
been to stop allowing the left and the intelligentsia to tell average Americans
that they were ''hopelessly out of date, utterly trite and . . . reactionary.''

''The normal was portrayed as eccentric, and only the abnormal was worthy of
emulation,'' said Mr. Reagan. ''The irreverence was celebrated -but only
irreverence about certain things. Irreverence toward, say, organized religion?
Yes. Irreverence toward establishment liberalism? Not much of that. They
celebrated their courage in taking on safe targets, and patted each other on the
back for slinging stones at a confused Goliath who was too demoralized - and,
really, too good -to fight back. But now, one simply senses it: the American
people are no longer on the defensive.''

Given the President's gift for exaggeration and self-congratulation, the speech
seemed unremarkable. But as a projection of Mr. Reagan's views of his legacy and
a demonstration of the themes that have dominated his terms - from reshaping the
national agenda to slowing the growth of domestic spending, from changing the
priorities of the Federal budget in favor of more military spending to restoring
a sense of national pride and endorsing certain middle-class values - the speech
served as both a second-term marching call to the faithful and an embodiment of
the ''Reagan Revolution.''

''The moment is ours, and we must seize it,'' said the President in a hoarse
voice. ''There is work to do.''

Although he is the most influential President in 50 years, even his aides
acknowledge that Mr. Reagan, with two years left in the White House to seize a
''revolution,'' has only scraped around the edges of the welfare state, leaving
it largely intact. In fact, there has actually been an an increase in the number
of Federal workers (because of the shift of emphasis to defense), despite the
pledge to reduce ''big government.'' And the promises to abolish everything from
the Department of Energy to the Department of Education and to balance the
Federal budget have been abandoned.

Yet political figures, academics and economists assessing the Reagan years say
that after six years, the legacy of Ronald Reagan is - even with its failures -
an extraordinarily powerful one and that his impact will affect domestic and
foreign policy and the Presidency itself through the 1990's.

''He has restored the Presidency as an institution after a run of basically
three failed Presidencies,'' says Henry Hugh Heclo, a professor of government at
Harvard. ''He had a clear idea of what he wanted - cut the budget for the
domestic side and raise it for the military - and maintained command of the
agenda. He's made it clear you don't have to be hyperactive to be President, to
have an answer for every question. It's O.K. for a President not to know
everything. He seemed to make the job manageable. And although the basic
textural fact of his popularity is the sustained economic upturn, what also
makes him popular is, he actually seems like a normal human being. He's
knowable, he's likable. He's not weird. You think of Johnson and Nixon and
Carter. And then there's Reagan. He's someone you'd be happy to have in your
living room.''

But there are also contradictions in the Reagan Presidency that, according to
some historians, raise the possibility that in 10 or 20 years the Reagan era
will be viewed merely as a strange interlude in American politics. For example,
his personal popularity ratings, especially high for a second-term President,
are not matched by public support for some of his key policies. As Fred I.
Greenstein, a professor of politics at Princeton, puts it: ''He is more
successful than any recent President in establishing space between himself and
his policies.''

Certainly, to many observers, the Reagan legacy is not an especially happy one.
''Government may or may not be able to solve the problems of inflation,
unemployment and growth in an increasingly competitive world economy, but one
could hope that it would at least not make matters worse in the process of
trying to make them better,'' writes Isabel V. Sawhill, an economist, in
''Perspectives on the Reagan Years,'' a collection of essays edited by John L.
Palmer that is scheduled to be published late this summer by the influential
Urban Institute. ''Yet this is the true legacy of the Reagan years. There have
been earlier periods of economic mismanagement, but few, if any, can rival the
current Government's tolerance of budget deficits that virtually guarantee
poorer productivity performance in the future and a further erosion of our
relative standard of living.'' SIMILAR VIEW IS voiced by Senator Daniel P.
Moynihan. ''Ronald Reagan as an immensely popular President has done the polity
a great service,'' he says. ''We needed a popular President. The social order is
peaceable and in good order. From L.B.J.'s time and Vietnam to Watergate and
then the Iranian hostages, we needed that. But he has crippled the economy of
the nation and this will be with us for the rest of the century.''

And Richard P. Nathan, a professor of public and international affairs at
Princeton University, says, looking at Mr. Reagan's economic and social
policies: ''The Reagan Administration marks a watershed in domestic policy and
signals a fundamental shift in attitude in which the Federal Government takes on
a much smaller responsibility for social and urban issues. The Roosevelt New
Deal served as a period of ascendancy in both identifying and dealing with
social needs. The Reagan Presidency marks a turning away from that agenda by
stopping the growth in Federal efforts and spending in certain social programs,
by turning over authority to state governments in areas where the Federal
Government previously played an important role.''

In the economic field, the 1981 tax cuts, the dramatic fall in inflation from
12.4 percent to less than 4 percent and the break in the wage-price spiral,
which some attribute to Mr. Reagan's determined handling of the air traffic
controllers' strike, are hallmarks of the Reagan years. Murray L. Weidenbaum,
chairman of the President's Council of Economic Advisers in 1981-82, says that
the break-up of the air traffic controllers' union was ''the single most
important event in American labor relations in more than a decade - strike
activity is at its lowest point in 30 years.'' Mr. Reagan's ability to crush the
strike undoubtedly will make future Presidents far less inhibited about similar
moves.

The first year of the Reagan Administration was marked by its most significant
legislative achievment and the pivot of the President's domestic program - the
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981. The measure encompassed such goals as
reducing the size and scope of the Federal Government in domestic affairs
(although Mr. Reagan, in his budgets, also sought big increases in defense
spending), fundamental changes in welfare policy (which restricted eligibility
and reduced benefits in the main Federal-state program) and the establishment of
block grants, which sought to shift domestic priorities to the states.

''The budget act of 1981 is the most important piece of domestic legislation
since the Social Security Act of 1935,'' writes Professor Nathan in the
soon-to-be-published Urban Institute book. ''The 1981 budget act represented a
marked shift in direction on social spending and encompassed fundamental changes
in the substance of domestic policy and in American Federalism.''

Poor families have suffered in large numbers; the disadvantaged have borne a
disproportionate share of the burden compared to politically powerful
middle-class constituents ranging from some farmers, to veterans, to Social
Security recipients. The new tax revision, however, if passed, has provisions
for the poor that could take many off the tax rolls.

''The cuts have, let's face it, caused a considerable amount of pain,'' remarks
Jack A. Meyer, a resident fellow at the American Enterprise Institute and
president of a Washington social welfare research firm. He also notes that cuts
in supplemental income for the working poor would send ''a long-term signal to
people in low-income households that we're not going to reward work, we're not
going to reward holding families together, and it'll have an effect beyond
Reagan. We're restricting public assistance to split families headed by
nonworking adults. What this means is, we have not addressed the issue of
long-term welfare dependency, we have not addressed the issue of people in this
society caught in the cycle of teen-age pregnancy and crime and long-term
welfare dependency.''

It is these budget cuts involving the poor that raise question's about Mr.
Reagan's future standing among other Presidents.

''When it came time, great Presidents bent over backwards to speak for the less
privileged, to take a moral stance, and Reagan hasn't done that,'' says Thomas
E. Cronin, an author of several books on the Presidency, who teaches at Colorado
College. ''History will treat Reagan less well than the public opinion polls
today because being popular is not necessarily doing the right thing.''

''Reaganism's celebration of a nation of communities has no real answer when
such communities entrench equality and merrily suppress the individualism of
those falling out of the mainstream of particular small groups' norms,'' writes
Professor Heclo of Harvard in the Urban Institute book.

''The economic, as opposed to the social, face of Reagan's individualism can
easily be portrayed as playing to the most rationalized forms of selfishness -
looking out for No. 1 is the best way of helping the country. There can arise a
determined insensitivity that passes for toughmindedness. The economic losers
are not victims, just incompetents. Reaganism then becomes a rationale for the
nation to secede from some downcast fraction of its own inhabitants.''

T HE ECONOMY -the booming stock market, inflation of only 3 or 4 percent (thanks
in large part to the oil price collapse), the move toward single-digit mortgage
rates -serve as the underpinning for the President's popularity. But the huge
budget deficit, sluggish productivity growth, growing foreign debt and the
decline in the dollar's value, which raises import prices, create a shadowy,
even ominous backdrop.

Asked why the President and his chief of staff, Donald T. Regan, did not seem to
view the deficit with the same concern as many economists (despite their
endorsement of the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings balanced-budget act), William A.
Niskanen, former acting chairman of the President's Council of Economic
Advisers, replied: ''If the deficit were causing near-term economic problems,
they'd be concerned. But it hasn't. It's just too easy to put off. It has proved
to be consistent with moderately good economic conditions.''

Mr. Reagan's impact on the Republican Party - and national politics - offers one
of the more striking contradictions about a conservative President who is
extraordinarily popular in a nation undergoing considerable social change. The
irony has not been lost on Democratic and Republican politicians. Although he
embodies, for many voters, an America of small towns, tightly-knit families and
religious values, Mr. Reagan came of age in show business, enjoys a ribald joke,
rarely goes to church, became the first divorced man to serve as President and
has had an often-strained relationship with his children.

Assessing Mr. Reagan's impact on the political process, however, especially on
the Republican Party, has a potentially significant negative side. The
President; his Attorney General, Edwin L. Meese 3d, and his Education Secretary,
William J. Bennett, have paid obeisance to the religious right. ''The religious
right has been legitimized by the six years of Ronald Reagan; they're no longer
regarded as a fringe group, they're part of the power structure,'' says Kevin
Phillips, a Republican political analyst. ''In the same way that the Democrats
had been perceived as bending too far to organized labor, to minorities, to
gays, the Republicans are in danger of being seen as tilting too far to to the
religious right.'' The likelihood is that the Republican agenda will be affected
by the Rev. Marion G. (Pat) Robertson and the Rev. Jerry Falwell. Accordingly,
the Republicans face pressures to adopt programs involving social and religious
values that are anathema to a relatively libertarian youthful constituency that
voted heavily for Ronald Reagan in 1984.

''The growing crisis in the Republican Party is, how to do they resolve the
social agenda of the religious right, which the President has done so much to
legitimize?'' says Patrick Caddell, the Democratic polltaker. ''How do they
restrain those impulses at a time when politics is shifting to a generation
whose hallmark is tolerance on social issues?'' It is quite possible, Mr.
Caddell continues, that Mr. Reagan has unwittingly created ''a monster'' that
could seize the Republican Party.

Even Richard Wirthlin, Mr. Reagan's polltaker, concedes that ''a social schism
between economic conservatives and social libertarians could open up in 1988.''
But Mr. Wirthlin observes that one of the more unusual twists of the 1984
Presidential campaign was that Mr. Reagan received a far higher percentage of
votes from those under 24 than he had in 1980. What attracted the young to
Reagan were qualities that voters also saw in F.D.R. -stability and direction.

M R. REAGAN'S huge defense buildup also stirs negative questions about his
legacy. His campaign rhetoric about fraud, waste and abuse in government has
been turned on its head, and Republicans have joined Democrats in condemning
fraud, waste and abuse at the Pentagon. The consensus for increased defense
spending has withered, and it seems improbable that even Republican Presidential
contenders such as Vice President George Bush or Jack Kemp will focus their
campaigns on the need for stepped-up military spending.

Democrats concede that abroad, the United States now projects self-confidence
and authority for the first time since Vietnam - no small feat, although United
States-Soviet relations, arms control, the Middle East and Central America
remain in a state of uncertainty.

But, says William G. Hyland, editor of the journal Foreign Affairs,
''Historically, Reagan will be remembered for reopening the question of
strategic defenses as a broad issue, a question that's been closed since the
postwar period, a question that was buttoned up; no one was talking about it
except one or two people on the fringes.''

Mr. Eizenstat says that one of the most significant results of Mr. Reagan's
tenure is that ''America has finally come to terms with the Vietnam legacy.''
The Libyan raid, the Grenada invasion, support for rebels in Nicaragua, Angola,
Afghanistan and elsewhere marked a turning point that will affect future
Administrations. ''The sense that America was paralyzed in projecting its power
after Vietnam was ended by Reagan,'' says Mr. Eizenstat. ''Future
Administrations will no longer be inhibited by Vietnam; future Administrations
will have more leeway in projecting U.S. economic and military power without
running into the constant argument of Vietnam.''

''Give Reagan credit for one thing,'' says Walter F. Mondale, who gives him
credit for little else. ''He's uncanny in his ability to create a sense of
feeling good, of enhancing the American spirit, of pumping up the American sense
of self-worth. He belongs to the marketer's school of politics; it's not
substance, it's positioning and selling. It's not policy, it's polling. It's
market surveys, it's film-making, it's using the skills of Hollywood to lead the
country. And it's been so successful, I'd be surprised if a lot of politicians
weren't influenced by it.''

But Mr. Reagan's successful political career is hardly just the result of
Hollywood technique. He is a shrewd, calculating and, to some degree,
manipulative politician and ideologue. And even Mr. Mondale agrees that Mr.
Reagan's two landslide Presidential victories, his leadership style, have
altered the nation's politics for the future.

''Reagan has made as much of a midcourse correction in the direction of American
policy and politics as it is possible to make in a noncrisis environment, and
his accomplishments have been extraordinary in the sense that for the last five
years everybody has played off his agenda - everybody,'' says Mr. Eizenstat.
''It's not whether you cut domestic spending, it's how much. It's not whether
you increase defense spending, but how much. He has captured the high ground on
virtually every major issue of consequence and controlled the debate as well as
any President since Roosevelt.''

Mr. Reagan's ''visionary zeal'' in seeking to turn the Republicans into the
nation's majority party has transformed the nation's political scene for the
near future. ''It will take an extraordinary candidate and set of circumstances
for the Democrats to win the Presidency in the foreseeable future,'' says Mr.
Eizenstat.

Mr. Reagan's Presidential persona - his style - has impressed other politicians,
who confess that they've learned from him. ''He's conducted himself with grace,
with control, with generosity,'' says Governor Cuomo. ''His personal strength
has produced high poll figures - certainly not his position on the economy. He's
totally nonmenacing, so affable, that if you're vulnerable, you're poor, you
have to believe he's a man of feeling.''

He has succeeded in changing the terms of the national debate over domestic
policy: antipoverty programs were reduced, grants to the states and communities
that enabled them to hire the jobless were eliminated and middle-income college
students became ineligible for Government-backed loans. Yet if Mr. Reagan
yearned to overturn the welfare state, he has failed in doing so.

''The current view of Reagan's legacy is that he made assaults on government and
he attempted to shrink government,'' says Senator Bill Bradley, Democrat of New
Jersey. ''He tried to do that. But the result of his eight years will be the
closing of any debate on the value, acceptability and existence of the modern
welfare state.'' In fact, because of overwhelming Congressional resistance to
fundamental changes in domestic programs, Social Security, civil-rights acts,
the Clean Air act, consumer protection and Federal aid to education remain on
the books, some of them diminished but all still effective.

Although, six years into his Presidency, some critics dismiss Mr. Reagan - and
Reaganism - as an aberration, an interregnum in American politics with marginal
impact, most academics and politicians say that the Reagan years will symbolize,
as have few other Administrations in decades, the way most Americans of the era
view themselves, their neighbors and their Government.

''Just as liberalism made it all right to talk about sex, Reaganism made it all
right to talk about patriotism, work requirements and family values, parochial
allegiances, moral purpose and, yes, imposing middle-class values on others,''
writes Professor Heclo of Harvard in the Urban Institute book. ''Reaganism has a
future because Americans want to talk about these things in politics. Reaganism
is an upbeat, positive political message. In this regard there is much in common
with the older liberal tradition of the Happy Warrior, 'Happy Days are Here
Again' and 'politics of joy.' Reaganism, like the headiest days of liberalism,
offers a vision in which Americans can have it all: world leadership, economic
growthmanship without guilt or hard choices. Americans have only to believe in
their own dreams.

''To the experts who speak of limitations, economic contradictions, tradeoffs,
United States international decline, Reaganism offers the classic American
response: Nuts.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of President Reagan and Walter Cronkite (Rene Burri/Magnum);
photo of President Reagan arguing for tax reforms (Larry Downing, Woodfin Camp);
photo of Franklin D. Roosevelt (UPI Bettimann Newsphotos); photo of a welfare
mother feeding her children (Stephenie Hollyman); photo of crowds at the
Government Printing Office (Cynthia Johnson/Gamma-Liaison); photo of President
Reagan with memb

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              306 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 22, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE RIGHT TO BE IN COMBAT

BYLINE: By Russell F. Weigley; Russell F. Weigley, a professor of history at
Temple University, is the author of ''History of the United States Army.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 15, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1670 words


STRENGTH FOR THE FIGHT A History of Black Americans in the Military. By Bernard
C. Nalty. Illustrated. 424 pp. New York: The Free Press. $22.50.

FOR black Americans, progress toward equality in the armed forces has usually
required the stimulus of war. This is the unhappy but hardly unexpected
conclusion that emerges from ''Strength for the Fight,'' Bernard C. Nalty's able
overview of blacks in the American military. Sometimes the stimulus was applied
directly by the enemy, who by enlisting blacks frightened white Americans into
allowing black enlistments also. Early in the American Revolution, on Nov. 2,
1775, John Murray, fourth Earl of Dunmore, the royal governor of Virginia,
offered freedom to slaves and indentured servants who would join with British
troops in restoring the colony's loyalty to the crown. He organized an Ethiopian
Regiment about 300 strong. A conference between Gen. George Washington and his
principal subordinates on Oct. 8, 1775, had produced a decision to ban black
enlistments in the Continental Army, but Dunmore's activities may have helped
precipitate decisions by Washington and the Continental Congress to reverse
course - to the extent of permitting re-enlistment of blacks already serving.

In the War of 1812 the British operating around the Chesapeake Bay accepted
escaped slaves into a contingent of 200 black marines. Among the battles they
fought in was Bladensburg on Aug. 24, 1814. That battle produced the British
victory that opened the door to the city of Washington. The Legislative Council
of Louisiana, no doubt aware of such possibilities, had already moved toward
partial pre-emption of them by authorizing the enlistment of free blacks, and
later two battalions of them fought with Maj. Gen. Andrew Jackson in his defense
of New Orleans. They included black officers, two of whom, Vincent Populus and
Joseph Savory, were commissioned as majors; the latter commanded the second
battalion by the time it went into action.

The circumstances of later wars tended to preclude direct appeals by the enemy
to American blacks, but as late as the Spanish-American War, there was a
conviction in part of the black community that black enlistment amounted to
black participation in the same kind of racist imperialism from which blacks
themselves suffered. And even after enlisting blacks in the services was no
longer a matter of pre-empting the enemy, the desperation attendant upon war
persisted as the main force favor-ing black advancement in the military.

Mr. Nalty is a historian with the Office of Air Force History and previously the
editor, with Morris J. MacGregor Jr., of the 13 volumes of ''Blacks in the
United States Armed Forces: Basic Documents.'' Compiling that indispensable
collection gave him the foundation for ''Strength for the Fight,'' the soundest
and best documented synthesis of black American military history we have.

While Mr. Nalty gives ample attention to events before 1940, the special
strength of the book lies in its account of World War II and after. This period
has been a time of exceptionally rapid change, not least because of the
continual pressure of wars and near wars. And the black military history of the
period has only begun to be digested by historians.

If whites' need for blacks' assistance in war has been the principal impetus to
black military advancement, nevertheless whites have been reluctant even into
the very recent past - and are even now? - to grant blacks the recognition of
manhood that in our culture is implicit in participating in combat. From the
first large-scale enlistments of blacks during the Civil War, the armed forces
attempted to relegate black men mainly to noncombat assignments. In the Navy,
whose crews were integrated during the sailing-ship era, blacks in the steam and
steel warships of the first half of the 20th century were pushed down into the
engine rooms and to a still greater extent into servile positions, cooking and
waiting on table for officers. WHILE President Franklin D. Roosevelt, under
pressure of a re-election campaign and an approaching war, announced on Oct. 9,
1940, that blacks would serve in the Army in proportion to their population and
would be eligible for the Army Air Corps as well as other branches, the
experiences of the black 99th Fighter Squadron and the black 761st Tank
Battalion (among others chronicled by Mr. Nalty) demonstrate how difficult it
was for even a handful of blacks to win acceptance as combat soldiers.
Furthermore, it required the crisis of the German counteroffensive in the
Ardennes in the winter of 1944-45 to create even so much integration as the
incorporating of some black platoons and companies into white infantry units.

Many whites professed to believe that discrimination in the military was
acceptable because blacks could not fight as well as whites. By the time of the
Korean War, an investigation of military justice as applied to black soldiers,
undertaken for the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People by
Thurgood Marshall, pointed by implication to the baneful effects of segregation.
The study found that segregation reached well beyond unequal military justice
and explained why a black combat unit like the 24th Infantry Regiment, once a
proud contingent of the post-Civil War Indian-fighting Army, now had a dubious
combat record. Mr. Marshall found that segregation sapped the morale of the
black soldier in ways that affected every aspect of his performance.

Mr. Nalty's historical survey carries the implications still further. It
suggests that for blacks just freed from slavery, it seemed enough recognition
of their manhood to be allowed to be soldiers at all during the Civil War and
the Indian-fighting days, and so black Civil War regiments and especially the
black regiments of the old Regular Army often fought well. Increasingly in the
20th century, blacks perceived how limited their acceptance was when they might
wear a military uniform but only in segregated circumstances and in the face of
a reluctance to allow them to fight that was, if anything, growing. With
evidence all around them that whites still did not regard them quite as men,
they refused often to exceed white expectations, and in Korea the 24th Infantry
became notorious for its rate of ''bugging out'' of combat.

On the other hand, by the time of the Korean War, whites needed black soldiers
and needed them in combat; sufficient manpower to meet the global
responsibilities of the cold war was hard to find. So the armed services at last
set out to implement President Harry S. Truman's Executive Order 9981 of July
26, 1948, decreeing racial equality in the military. And once the military
actually moved toward equality, blacks showed themselves again to be the capable
warriors they had always possessed the potential to be.

To be sure, even in the 1950's and later, as Mr. Nalty's concluding chapters
eloquently demonstrate, the military will to implement equality has been weak.
In the era of all-volunteer armed forces, energies that the Army might well have
spent educating white noncommissioned officers to accept the racial implications
of a volunteer force - and energies that the other services might well have
spent trying to attract black officers - have gone instead into worrying about
''tipping points'' at which blacks might become excessively overrepresented in
the military. In the Vietnam War, in fact, that overrepresentation was of
concern also to black leaders, whose perspective was different. They worried
that blacks were becoming a disproportionate part of the combat troops.

Mr. Nalty's book suggests that it may require another war to correct the armed
forces' latest mistakes. Does it go without saying that American society is so
willfully blind on racial matters that even reading this book will not prevent
the emergence of yet another variety of folly? Mr. Nalty makes optimism about
his subject difficult to muster. TRUMAN OUTFLANKED The Democrats, meeting in
convention, sought to adopt a civil rights plank in their campaign platform that
bridged the gap between liberals and conservatives . . . integrationists and
segregationists. This time the usual strategy failed. . . . The delegates
incorporated in the party platform all the measures that Mr. Truman supported
but had hoped to avoid raising as campaign issues. . . .

Suddenly the Democratic phalanx . . . was shorn of its far left wing, which
marched off behind Wallace, and its far right, which now followed Thurmond. A
number of President Truman's closest advisers believed that he could turn these
defections to his advantage. Clark Clifford, for one, had been insisting for the
past year that black voters could hold the key to victory in the 1948
presidential election. Another adviser, Oscar Ewing, urged the Chief Executive
to issue at once a series of directives based on the . . . civil rights plank. .
. .

Clifford, Ewing, and Philleo Nash, another of the President's advisers,
hurriedly prepared the draft of an executive order. . . . ''It is hereby
declared,'' intoned the executive order of July 26, 1948, ''that there shall be
equality of treatment and opportunity for all persons in the armed services
without regard to race, color, religion, or national origin.'' . . .

What did the order mean? Was it merely a broadening of the Army's failed policy
of increasing opportunity without disturbing racial segregation? It definitely
was not. When asked during a press conference if his ''advocacy of equal
treatment and opportunity in the Armed Forces'' foretold the eventual end of
segregation, the President's answer was an unequivocal ''Yes.''

Words like these produced the effect that Truman, the politician, wanted. All
but the most skeptical of black leaders rallied behind him. Among those who took
the President at his word was A. Philip Randolph, for the black union leader
abandoned his plan to organize resistance to the draft. - From ''Strength for
the Fight.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of black soldiers, sailors and marines from the 1880's through
1968.; Photo of Bernard C. Nalty (Page 17)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              307 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 22, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM SCULPTURE GETS GO-AHEAD AS EFFORT ON HOLOCAUST RESUMES

BYLINE: By JAMES FERON

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 1, Column 3; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1269 words


TWO proposed memorials, one for Vietnam War veterans and the other for Holocaust
victims, seized the attention of Westchester officials last week, with one
taking shape and the other remaining enmeshed in administrative and artistic
confusion.

The county, which his offered sites for both monuments, announced that the
Vietnam memorial honoring local residents who were killed or missing in action
would be installed next year at the newly acquired Lasdon County Park in Somers.

The Holocaust memorial, a six-year-old project that was canceled last fall for
architectural and financial reasons, may be revived next week when members of a
memorial committee meet to recommend a new chairman.

Meanwhile, a private group, Westchester Public Art, is seeking to take the
initiative in resuming the effort to commemorate the estimated six million Jews
who were systematically killed by the Nazis before and during World War II.

County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke, who is involved in both efforts, said he
was ''pleased to be able, in a small way, to have the county play a part in
honoring county residents who served in the Vietnam War'' and that the county
also was ''ready to accept an appropriate piece of sculpture'' that
''encompasses the thrust of the Holocaust.''

Turning his attention to the Vietnam memorial at a news conference, Mr. O'Rourke
called the proposed monument a ''fitting piece of sculpture.'' It is designed by
Julia Cohen, a Bedford sculptor, and depicts three bronze figures: a soldier
carrying a wounded comrade with a military nurse running toward them.

Dr. Marcus Gmelin, president of the Northern Westchester Jaycees, a
community-service organization that will seek to raise the $300,000 necessary
for the project, said that the Westchester and Putnam chapter of the Vietnam
Veterans of America, which helped initiate the project, was ''delighted'' with
the county's response.

Dr. Gmelin, a psychologist, said that county veterans conditioned by public
apathy and even hostility to the lengthy Vietnam conflict, were surprised and
pleased by the county's interest in participating in the placement of the
monument.

''They were a bit skeptical at first,'' he said, ''because this conflict had
ended over 10 years ago and there was still little public recognition. Other
wars ended with ticker-tape parades and with the nation embracing the veterans,
but Vietnam was an exception.''

The idea originated with Richard W. Dwyer, a Bedford policeman and Jaycee
member, and was presented in January to the veterans group. ''One of their
recommendations was to include the nurse,'' Dr. Gmelin said. ''They said that as
far as they knew, no such reference had ever been made in any Vietnam memorial
to the women who took part in the war.''

''They said people forgot that thousands of women participated in the war and
that they felt isolated, too,'' Dr. Gmelin said. The veterans thought that ''she
should be a nurse, dressed in fatigues.'' Miss Cohen, who had been selected to
do the sculpture, modified the original plan, which included only the two men.

Miss Cohen said that the memorial pieces - 6 and 7 feet high - would take ''six
months of sculpting and six months of casting.'' The concept was Mr. Dwyer's,
she said; ''I personalized it.'' The figures will stand on a 110-by-20-foot site
that will include a flagpole encircled by a cobblestone path.

At the base of the flagpole there will be four plaques inscribed with the names
of Westchester men and women killed in the war or listed as missing. Mr. Dwyer
said he estimated that the names of 250 to 400 residents would be recorded.

Dr. Gmelin said the Vietnam memorial organizers sought the county's endorsement
of the project in March, after a second meeting with the veterans. ''We met
first with Roger Biaggi,'' the County Executive's chief of staff ''and a Vietnam
veteran himself,'' Mr. Gmelin said, ''and then with Mr. O'Rourke, a Naval
Reserve officer, ''who was very supportive.''

He said the group had no idea how it would be received ''and when we left we
were in seventh heaven.'' The Jaycees will conduct direct-mail fund raising,
primarily in Westchester, Dr. Gmelin said, and they will seek corporate support,
with $10,000 donations entitling contributors to 15-inch-high bronze sculptures.
The number for information is 666-8141.

The Holocaust memorial effort began earlier, in 1980, under former County
Executive Alfred B. DelBello, who had appointed Martin S. Berger, president of
the Robert Martin Company, a major real estate developer, as chairman of a
20-member Holocaust Memorial Committee.

A memorial site was provided by the county in White Plains, between the County
Courthouse and the White Plains library, and an abstract design selected. It
consisted of two contiguous black granite triangles, one symbolizing humanity
and the other children, with the six points representing a Star of David.

The raised memorial area would be lighted, with trees, plantings and flowing
water to represent life. Plaques in a special mosaic would have designated the
extermination camps and there would also have been a ''Founders' Wall'' for the
names of major contributors.

Samuel G. Fredman, a lawyer and member of the commission, said last week that
''it was too ambitious, and perhaps too costly - the estimated price was
$750,000. But the biggest problem was that the memorial would have been too
heavy for the site, which is the roof of the library's parking garage.''

Mr. Berger, who had raised $70,000 to $100,000, according to Mr. Fredman, has
since resigned and returned the money to the contributors. An educational aspect
of the Holocaust memorial is continuing, however, and a monument may yet be
realized.

''The County Executive now has to appoint somebody to replace Marty Berger,''
Mr. Fredman said, ''and perhaps decide which direction to have this commission
go. Some of us are meeting next Wednesday with Judy Matson,'' Mr. O'Rourke's
coordinator of special events, ''to discuss the next step,'' which he said could
include a ''scaled down'' monument.

The original plan also was to contain an ongoing educational program dealing
with the Holocaust, to include courses on the subject in colleges in the county,
teacher-training courses, special projects and library acquisitions. Mr. Fredman
said he hoped that a program of Jewish studies at the State University of New
York in Purchase would include Holocaust studies, in part for public school
teachers.

Mr. O'Rourke said he still wanted to help: ''We had a meeting three or four
months ago and set forth our policy, which was to produce a TV show on the
Holocaust, which we've done; to include the Holocaust as part of the SUNY
curricula, and that's being done. And we said if they wanted to come up with a
piece of public sculpture, we'd accept it.''

Meanwhile, Adele Greene, director of Westchester Public Art, a group whose goal
is to place works of art in communities countywide, has offered to take on the
Holocaust memorial project. ''I only need O'Rourke to say its O.K.,'' she said.

She said that ''we'd raise the money privately, but its not necessary to go to
$750,000.''

''In San Francisco, George Segal, the renowned sculptor, did a Holocaust
memorial sculpture for $500,000; that's public art at its best,'' she said.

Westchester Public Art, which is both a private and nonprofit organization, she
said, placed a 14-foot red megaphone entitled Freedom of Expression National
Monument at Westchester Community College last November ''and we're hoping to do
a temporary installation in Mount Vernon's Hartley Park.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 22, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WESTCHESTER JOURNAL;
NICARAGUA VOLUNTEERS

BYLINE: By Tessa Melvin

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 3, Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 440 words


''One way, you get more mosquitos, the other way you get more dust,'' Marianne
R. Maloney said, as she recalled facing a decision between picking coffee or
cotton in Nicaragua.

Mrs. Maloney, a 67-year-old retired school teacher from Bedford Village, chose
cotton and last February spent two weeks working on a cotton plantation as part
of a volunteer ''brigadista'' in that war-torn country.

More than 100 Westchester County area residents have visited Nicaragua in the
last few years, and this summer five more peace activists and students will
leave to join a North American construction brigade.

The brigade is part of an ongoing international campaign that includes teams
from several European countries. While most brigades will help to build 40
schools in the Sebaco Valley in the central part of Nicaragua, the Westchester
group will be working on a housing cooperative in Miguel Angel Lagos, north of
Managua, the capital city.

The five include Mike Levinson of New Rochelle, associate director of the
Westchester People's Action Coalition; Stephen Duncombe of Rye and Felicity
Arengo of White Plains, both students at the State University of New York in
Purchase; Peter Clauson of White Plains, a high school student at Woodlands High
School in Greenburgh; and Brandon Marger of Valley Cottage in Nyack, a
carpenter.

The group is raising $7,000, which they say they will need for their trip
because they plan to carry in most of their building supplies. ''Nicaragua is a
very underdeveloped country,'' Mr. Levinson said. ''There's a shortage of nails,
screws and work gloves, all the things you'd think you just go into the hardware
store and pick up.''

The Nicaragua Construction Brigade, as the international group is called, was
formed in 1984, Mr. Levinson said, after people contacted Nicaraguan officials
to ''see how they could help.''

A teacher at Woodlands High School, Andrew Courtney, became coordinator of the
first construction brigade, which visited Nicaragua in 1984 and included a
half-dozen Westchester social activists. Mr. Courtney is a member of a
fact-finding group of elected officials and professors from around the country
who are planning to visit three Latin American countries this summer.

When Mrs. Maloney decided to join a brigade last year, she did so, she said,
''because I wanted to see for myself what was going on.'' Mrs. Maloney said she
was convinced now that Nicaragua was ''another Vietnam.'' She added: ''If our
foreign policy continues to be based on lies, and Congress continues to be too
slow to respond, we'll be involved in a low-intensity conflict the rest of our
lives.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              309 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 22, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT: FICTION

BYLINE: By Charles Salzberg

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 292 words


THE BLIND CORRAL. By Ralph Beer. (Viking, $16.95.) The West, as writers like Sam
Shepard are quick to point out, is the West no longer. Today it is filled with
shopping malls, trailer parks and yuppie bars. The bad guys are not bank robbers
and bushwhackers with six-guns strapped to their hips, but bankers and land
developers who wield pens and use lawyers as their hired guns. This is the new
West with which Ralph Beer is concerned - Big Sky Country, Montana, where real
men talk little, reveal their emotions less and name their offspring after
natural phenomena, just as Jackson Heckethorn is named for a neighboring creek.
As the novel opens, Jackson is returning home from the Army after being injured
in a freak gunnery accident, having never even made it to Vietnam. A former
rodeo rider, he plans a short visit to see his father and aged, dying
grandfather before heading to Canada, where a job and girlfriend await. But down
on the ranch things don't look good, so, like any western hero worth his salt,
Jackson decides to stick around and see the bad times through. Suffering a form
of culture shock, he wanders across the land where he grew up, breaking in his
new roan, corralling cattle, trading punches with the local land baron's son,
renewing familial ties and noting that the West he loved so dearly is
disappearing fast. Unfortunately, what little action takes place in this
contemporary western is all too predictable. Mr. Beer is a fine, evocative
writer with a knack for the descriptive phrase, and yet, ironically, this
ultimately does him in. This first novel is short on dramatic tension and
top-heavy with description. As a result, the characters are given short shrift
and the book is too often heavily sociological.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              310 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 24, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

O'NEILL REFUSES REAGAN REQUEST FOR HOUSE FLOOR

BYLINE: By LINDA GREENHOUSE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 781 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 23


President Reagan asked today to address the House of Representatives on Tuesday
to make a final appeal for $100 million in aid for the Nicaraguan rebels, and
the Speaker of the House turned him down.

As partisan maneuvering over the aid request intensified, Speaker Thomas P.
O'Neill Jr. said that Mr. Reagan was welcome to address a joint session of
Congress, but that ''having the President appear before only one house to lobby
for a legislative proposal would be unprecedented.''

A senior White House official said the President's advisers were
''flabbergasted'' by the refusal.

Vote Scheduled for Wednesday

The House is scheduled to vote Wednesday on the latest version of an
Administration plan to channel $70 million in military assistance and $30
million in other aid to the forces, known as the contras, which are seeking to
overthrow the Nicaraguan Government.

The President was ''surprised and disappointed'' by Mr. O'Neill's refusal to let
him address the House, Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, told reporters
at an afternoon briefing.

A Call From Regan

According to Mr. Speakes, Donald T. Regan, the White House chief of staff,
telephoned Mr. O'Neill this afternoon to inform him that the President wanted to
address the House ''on the cause of freedom and democracy in Central America.''

Mr. Speakes said he hoped Mr. O'Neill would reconsider the refusal.

There appeared to be little chance of that. In a statement issued by his office
after the White House had made the matter public, Speaker O'Neill said the
''only justification'' for the ''unorthodox procedure'' of a Presidential talk
to one house of Congress ''would be if the President would use the occasion to
participate in open dialogue with members of the body.''

Joint Session Offered

He added: ''A formal address should properly be made before a joint session.''
Mr. O'Neill said he would grant a request for a joint session, which he said
would be particularly appropriate because the Senate will also have to vote
again on aid to the contras if the House approves any aid.

Mr. Speakes, asked why the offer of a joint session had been turned down, said,
''The Senate is occupied with the tax bill.''

''The House of Representatives is working on it,'' Mr. Speakes said of the
contra aid bill, ''and that's who we want to speak to.'' He said Mr. Reagan
would send his speech to the House on Tuesday in the form of a written message.

Vote Scheduled for Wednesday

The vote in the House on Wednesday is expected to be extremely close. The House
turned down the Administration's aid package in March by a vote of 222 to 210.
At that time, 16 Republicans voted against the package and 46 Democrats voted in
favor.

This time, both sides have linked aid to the contras to a broader program of
economic aid to four United States allies in Central America: Guatemala,
Honduras, El Salvador and Costa Rica. The House Democratic leadership is
offering $325 million to the four countries, and a competing proposal sponsored
by Robert H. Michel, the House Republican leader, offers $300 million.

The difference between the two plans is that while the Michel plan would make
military aid immediately available to the contras, the Democratic leadership
plan would release only the non-military portion of the contra package and defer
the $70 million in military assistance until after a second vote in October.

No Record of a Precedent

Historical records indicate that no President has addressed the House of
Representatives without also addressing the Senate. Presidents Nixon and Ford
addressed the House and Senate sequentially, each on the same day, Mr. Nixon on
the war in Vietnam in 1969 and Mr. Ford on the cost of living in 1974.

Three Presidents addressed only the Senate. President Truman spoke in 1945 on
the United Nations charter. President Wilson spoke to the Senate in 1917 about
entering the First World War, in 1918 about women's suffrage, and in 1919 about
the Treaty of Versailles. And George Washington delivered his second inaugural
address to a session of the Senate in 1793.

Mr. Speakes also said that President Jefferson spoke to one chamber of Congress
on the Barbary pirates and that President Madison spoke on the War of 1812, but
the House historian, Raymond Smock, said he could find no record of those
Presidents ever appearing before either house of Congress. In later statements
the White House dropped the references to Jefferson and Madison.

The Clerk of the House said he was unable to determine whether there had been
any previous incident in which a President had asked to speak to one chamber of
Congress and was turned down.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              311 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 24, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

PROTECTIONISM HAS RISKS, SHULTZ IS TOLD

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 710 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE, June 23


The Prime Minister of this Southeast Asian nation warned Secretary of State
George P. Shultz today that failure by the Reagan Administration to resist
protectionist pressures in Congress could encourage Soviet inroads in this
region of the world.

According to a senior American official, Mr. Shultz told Prime Minister Lee Kuan
Yew that he shared his concerns and would do all he could to prevent passage of
bills now before Congress that would severely limit exports to the United States
from nations like Singapore, which specializes in textiles and high-technology
manufactures.

Protectionist trends pose ''real dangers,'' Mr. Shultz said in a news conference
as he flew here.

Mr. Shultz is in Southeast Asia to attend the meeting of the foreign ministers
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. The meeting this year is in
Manila, where Mr. Shultz flies Tuesday after a stopover in Brunei.

Trade Gets Highest Priority

In past years, the focus of his talks has been on political and military
matters, such as how to bring an end to the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia
and whether American arms should be supplied to China. But this year, Mr. Shultz
said, he expects concerns about trade to be given the highest priority.

Singapore is suffering from its first economic recession since it became an
independent nation 20 years ago, and Singapore officials do not expect the
economy to improve until next year at the earliest. A senior American official
said this has made Mr. Lee and other top officials more sensitive than usual to
threats posed by the Omnibus Trade Bill, approved by the House, and by threats
to renew efforts to pass a textile bill earlier vetoed by Mr. Reagan.

Mr. Lee and Mr. Shultz are longtime friends, dating to Mr. Shultz's years in the
Nixon Administration. Mr. Lee has been Mr. Shultz's guest at his home in Palo
Alto, Calif., and at the Bohemian Grove, the exclusive men's retreat near San
Francisco.

Their two-and-a-half-hour private meeting this afternoon was described by an
aide as ''the most friendly atmosphere you could imagine.''

Warning on Soviet Intentions

Mr. Lee's linking of protectionism to possible Soviet inroads stems from his
belief that if nations in the Pacific area find obstacles to their normal
markets to the West, they will become increasingly susceptible to Soviet offers.
At the moment the Soviet Union is trying to increase its influence in the
region, using Vietnam as a base of operation.

In recent months the Soviet Union signed an agreement to pay $1 million to the
island nation of Kiribati for fishing rights. American tuna boats have refused
to pay, leading to protracted negotiations with the United States. The Russians
are negotiatinag a similar arrangement with the nation of Vanuatu.

''I think protectionism and its impact on trade has a political and strategic
dimension,'' Mr. Shultz said. But he said it would be difficult for Moscow to
make much economic headway with Asean members because he could imagine few
products those nations would want to buy from the Soviet Union. The association
embraces Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand.

Questions on Marcos's Status

Mr. Shultz expressed irritation with the number of questions asked about the
status of Ferdinand E. Marcos, who from his exile in Hawaii has been sending
back messages to the Philippines critical of President Corazon C. Aquino. There
have also been reports that Mr. Marcos has helped pay for anti-Aquino rallies in
the Philippines.

When asked if the Administration would like Mr. Marcos to leave the United
States for some other destination, Mr. Shultz said that Mr. Marcos himself has
said he would like to leave, and ''we don't have any desire to have in our
country people who don't want to be there.''Mr. Shultz added, however, that no
other country has agreed to take the deposed Philippine leader.

Mr. Shultz, when asked another question on Mr. Marcos, said that ''I want to
concentrate on the future of the Philippines'' when he confers with Mrs. Aquino
on Wednesday in Manila.

He is reportedly carrying word of a decision to transfer immediately to the
Philippines some $200 million in aid that had been held up from previous years.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 24, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Tom Hayden Retains Seat in California House

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 163 words

DATELINE: SACRAMENTO, Calif., June 23


The State Assembly narrowly rejected an attempt today to oust from its
membership Tom Hayden, the onetime Vietnam War protester.

Mr. Hayden, a Santa Monica Democrat, visited North Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia and
Thailand while the war was on. He said he made the trips as ''an amateur
diplomat'' trying to end the war and bring prisoners home.

The effort to oust Mr. Hayden was led by Assemblyman Gil Ferguson, Republican of
Newport Beach, a retired Marine lieutenant colonel who served in Vietnam. ''Tom
Hayden was not a simple war protester,'' Mr. Ferguson said. ''Tom Hayden was a
traitor.''

Mr. Hayden responded: ''The charges of Mr. Ferguson's are utterly false. I am a
patriotic American, and no narrow-minded bigot can strip that away from me.''

The motion to disqualify Mr. Hayden was ruled out of order by Speaker Willie
Brown. His ruling was sustained on a 41-to-36 vote, the exact majority required
in the 80-member Assembly. The vote was mostly along party lines.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              313 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 25, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
8 Vietnamese Officials Dismissed or Reassigned

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 117 words

DATELINE: MANILA, June 24


Vietnam, apparently in an attempt to regain control of its economy before a
Communist Party congress, has dismissed or reassigned eight ministers.

Among those removed was Deputy Prime Minister To Huu, a Politburo member and the
country's poet laureate, who had often been mentioned as a potential Prime
Minister.

Also dismissed were the Ministers of Finance, Communications and Transportation,
Foreign Trade, Domestic Trade, Food Industries, Mines and Coal, and Culture. The
head of the state bank was also removed.

Left in place were economic planners who have been trying to introduce incentive
systems in agriculture and industry to channel energies away from activities
considered illegal.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              314 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 25, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

3-NATION PLAN BEGUN TO SAVE RARE ASIAN OX

BYLINE: By ERIK ECKHOLM

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 789 words


Wildlife specialists are using the current peace in Indochina, unsettled as it
is, to see if an elusive wild ox, the kouprey, can be saved from extinction.

The kouprey was already rare in 1937, when it was one of the last large mammals
ever to be scientifically described. Unknown thousands then lurked in the
woodlands of French Indochina and northern Thailand.

Today, after hunting and warfare have covered much their range for decades, no
more than 200 kouprey are thought to persist in pockets of Vietnam, Laos and
Cambodia. The animals are shy, often hiding in forests by day and browsing at
night; few people besides local hunters ever glimpse one.

''This is a large and striking mammal,'' John MacKinnon, a zoologist who is a
consultant to the World Wildlife Fund, said in a telephone interview from
England. ''When a big mammal goes extinct, that's a sign you're really
mismanaging the environment.''

The new rescue effort is being led by a Vietnamese biologist, Vo Quy of Hanoi
University, with assistance from the wildlife fund, which has headquarters in
Switzerland.

Useful for Crossbreeding

Experts believe that the kouprey, like other more familiar wild cattle species,
could prove useful for crossbreeding with domestic livestock. Some evidence
indicates, for example, that kouprey are resistant to rinderpest, Southeast
Asia's most serious cattle disease. In the 1950's, a kouprey herd survived a
rinderpest epidemic that wiped out cattle in the area.

Wildlife officials from Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia recently signed an agreement
to cooperate in the animal's salvation. Field surveys have begun, along with
efforts to discourage hunting and an admonition by the Government of Vietnam to
its soldiers, still fighting rebels in Cambodia, not to hunt kouprey for food.

Vietnam invaded Cambodia in December 1978 to unseat the Khmer Rouge Government,
in power since 1975. The Government imposed by the Vietnamese has not been
officially recognized by the United Nations or Western countries, inhibiting
international assistance to the wildlife program, experts said.

The scientists hope the kouprey's time has not already run out. In Vietnam, the
animals have been confirmed in only two small areas, both now earmarked as
reserves. On the basis of consultations with local hunters, scientists estimate
that only 10 kouprey live in each of the zones.

Up to 100 in Border Area

Up to 100 kouprey are believed to survive in Laos, spread among several southern
districts and crossing back and forth over the border with Cambodia.

Scattered animals, fewer than 100, may persist in two areas of Cambodia,
although information is badly out of date. The kouprey that live east of the
Mekong River, near Vietnam, are now living in peace, but from 1965 to 1975, when
American, Vietnamese and other Southeast Asian forces battled, their habitat was
tattered by bombs and herbicides.

Kouprey living west of the Mekong, near the Thai border, were largely spared
that earlier onslaught, but since then have been caught in the fighting between
rebel forces and the soldiers of Vietnam and Cambodia. These armies depend
heavily on game for meat.

This year and next scientists hope to gain a better picture of how many kouprey
are alive and where. Initial survey results will be evaluated at a meeting in
Hanoi, Vietnam, in December or January. The biologists also hope that at the
same meeting the three goverments will commit themselves to a reserve that would
be in the border area of all three countries. A plan to capture some of the
animals for accelerated breeding is also sought.

Lack of Managers a Problem

One impediment is the dearth of trained wildlife managers, especially in
Cambodia. In the mid-1970's, many of the technical elite were killed or fled.
Dr. MacKinnon said that the country still had no qualified biologists and that
local universities offered no biology courses. Foreign technical aid will be
essential to the kouprey program, he said.

Another problem is the continuing warfare in Cambodia. Field surveys in a large
area are now impossible. The scientists have, however, persuaded Vietnamese Army
commanders to prohibit the shooting of kouprey by soldiers, to distribute
leaflets to civilians explaining why the animals must be conserved and to keep
records of kouprey sightings.

In 1982, after several kouprey were seen near the Cambodian border, Thailand
sent of team of wildlife specialists to investigate. The expedition was
abandoned, according to Elizabeth Kemf of the World Wildlife Fund, when a guide
stepped on a landmine.

''The kouprey is a symbol of how international politics have come first in
Indochina, at the expense of the environment,'' Dr. MacKinnon said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              315 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 25, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

A LONG LOOK BACKWARD, AND AHEAD, BY ROSTOW

BYLINE: By PETER APPLEBOME, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 954 words

DATELINE: AUSTIN, Tex., June 20


To get to Walt Whitman Rostow's eighth-floor office in the Lyndon Baines Johnson
Library and Museum here, a visitor makes his way through memorabilia of another
era, slightly eerie reminders that it has been almost two decades since the
Johnson Presidency ended.

But if the setting unmistakably evokes the past of Mr. Rostow, who is usually
remembered as one of the architects of the United States military policy in
Vietnam, his own office overflows with the books and manuscripts that define his
present.

Mr. Rostow, who served in various positions with the Eisenhower, Kennedy and
Johnson Administrations, was always known as a prolific writer. President
Kennedy was reported to have once said, ''Walt can write faster than I can
read.''

Now, as he nears his 70th birthday, he is working on the culmination of a
scholarly career in which he has written or edited 28 books, almost half of them
since he returned to teaching as a professor of economics and history at the
University of Texas here in 1969.

Working on 2-Volume Treatise

He recently completed the final book in a six-volume collection published over
the last five years exploring the interplay of ideas and action in public
policy. The final volume on Asian regionalism was published earlier this year.
Before that he completed a history of the world economy. He is now working on
what he expects will be a two-volume treatise on his theory of economic growth.

Mr. Rostow, who was born in New York and educated at Yale and Oxford
Universities, has always been known as a man of great intellectual capabilities
and decisive judgments, some a bit too decisive for critics such as the author
David Halberstam, who depicted Mr. Rostow as typical of the intellectual
arrogance of thinkers of the Vietnam era in ''The Best and the Brightest.''

Mr. Rostow's current work has led him to ponder an ambitious theme: what the
West must do to maintain its prosperity in the wake of emerging industrial and
technological challenges from around the world.

''There's a marvelous definition of history by Sir Louis Namier, who said a
neurotic, according to Freud, is a person who is dominated by unconscious
memories, fixated on the past, and incapable of overcoming it - the regular
condition of human communities,'' he said. ''That is what we're up against,
whether we're capable of change or whether we're determined to go down in the
style to which we've become accustomed.''

Long View of the West

Mr. Rostow contends the West is entering a new and little-understood phase of
its economic growth. The first, he said, ran from the middle of the 18th century
to about 1870 and was concerned solely with growth. The second, running through
the 1970's, was mostly concerned with ''softening the harshness'' of industrial
society and determining the division of what was assumed to be a growing
economic pie.

Mr. Rostow says the United States is venturing into a new phase in which
collaboration between science, business, government and labor is essential for
the technological and economic development needed to maintain the West's
well-being. He said that collaboration was needed to bring modern technology to
the nation's aging industrial sector.

''When you look at it, the slogans of the 1984 election were slogans you could
have heard any time over the past century,'' Mr. Rostow said. ''President Reagan
was saying let's make sure we protect the private sector. Mr. Mondale was saying
we have to remember equity. But no one was really talking about the politics of
community, of collaboration. There's not one mainstream economist who knows how
to talk about the technological revolution. The modern world calls for the kind
of cooperation and collaboration we've never had before and our institutions are
not set up to do it.''

Mr. Rostow said there were signs of a new awareness in business and at the local
and state levels through such figures as Mayor Henry Cisneros of San Antonio,
Governor Kean of New Jersey and Gov. Charles S. Robb of Virginia or such
developments as the new General Motors Saturn plant. They are indications that
American society has the resilience to change, he said.

But he said there seemed to be little recognition at the national level, with
some notable exceptions such as the recent bipartisan progress on tax reform.

''I think both parties are out of sync with reality,'' he said. ''The biggest
danger we face is not understanding that our most critical challenge is the
rapid application of high-tech to our basic industries because a high proportion
of the new technologies will either be applied to the basic industries or they
won't be applied at all.''

Mr. Rostow said he had little interest in writing about the area in which he is
best known, the Vietnam War.

He contends Congressional cuts in military aid caused the fall of South Vietnam
but said that he had already put forth his views on the issue.

''I'm not obsessed with Vietnam, and I never was,'' he said. ''I don't spend
much time worrying about that period.''

He says the new generation of students he teaches have no more than a
dispassionate interest in Vietnam.

''Each generation has a great gift for rejecting the traumatic problems of the
previous ones,'' he said. ''Some teachers try to transmit the excitement of
marching on the Pentagon, but it means as much to these students as marching
with Coxie's Army.''

Still, he is aware that for many he will always be identified with the war.

''I remember the first time I met Tom Hayden,'' he said of a leading war
protester who is now a member of the State Assembly in California. ''He couldn't
believe it. He said out loud, 'Just think of it. I'm talking to Walt Rostow.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Walt Whitman Rostow (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              316 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 26, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Fulbright Program: 40 And Still 'Pretentious'

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 731 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 25


It was the shock that he and so many other members of Congress felt after the
destruction of Hiroshima and Nagasaki that inspired J. W. Fulbright, then a
Democratic Senator from Arkansas, to propose legislation in 1945 that gave rise
to what today is a renowned educational foreign exchange program bearing his
name.

The ultimate purpose of that program, Mr. Fulbright said, ''is to avoid a
nuclear war.''

''You may think that's pretentious,'' he said, ''but that's its main purpose.''

This year the Fulbright Program is celebrating its 40th anniversary, which
technically falls on Aug. 1, and commemorative events are planned in the United
States and several other countries throughout the year.

One highlight will be an exchange of 40 American and 40 foreign scholars and
artists who will deliver a series of Fulbright 40th Anniversary Lectures this
fall. In Washington a conference, ''Educational and Cultural Exchange in the
21st Century,'' will be held Nov. 17-19.

The Fulbright Program now boasts 150,000 former scholars and 120 participating
countries. Scholarships are awarded to American students, teachers and scholars
to study, teach and do research abroad and to foreign nationals to pursue
similar activities in the United States.

Distinguished Alumni

One-third of the participants have been Americans. Alumni include Derek Bok, now
president of Harvard University; Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of
New York, and Ingvar Carlsson, the new Prime Minister of Sweden.

The Fulbright Program ''speaks well of us,'' said Mr. Moynihan, who did research
for his dissertation at the London School of Economics.

The United States did not abuse the role of victor after World War II, Mr.
Moynihan said, but instead ''passed a law to send our young men and women to
universities in countries that were our allies and in countries that were our
enemies.''

Mr. Fulbright, now of counsel to the Washington law firm of Hogan & Hartson,
said, ''The exchange program was to enable Americans to understand their role in
the world.''

He says he regrets that the exchanges with the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe
are so limited: ''In the long course of history, having people who understand
your thought is a much greater security than another submarine.''

The program is administered under guidelines established by the Board of Foreign
Scholarships, appointed by the President.

The integrity of the program has been preserved, Mr. Fulbright said, despite
threats of impropriety by the Central Intelligence Agency.

In one instance, Mr. Fulbright said, a C.I.A. agent approached a Fulbright
student in Paris and offered him a free apartment in exchange for reporting what
he heard from Vietnamese students.

''I saw the Director of the C.I.A. several times to keep them from trying to
utilize these students for their purposes,'' he said. ''It was always a danger.
It still is, I suspect.''

Until the mid-1960's the Fulbright Program was financed primarily by
Congressional appropriations. But then other nations, particularly Japan, West
Germany and Spain, began contributing. And today, binational commissions in more
than 40 foreign countries play a key administrative as well as financial role in
the program.

In 1981 the Reagan Administration tried to reduce the program's $48 million
budget by 53 percent. But the proposal backfired, Mr. Fulbright said, because it
drew attention to the program and Fulbright supporters rushed to defend it.

Congressional appropriations for the program reached $77.7 million in 1985 and
are expected to rise to almost $94 million this year.

His Greatest Achievement

Mr. Fulbright considers the exchange program his greatest achievement in his 30
years in the Senate. As chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee from 1969
until his electoral defeat in 1974, he is also remembered for his opposition to
the Vietnam War.

''I'm sure that President Johnson would never have pursued the war in Vietnam if
he'd ever had a Fulbright to Japan, or say Bangkok, or had any feeling for what
these people are like and why they acted the way they did,'' Mr. Fulbright said.
''He was completely ignorant.''

Mr. Fulbright said the success of the program is constrained by everyday
politics.

''It can't overcome policies which are so misguided,'' he said, adding: ''I
think it does help. It keeps alive a spark of hope.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of former Sen. J.W. Fulbright (AP); photo of Derek Bok (NYT);
photo of Sen. Daniel P. Moynihan (NYT); photo of Prime Minister Ingvar Carlsson
of Sweden (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              317 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 26, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnamese on Rescue Ship

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 22, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 40 words

DATELINE: BONN, June 25


The West German rescue ship Cap Anamur II picked up 60 more Vietnamese refugees
today from two open boats in the South China Sea, the Cap Anamur relief agency
said in a statement. The ship has brought 788 refugees to safety since March.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              318 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 28, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

TO ASIAN REFUGEES, U.S. IS STILL LAND OF HOPE

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1258 words

DATELINE: PHANAT NIKHOM, Thailand


Khounphom Sone expects to be living in Brooklyn by the Fourth of July.

''I can't know in my mind what Brooklyn will be like, but I have been told it is
a very big city, with houses 50 or 60 levels high,'' said Mr. Khounphom Sone, a
36-year-old refugee from Laos.

''But I want to go to Brooklyn very much,'' he said. ''Because there is my
brother.''

Mr. Khounphom Sone, his 33-year-old wife, Pratsany, and their five children -
waiting here in a crowded processing center with papers that say, ''Destination:
La Guardia'' - symbolize in a number of ways the Asian newcomer to America in
1986, a year of special significance as America celebrates its immigrant
heritage with the centennial of the Statue of Liberty.

Reuniting a Family

They are refugees. From the Middle East to the South China Sea there are almost
seven million refugees in Asia, about half of them Afghans who have fled to
Pakistan. Others include Vietnamese boat people, exiled Sri Lankan Tamils,
Cambodians and ethnic Melanesian Indonesians.

Mr. Khounphom Sone, whose father was a village leader and who bears a Lao tattoo
on his arm that translates ''Son of a Warlord,'' is seeking to reunite a family
torn apart by war and revolution.

''Asian immigration is increasing in a geometric pattern because of family
reunions and migrations,'' a United States consular official said. ''A family
chain develops; a community grows.'' Under current immigration law, close
relatives of United States residents receive preference in immigration
proceedings and are not counted as part of the quota for people from their
country who are allowed to immigrate.

Mr. Khounphom Sone's family is poor and has had little education; Mr. Khounphom
Sone (pronounced koon-POM so-NAY) had four years of primary schooling and is a
mechanic; his wife was a noodle-shop waitress. Increasingly, refugee and
immigration officials say, people with limited skills, facing hard times in the
developing world, want a chance to be American.

From China to Indonesia, from Manila to Bombay, people tell interviewers that
they want to go ''for a job and so my children can get an education.''

Consular and refugee officials who meet hundreds of thousands of would-be Asian
emigrants to the United States say little has changed in the basic reasons
refugees want to live in America.

Following the Children

''The pull factor is still there,'' an American official said. ''They see the
same gold sidewalks.''

In most of the developing nations in Asia, there remains a belief that life is
better in America - economically and politically, but above all in terms of
education.

Though many refugees have seen ample evidence of American shortcomings in films
and television, most profess a belief that Americans are on the whole ''fair
people,'' as one Southeast Asian put it, and that they will give anyone who
works hard a chance.

In Asia, there are other motivating factors for emigration, according to
consular officials.

An American diplomat here pointed to the elderly Asians, living comfortably in
their own societies, who go to Los Angeles or New York only because the time has
come for the younger generation to look after them, and the younger generation
is no longer in Asia.

''We as Americans, with our looser family ties, don't always understand this,''
this consular official said. ''A grandmother or grandfather who probably speaks
no English may not really want to go. But that's where all the kids are.''

The line frequently blurs between political asylum and economic migration. Boat
people from Vietnam tell reporters regularly that they are leaving because, as
one recent arrival in Thailand said, ''Communism doesn't give us rice or work.''

Mr. Khounphom Sone is also representative of the hundreds of thousands of
Laotians, Cambodians and Vietnamese who have suffered suspicion and retribution
because of their association with the American side in the wars that brought
Communist governments to those countries in the 1970's.

Tens of thousands of Indochinese remain in political prison camps; others are
languishing in Thailand as displaced people, asking any American who comes along
why they have been forgotten.

Mr. Khounphom Sone's case has an ironic twist. A welder in the defeated Lao
army, he was able to escape from seven years of political detention in October
1983 when the truck taking his work gang to a forced-labor project near Pakse,
in southern Laos, hit what was probably an unexploded American bomb.

Crossing the Mekong River

Wounded from the blast, he crept from his hospital bed and fled to Vientiane,
375 miles away.

There his wife, who had been able to visit him regularly in detention, joined
him four days later with their children. When night fell, he put his wife and
three little girls on a bamboo raft. He and his son, Soutchay, then 11, swam and
pushed the family across the Mekong River to Thailand.

More than 300,000 people, almost a tenth of the population of Laos, have fled
the country since the Communist takeover in 1975. Many of them, though not Mr.
Khounphom Sone's family, come from the Hmong and other hill tribes in remote
mountain areas of this landlocked and undeveloped country.

Because the Laotian refugee population in Thailand has soared to almost 90,000,
the Thai Government has recently opened the camps to interviewers from the
United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. Refugee officials say that
Laotians will probably form the largest Southeast Asian ethnic group accepted
for American resettlement this year.

A Brother in Texas

It was in a Thai refugee camp that Mr. Khounphom Sone found his father-in-law
and learned from him that Mr. Khounphom Sone's two brothers, who had fled Laos
earlier, were in the United States.

One brother, Siritham Korakahn, 40, had become a welder in Texas. The other,
Souvanh Vilayvanh, 23, of Brooklyn, has had a succession of jobs and
intermittent illnesses that kept him out of work, Mr. Khouphom Sone said. But
Mr. Souvanh Vilayvanh had married an American, had an apartment and was able to
act as the family's sponsor.

And so the family - Sone and Pratsany, along with Soutchay, who is now 14, and
four daughters: Khanthadokmay, 10; Kasapa, 8; Chanthida, 5, and Thaithouna, who
is 8 months old - wait for the bus to Bangkok airport, and a life they cannot
even imagine.

Drawn from some of the most isolated villages in Asia, the Laotians often face
unexpected trauma in the West, refugee officials say. Learning About the U.S.
Amornpan Nimanan, the Thai commander of the refugee processing center where Mr.
Khounphom Sone's family has been staying, said he had seen Lao refugees weep
with fear in a bus on the Oakland Bay Bridge as they rode to a new life.

Laotians have met harassment and violence in several American cities, as have
Cambodians. Refugee officials say that on the whole the Vietnamese, more
urbanized and more aggressive, have fared better, along with ethnic Chinese and
Korean migrants.

At Phanat Nikhom and other camps throughout Asia an effort is made to teach the
refugees English, with special ''high school English'' courses for teen-agers.
Occasionally, videotapes made in American communities are shown.

While many Asians now trying to come to the United States are poor, there are
indications that a wave of more highly skilled immigrants may be imminent. As
Hong Kong's assimilation by China approaches, an unknown number of Hong Kong
residents is expected to leave the colony, some with considerable fortunes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Khouphom Sone and his family at refugee center in Thailand
(NYT/Barbara Crossette)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              319 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 28, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BINGHAM CLEARED IN 1971 SHOOTOUT

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1084 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, June 27


Stephen M. Bingham, a Yale-educated lawyer who spent 13 years as a fugitive, was
found not guilty today of murder and conspiracy charges stemming from a 1971
shootout at San Quentin prison that left six people dead.

Mr. Bingham, the 44-year-old scion of a prominent New England family, had been
charged with smuggling a pistol to George Jackson, a member of the Black Panther
Party who had written a best-selling book about his prison experiences. Mr.
Jackson died in the shootout, which occurred shortly after Mr. Bingham visited
him at the prison.

Under California law, prosecutors said, providing the gun to Mr Jackson would
have made Mr. Bingham equally liable for the deaths.

'A Word of Encouragement'

Mr. Bingham and many of his supporters who had attended the 2 1/2-month trial
before Judge E. Warren McGuire in Marin County Superior Court in San Rafael
burst into tears upon hearing the verdict.

The jury deliberated 6 days after hearing the testimony of 61 witnesses. Mary
Bradford, a retired teacher who served as foreman of the jury, said jurors had
voted not to comment on the case.

Mr. Bingham said he felt the verdict spoke ''a word of encouragement'' to people
who become involved in unpopular causes.

Susan Rutberg, a defense lawyer, said, ''Now that this case is over, maybe
people will focus their attention on what's wrong with prison conditions.''

Although the trial began April 7, its roots were in the era of sometimes bitter
radical ferment that shook the country in the late 1960's.

A graduate of Milton Academy, Yale and Boalt Hall, the law school at the
University of California at Berkeley, Mr. Bingham was a product of a patrician
New England background. His grandfather, Hiram Bingham, an archeologist, helped
discover the Inca ruins of Machu Picchu in Peru and served Connecticut as
Governor and United States Senator. His father, Alfred, who was in the courtroom
for most of the trial, is a retired Connecticut probate judge.

After his graduation from Yale in 1964, Mr. Bingham's life was a virtual
catalogue of liberal causes of the day: He took part in the civil rights
movement in Mississippi, campaigned against the Vietnam War, spent two years as
a member of the Peace Corps in the African nation Sierra Leone and marched with
Cesar Chavez in his battle to form a farm workers' union.

Movement Toward Radicalism

As he grew older, Mr. Bingham later told friends, he became disillusioned with
liberalism as a means to social justice and moved further to the left,
eventually adopting some Marxist views.

By early 1971, Stephen Bingham, a bearded lawyer living in a commune in nearby
Berkeley, was working in a variety of radical causes, including efforts to help
black prisoners. It was then that his life became intertwined with that of Mr.
Jackson.

In January 1970, a guard at Soledad State Prison in central California shot to
death three black inmates who were involved in a scuffle in the exercise yard.
Several days later, Mr. Jackson and two other black inmates at Soledad were
charged with murdering another guard in revenge.

To Mr. Bingham and many other white radicals, the three inmates, who would soon
be known as the ''Soledad Brothers,'' were symbols of what they considered
racially motivated oppression of blacks in what they called ''medieval''
prisons.

Mr. Jackson, who had been in prison since 1961 for a $71 robbery, had embraced
Marxism and became a leader of the Black Panther Party, which advocated
revolutionary acts against the police. He wrote ''Soledad Brother,'' a book
about prison life that became a best seller.

Deputy District Attorney Terry Boren of Marin County, who prosecuted Mr.
Bingham, contended that Mr. Jackson subsequently enlisted Mr. Bingham in an
escape plot, one that led to the bloody violence at San Quentin Aug. 21, 1971.

Mr. Bingham, he alleged, smuggled the gun, ammunition and a wig to Mr. Jackson
in a tape recorder and briefcase after it had been given to him by Vanita
Anderson, a member of the Black Panther Party who was a research assistant to
Mr. Jackson.

Testimony of Prison Guards

Miss Anderson, now an instructor at Los Angeles Community College, has never
been charged with any crime and did not testify at Mr. Bingham's trial. Mr.
Boren said he did not subpoena her as a witness because he said she would have
refused to testify on constitutional grounds.

At Mr. Bingham's trial, guards testified that moments after Mr. Jackson finished
a private meeting with Mr. Bingham, they detected a ''shiny object'' in the wig,
which they said he was wearing.

The guards testified that Mr. Jackson then pulled a gun out of the wig and,
shouting ''They caught me; the dragon has come,'' took control of a section of
San Quentin reserved for difficult prisonors. Within 30 minutes, six people were
dead - three guards, two prison inmates and Mr. Jackson, who was shot to death
by guards.

In 1971, six prisoners were charged with joining in what the authorities say was
an escape attempt. One, Johnny Spain, was convicted of two counts of murder; two
inmates were convicted of assault, and three were aquitted.

The authorities also named Mr. Bingham as a conspirator with Mr. Jackson in the
prison violence. They argued, as Mr. Boren did at the trial, that Mr. Bingham
was the only person who had been with Mr. Jackson before the incident, and
therefore was the only person who could have given Mr. Jackson the gun and other
contraband.

Under California law, the prosecutor argued, Mr. Bingham was equally guilty in
the slaying of two of the guards. Judge McGuire had earlier ruled that there was
insufficient evidence to try Mr. Bingham for the death of the third guard.

Mr. Bingham, who in the summer of 1971 visited Mr. Jackson six times at San
Quentin, vanished a few hours after the violence and lived as a fugitive in this
country and abroad for 13 years until he gave himself up July 9, 1984. At the
trial, he testified that he had fled because he believed prison guards had
killed Mr. Jackson to end his revolutionary activities and that his own life was
in dagner.

When he surrendered, he said he thought he could now get a fair trial.

''I am convinced,'' he said when he came out of hiding, ''that most Americans
reflecting back on the late 60's and early 70's, are now aware, and willing to
accept, the fact that the Government did, at times, engage in illegal, excessive
and immoral practices in trying to discredit those who were working actively for
change.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Stephen M. Bingham hugging his wife Francoise (AP) (page 14)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              320 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 28, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

MASSACHUSETTS MAN MAKES BALLOT BUT PARTY SHUNS HIM

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 845 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, June 27


The Massachusetts Ballot Law Commission today upheld the candidacy of Gregory S.
Hyatt, the only candidate still running in the Republican gubernatorial primary
this fall, whose nominating petitions had been assailed by both Republicans and
Democrats.

The commission's ruling compounded the problems of the Republican leadership,
whose previous candidate had dropped out of the race, because the dispute over
the signatures has undercut much of Mr. Hyatt's support within the party.

The commission ruled that Mr. Hyatt had enough valid signatures on his
nominating papers to keep his name on the primary ballot despite widespread
charges of fraud. He submitted petitions with 11,839 names; the signatures of
10,000 registered voters are needed.

The commission, acting on a formal complaint by the state Democratic Party,
indicated it had let Mr. Hyatt's candidacy stand largely because the Democrats
had not given Mr. Hyatt's lawyer enough notice that they thought many of the
signatures on his papers were fraudulent. The commission said a fuller statement
would be issued next week.

Ruling Compounds Problem

On Thursday, Mr. Hyatt's attorney, William A. McDermott, admitted to the
commission that almost 10 percent of the names had been fraudulently signed.

Earlier this afternoon, Andrew S. Natsios, the chairman of the state Republican
Party, announced that he was appointing a special committee to select a new
Republican candidate for Governor. Mr. Natsios said he had decided to act, even
before the Ballot Law Commission made its decision, because Republicans in
Massachusetts had been ''demoralized'' by the disclosures about Mr. Hyatt and
his opponent who quit the race.

Only 10 days ago the other Republican, Royall H. Switzler, withdrew from the
September primary after admitting that he had falsified his military record. Mr.
Switzler, a State Representative from suburban Wellesley, had said he had been a
captain in the Special Forces in Vietnam when in fact had been a sergeant in the
peacetime Army stationed in Korea.

However, both Mr. Switzler and Mr. Hyatt's names will remain on the ballot.

'Discussing Political Future'

Despite today's ruling, it was unclear what would happen to Mr. Hyatt's
candidacy. Mr. Natsios said it was ''at an end'' regardless of the commission's
decision, and Mr. Hyatt himself hinted he might withdraw.

''I am pleased with the decision of the Ballot Law Commission,'' he said. But he
added that while his name would remain on the ballot, ''I will be discussing my
political future with my family and supporters over the next few days.''

Mr. Natsios, a State Representative who is a candidate for State Auditor this
fall, declined to speculate about who the 37-member committee would recommend.
Among the names that have been mentioned as possible replacements are former
Gov. Edward J. King, a Democrat who turned Republican earlier this year; Raymond
Shamie, a wealthy conservative businessman who has twice run unsuccessfully for
the Senate, and Andrew Card, a former State Representative who is now a member
of President Reagan's staff.

But whoever is picked will face a formidable task. The candidate's name will not
appear on the September primary ballot because the deadline for filing is past,
and the contender will then have to run against Gov. Michael S. Dukakis, a
popular Democrat who is completing his second term.

At a news conference today, Mr. Natsios said the new special nominating
committee, to be headed by former Gov. John Volpe, would go ahead with selecting
a new candidate whether or not Mr. Hyatt withdrew.

''It's not a question of a few signatures'' being improperly added to Mr.
Hyatt's nomination papers, Mr. Natsios said. ''It was systematic fraud.''

''I've never seen anything like this before,'' he said, even ''in Boston
politics.''

'We Are at a Crisis Point'

''I think we are at a crisis point now and I am going to intervene,'' Mr.
Natsios said. ''We need someone at the top of the slate who can direct attention
at Mike Dukakis.''

Mr. Hyatt's troubles arose after the Democratic State Committee contended that
2,550 signatures on his nomination papers should be disqualified. Mr. Hyatt's
lawyer, Mr. McDermott, on the advice of his own expert witnesses, agreed that at
least 1,005 of the signatures were forgeries.

The commission also heard testimony from handwriting experts that four
individuals had signed almost 1,700 names on Mr. Hyatt's nomination papers. Mr.
Hyatt insisted that he had no knowledge of how the forgeries occurred.

Mr. Hyatt lost support earlier this spring when officials at his former
employer, a contractors' association with ties to the Republican Party, charged
that he had been seen naked in his office and talked on the phone to himself.
The charges had led party leaders to draft Mr. Switzler at the Republican state
convention in April.

The Republicans' troubles finding a candidate for Governor underscore the
party's decline in Massachusetts in recent years. The the party has not won a
statewide race since 1972.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Gregory S. Hyatt (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              321 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 28, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

LOVE STORY: FROM THAILAND CAMP TO MASSACHUSETTS WEDDING

BYLINE: By MATTHEW L. WALD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 866 words

DATELINE: AMHERST, Mass., June 24


The last-minute rush is under way for the wedding on Saturday. ''It's going to
be close,'' worried the foster mother of the bride, biting her lip.

The bride will wear a floor-length white gown of lace embroidered into organza.
The bridegroom will be dressed in a black tuxedo when they arrive at the North
Congregationalist Church, of picturebook-prim New England white clapboard,
steeple and dark green shutters.

Today they hug, snuggle and gaze into each other's eyes, a long way from
Battambang Province in Cambodia, from the threat of starvation, arrest and
execution by the Khmer Rouge, the Communist insurgents who took over their
country after the Vietnam War, from the nighttime trek through the mined woods
to cross the border into Thailand in 1979.

When ChamNan Sophanny Koy becomes a June bride and Huy Kean Tan realizes his
ambition of six years by marrying her, it will represent fulfillment of a love
story played out over three continents and a triumph over the vagaries of
immigration policy.

They Meet in Refugee Camp

After long months in a refugee camp in Thailand where they met and fell in love,
Miss Koy was accepted into the United States for placement in a foster home here
in 1982. But Mr. Tan said he had been told that if he came here his two brothers
and two sisters would be placed separately. So the next year he accompanied them
instead to Adelaide, Australia, where the siblings could live as a family, and
he pined.

''We have a lot of memories that we can't forget,'' he said this week, recalling
when they had to share rice when there was little food or when they helped one
another deal with sorrow over relatives lost or killed when the Khmer Rouge
drove Cambodians into work camps in the countryside.

Miss Koy's foster mother, Phyllis Agard, said that she and her husband, Robert,
had not seen a way to unite the two. But when an Australian social worker came
to visit a colleague in Massachusetts with whom she had worked in the refugee
camps in Thailand, all those involved with Miss Koy contrived to help out.

With $1,800 in airfare that came from a job as a counselor, a stipend meant for
Miss Koy's support that was unused while she was at camp, and a contribution
from the Agards, she flew to Adelaide last summer to see if love endured after
three years.

After a Long Separation

It did, and Mr. Tan arrived in Boston Monday after a 24-hour flight, carrying
the tuxedo he bought after she mailed him a photograph she had chosen from a
catalogue. They had planned for him him to return to Australia without her after
his 30-day visa expires, to allow her to enter a community college here and wait
until August 1987, when she can apply for citizenship, but that plan slipped
away when he got off the plane.

''I don't want to lose him again,'' she said today as they hugged.

The couple first met at a Thai refugee camp for children in late 1979, although
they grew up in the same province of Cambodia.

Mr. Tan fled Cambodia after his parents, an older brother and a younger sister
were killed and a 3-year-old brother disappeared. The Khmer Rouge had found Mr.
Tan's certificate for Tae Kwon Do, a martial art, which had been given to him by
an American instructor of Korean origin. The Khmer Rouge could not read the
certificate but recognized the language as English, Mr. Tan said, so they
denounced him as an agent for the Central Intelligence Agency.

He reached the border in the summer of 1979 with his four surviving siblings,
then ranging in age from 7 to 12, but after a month Thai soldiers forced them
back into Cambodia. They walked 30 kilometers a night, about 19 miles, often
without food, until they could re-enter Thailand, he said.

Miss Koy's mother died in 1976 while performing forced labor in the rice fields.
One of 10 children, Miss Koy was separated from all her relatives by the time
she fled, she said, although she learned a year ago that her father was still
living in Cambodia.

Abandoned in Flight

She joined a group fleeing to the border, but all but one of them abandoned her
because she had a hacking cough that they thought would betray their presence to
Vietnamese troops.

''We had to step on footprints, so no one got killed,'' she said.

Both Mr. Tan and Miss Koy lied about their age to stay in the refugee camp, she
said, because while minors and families were given shelter, young adults were
sometimes pushed back into Cambodia. Miss Koy's immigration papers list her as
21 years old, but she is 26, she said. He is 31.

After the wedding she will seek a visa to go to Australia and will study nursing
at the Royal Adelaide Hospital School of Nursing, she said. Mr. Tan works as a
bookbinder in Adelaide.

Despite their backgrounds, or perhaps because of them, the wedding is to be a
traditional affair. The honeymoon may include a few days at a borrowed cabin on
a lake, but maybe not. ''He doesn't want to go, because I'm a bad driver,'' Miss
Koy said.

In Cambodia, women do not change their names when they marry, but Miss Koy will
become Mrs. Tan, in Western style, at her husband's request. And the dress, with
long sleeves and a lace V-neck, was Miss Koy's careful choice.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of ChamNan Sophanny Koy and Huy Dean Tan (NYT/Steve Miller)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              322 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 28, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

GAINING ADMISSION: REFUGEES OFTEN FACE LENGTHY PROCESS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 30, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 297 words

DATELINE: PHANAT NIKHOM, Thailand


For Asians who come to the United States as refugees, the first stop is
generally another Asian country, where they are given sanctuary and made
available for interviews with resettlement countries.

Except for Pakistan and China, Asian countries almost invariably refuse to allow
refugees from Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam to stay.

So the refugees' hopes focus on the United States, Canada, Australia and New
Zealand.

''We Americans are so used to a multiethnic society,'' a refugee officer here
said, ''that it is hard for us to think of keeping a national ethnic identity.
But in Asia, political entities are ethnically based, and refugees from other
ethnic groups are not welcome to stay.''

Thailand, for example, continues to deny citizenship to ethnic Vietnamese who
fled here in the 1940's and 50's and were allowed to stay. No Vietnamese have
been allowed to settle in Thailand since then.

While awaiting resettlement, refugees who want to come to the United States are
interviewed by the United State Immigration and Naturalization Service to
determine whether admitting them would violate American law.

In deciding who will be admitted, preference is given to those with familiy
members in the United States and, in the case of the Vietnamese, to those with
links to the former American-backed South Vietnamese Government.

For those who lack refugee status, the process is different. They cannot apply
for permission to go to the United States. Instead, they must have a petition
lodged by a family member or employer in the United States.

Only when a petition has been approved by the immigration service does an
embassy or consulate call in an applicant for an interview to determine whether
the facts in the case are correct and the documents are in order.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              323 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOUND;
U.S. DESIGN COMES BACK

BYLINE: By Hans Fantel

SECTION: Section 2; Page 23, Column 6; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 833 words


One current development in audio has nothing to do with electronics. Rather, it
is caused by the yen's rise vis-a-vis the dollar -a shift that now presents
American audio firms with rare opportunities.

The invisible hand of Adam Smith, which supposedly keeps free markets upright
and equitable, seems to have done its proper job. It has rewarded the Japanese
for their matchless industrial effort by raising the value of their currency to
the point where Japan is fast losing its competitive advantage. Handicapped in
its exports by the strength of the yen, Japan is paradoxically pinched by its
own success, and some American audio manufacturers see this as a chance for a
long overdue comeback.

Listeners with extensive memories recall the heyday of American audio a
generation ago, when companies like Fisher, Scott and Marantz -which have long
since sold their names to the Japanese - were the pacesetters of a nascent
technology. In those years, Yankee engineers and inventors - often toiling away
in basement workshops and garages, formulated most of the basic concepts of
modern sound reproduction.

But America's undisputed lead in the field was lost during the war in Vietnam,
as creative engineers and even entire companies were drawn into weaponry, where
the money abounded and Uncle Sam was the only customer they had to please. The
production of electronic consumer goods, for the most part, was willingly left
to emergent offshore enterprises with yet unknown names like Sony and Panasonic,
which were happy to fill the gap and did so with admirable acumen.

But with the yen gaining more than 30 percent on the dollar since last year, the
Japanese are finding it difficult to maintain the cost advantage that - along
with the intrinsic merit of their wares - helped them to capture so large a
share of the audio market. There are now signs that the tide may be turning and
that American companies are about to regain at least part of what had been lost.
Portents of such a development could be glimpsed early this month at the
Consumer Electronics Show in Chicago, where the increasing presence of American
products was clearly in evidence.

Loudspeaker companies were leading the parade, which is not surprising, since
that segment of the American audio industry was never entirely eclipsed by
foreign competition. New models from such concerns as Acoustic Research,
Allison, ADS, Advent, Genesis, Bose, Fourier, Fried, Infinity, Ohm Acoustics,
Boston Acoustics, JBL, dbx, Magnepan and Polk attested to America's continued
prominence in the field of speaker design. Even old names like Altec Lansing - a
California company which made theater loudspeakers back in the early days of the
talkies - surfaced once again, this time with a fine line of speakers for home
use.

What is more remarkable in the light of recent history is the apparent
resurgence of companies devoted mainly to the manufacture of purely electronic
products, like amplifiers or tuners, for this field had been largely abandoned
to foreign enterprise. It is true that even American companies often have their
products assembled in the Orient, where labor is cheaper and whole factories are
readily available for part-time hire. But the design - the essential engineering
imagination that makes these products distinctive - is strictly native. Besides,
the proceeds roll back to this country and help to straighten a severly lopsided
trade balance.

Among companies of this kind, Proton, Carver and NAD have already established a
reputation for daringly progressive engineering. But a number of other United
States companies are now attracting attention with novel design approaches.
Adcom, for instance, has fielded an unusual item - a one-piece combination of
radio tuner and preamplifier intended to work either with a separate power
amplifier or with the lately more popular active speaker; i.e., loudspeakers
which contain their own amplifiers.

Another unique kind of component was launched by Parasound, a company based in
San Francisco. Its Model CDD-940 combines a high-quality cassette deck with a CD
player, and the designers have thoughtfully included the relatively uncommon
Dolby HX-Pro circuit. This extends the dynamic range of the cassette so that a
CD can be copied unto tape without undue risk of overloading the tape. The whole
package will sell for less than $500.

In contrast to such economical pricing, many American firms appear to specialize
in deluxe designs where the cost advantage still enjoyed by foreign companies -
at least to some degree - is less crucial. Consequently, there was a plethora of
costly and unquestionably top-notch American amplifiers to be heard in Chicago,
among them those made by Mark Levinson Audio, Hafler, Threshold, Crown and
MacIntosh. These products appeal mainly to devoted audiophiles with comfortably
fat wallets. Aside from that, they prove that leadership in audio design is
returning to these shores - and maybe it never really went away.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              324 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TRUMP CARDS;
REAGAN AND THE CONTRAS WIN A ROUND IN THE HOUSE

BYLINE: By LINDA GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 944 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


THE Nicaraguan rebels had supporters to spare but few believers in the House of
Representatives last week. It was striking, as the House voted 221 to 209 to
send the rebels $100 million for their effort to overthrow the Nicaraguan
Government, how many of those voting in favor nonetheless expressed deep
misgivings about the worthiness of the rebels, also known as contras, and their
ability to accomplish their goal.

Had this been some abstract debate on Central American policy, the outcome in
the Democratic-controlled House might well have been different. But there was
nothing abstract about it. In effect, the issue before the House was whether
Ronald Reagan should receive a mandate to conduct foreign policy as he sees fit.
The lesson of the pro-Reagan vote was that, when the issue is close, the
President - perhaps any President, but certainly this one when he puts his
prestige on the line - is likely to prevail.

This lesson was summarized by Representative Mario Biaggi in an interview after
the vote. Mr. Biaggi, a Bronx Democrat, had voted against aiding the contras in
March, when the House defeated an earlier Administration proposal. But President
Reagan telephoned him from Air Force One a few hours before the vote Wednesday
night, and Mr. Biaggi became one of 51 Democrats to break ranks and vote with
the Administration.

''The contras are scoundrels and the Sandinistas are scoundrels,'' Mr. Biaggi
said. ''They're both scoundrels, but when it comes to the national interest, a
tie has to favor the President.''

The debate now moves to the Republican-controlled Senate, where there is also a
notable lack of enthusiasm for the contras and the policy that revolves around
them. Two weeks ago, the chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, Senator
Richard G. Lugar of Indiana, gave a speech that was obliquely critical of the
Administration's approach, warning that the contras ''will become irrelevant''
unless they can persuade the American public of their ''passion for democracy.''

But President Reagan has a track record for winning close ones in the Senate,
including the vote earlier this month sustaining his veto and permitting a sale
of weapons to Saudi Arabia to go forward. Thus, it is scarcely conceivable that
the Senate would block aid to the contras. The Senate approved aid in March,
albeit by a close 53-to-47 vote. Now, another Senate approval would give the
rebels their first official infusion of American military aid in three years.

If the Administration's hand needed to be strengthened, the Sandinista
Government was quick to oblige, wittingly or not. Less than 24 hours after the
House vote, the Government shut down the opposition newspaper La Prensa ''for an
indefinite time.'' President Daniel Ortega Saavedra said that the House action
Wednesday amounted to a ''declaration of war by the United States against
Nicaragua.''

On Friday, the World Court, a United Nations body in the Hague, issued a
long-expected ruling that the United States had violated the United Nations
charter by aiding the contras and was now obliged to make reparations to the
Nicaraguan Government. The Reagan Administration had boycotted most of the
proceedings. After the ruling, a State Department spokesman said ''the court is
simply not equipped to deal with a case of this nature involving complex facts
and intelligence information.''

The aid package that emerged from the House differed in some key respects from
the initial Administration proposal. The Administration had asked for an
immediate payment of $70 million for weapons and $30 million in nonmilitary aid.

But a coalition of House Republicans and conservative Democrats reworked the
proposal, adding $300 million in economic aid to Costa Rica, Guatemala, El
Salvador and Honduras. They also divided the aid into three installments,
deferring any delivery of heavy weapons until February and setting up a process
to monitor both the probity of the contra leadership and the prospects for
peace.

These changes made it easier for some members who had voted no in March to
support the package this time. Representative Marilyn Lloyd, a Tennessee
Democrat who switched sides, said: ''It was a new product. That was what sold
it.'' A surprise, late-night addition to the package served as a reminder that
this was, after all, still the House of Representatives, and that the war in
Vietnam was not entirely forgotten. By a vote of 215 to 212, the House adopted
an amendment, sponsored by Representative Robert J. Mrazek, a New York Democrat,
to bar American personnel from providing any training or other assistance to the
contras within 20 miles of the Nicaraguan border. The intent is to prevent
American advisers from being drawn into the fighting.

One hundred million dollars is a relatively small sum for a Congress that just
approved a Federal budget of nearly $1 trillion. But the expenditure is heavy
with symbolism. Representative Thomas S. Foley, the majority whip, who is one of
the strongest opponents of contra aid in the House, said that ''this was the
cross-the-Rubicon vote'' signaling an open-ended commitment to American
involvement in the Nicaraguan civil war.

Supporters of the aid did not dispute that analysis. The open question as the
week ended was when, or whether, the Administration would produce a policy to
accompany the $100 million. Representative Les Aspin of Wisconsin, another
Democrat who switched sides to support the Administration, was asked in an
interview whether the vote meant that the United States now had a policy in
Nicaragua. ''I have no idea,'' replied Mr. Aspin, the chairman of the Armed
Services Committee.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              325 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ONCE, ALL THOSE BILLBOARDS MADE YOU WINCE. THIS BOOK EXPLAINS WHAT'S HAPPENED
SINCE.

BYLINE: By Karal Ann Marling; Karal Ann Marling teaches American culture at the
University of Minnesota and wrote ''Colossus of Roads: Myth and Symbol Along the
American Highway.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 15, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1260 words


OPEN ROAD A Celebration of the American Highway. By Phil Patton. Illustrated.
304 pp. New York: Simon & Schuster. $17.95.

LADY BIRD JOHNSON has a lot to answer for, according to Phil Patton in his
intriguing new book ''Open Road.'' Armed with the smug conviction that bushes
are better for the American tourist than billboards, concrete dinosaurs, giant
tar-paper trout and the whole mad gaggle of roadside come-ons that used to lend
a certain aura of exoticism and spine-chilling pseudodanger to cross-country
treks, she got the Highway Beautification Act passed in 1965.

The full force of law banished the eye-popping menagerie to a distance of 600
feet from the center line, and with it those attendant congeries of signage
promising almost unimaginable delights at the next interchange. But if you look
very closely at Lady Bird's bushes strung out along the 600-foot mark -
especially in the wintertime, when the foliage is sparse, or toward sunset, when
the light takes on that peculiar power of penetration - you can catch glimpses
now and then of the aged critters, lurking back there, massing for another
assault on a highway grown longer and duller and wearier in their absence.

Their agents are among us, even now, bearing portfolios of old Walker Evans
photographs showing weathered billboards for a Carole Lombard movie, pinned
between the asphalt and a row of crumbling porches in 1930's Atlanta like so
many hard-edged shapes in a pricey abstract painting. High art redeems trash
nowadays. The campy flotsam and jetsam along the curbside have been
rehabilitated by a shift in sensibility hastily contrived, it would seem, to put
miles between Mrs. Johnson and the esthetic literati. The year after the Highway
Beautification Act, 1966, brought the architect and writer Robert Venturi's
strangled admission in his book ''Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture''
that the litter of signboards and franchise joints along Route 66 was ''almost
all right.''

There were and are lots of people, of course, who don't need the likes of Robert
Venturi to tell them that perky wigwam motels and Burma-Shave signs are just
fine, thank you very much. (They're the sort of folks who are apt to hum
snatches of ''King of the Road'' to themselves in the R.V. en route to places
called ''Holyland USA'' and ''Confederama,'' and they - pshaw, we! - tend to
idolize Robert Mitchum for his bravado driving technique in ''Thunder Road.'')
Well, they are among us, too, a shock wave of pop culture prophets brandishing
souvenir plates from Lawrence Welk Village in Escondido, Calif.; flashing
snapshots of The World's Largest Prairie Chicken on a rise, fully visible from
Interstate 90, outside Rothsay, Minn.; reciting litanies of the serial signs
that beckon and coax the happy tourist down hundreds of twisting miles of
two-lane roads toward meccas like Wall Drug, or South of the Border (of North
Carolina!) or Rock City. The happy tourist has much in common with the American
literati. In ''Blue Highways,'' William Least Heat Moon, following the likes of
Jack Kerouac and Edward Hopper and Hunter Thompson down the mythic American
road, bound for his own ritual of self-discovery and testing on the frontier of
the highway, skitters off the Interstate at the first opportunity: he swaps the
efficient sterility of the concrete slab for the funky potential of ''Blue
Highways'' meandering across the road map. He trades Mrs. Johnson's prim bushes
for tottering barns held together mainly by the legends enticing him toward ROCK
CITY - SEE SEVEN STATES. Sam Hughes, the heroine of Bobbie Ann Mason's ''In
Country,'' driving to Washington to find her father's name on the granite
billboard of the Vietnam Memorial, despairs of the very pleasantness of the
manicured Interstate heading out of Kentucky, the strip mines hidden behind
grassy ridges. G.I.'s of the 60's, coming back from war to an alien America, Sam
Hughes thinks, must have felt ''as though they belonged nowhere,'' the same way
she feels out on the beautified highway, with its spooky, squeaky-clean parody
of a landscape. MR. PATTON, a New York journalist and editor, is not insensitive
to the soul-destroying qualities of a week's worth of grassy medians, nor does
he discount the spiritual worth of the auto pilgrimage demanded of at least one
world-class American writer and a clutch of major movie stars every decade or
so. Trotting out key texts (by Mr. Venturi and by Henry-Russell Hitchcock,
respectively) on the extant duck-shaped Long Island duckling store and the
defunct ice-cream-bucket-shaped ice cream stand in Berlin, Conn., he regards the
discovery of the tacky ''vernacular'' by modernists with cool bemusement. He is
just as skeptical, however, of the uncritical enthusiasms of roadside attraction
buffs: he is not prepared to cherish every folkish assault upon the tourist
psyche, let alone each mansarded burger stand designed by corporate computer and
visited upon unwary locales with blinding speed from prepackaged kits. According
to Mr. Patton, in fact, oil company executives, called to the White House and
tongue-lashed by Mrs. Johnson for the prevailing grubbiness of their outlets,
were the ones who conjured up the roadside mansard in the first place in a
misguided attempt to lend a touch of class and good taste to the once-ubiquitous
gas station. MANY of us, in the wake of assorted gas crises, the alienation of
the Vietnam era and the uniform mansarding of modern-day America, have written
with more than a little nostalgia about the lore of an older, roadside America,
a cozy, quirky, old-fashioned kind of place frequented by truth-seekers in
ancient Chevys and filling-station philosophers, where dreams invariably come
true. And ''Open Road,'' after quoting all that with good cheer and
understanding, pushes on to speculate about roadways as expressive entities in
their own right, symbols of our freedom of movement, our historic hatred of
cities, our essential aloneness.

Mr. Patton is at his personal best, however, when he talks in specific detail
about Lady Bird Johnson's kind of highway, the mighty interstate, the
coast-to-coast system of divided highways begun in earnest under President
Eisenhower on the utopian model of the German Autobahn. Called ''National
Defense Highways'' in order to tap the nuclear hysteria of the postwar years,
the Interstates were funded, he discovers, by taxes levied ''per gallon, not as
a percentage of sales price.'' That legislative refinement tempted highway
builders into a kind of collective megalomania in the Robert Moses mode: the
more roads they paved, the faster the odometers spun, the higher the tax
revenues soared, and the more roads they could lay - newer and longer ones. THE
structure of the law also suggests that the road itself, not some mundane
destination toward which it coursed, was the real object of national desire, a
talisman the potency of which became apparent only when rising gas prices and
falling consumption brought the juggernaut to a shuddering halt in the 1970's.
So there we were, stuck in front of the television set, watching Charles Kuralt
do our traveling for us, listening to Willie Nelson wail about the joys of the
open road, pining for the ultimate freedom, the American Dream - a big old
American car with power everything and roads that would never end. Well, gas
prices are falling by the minute and Lee Iacocca may yet save the auto industry.
Put Mr. Patton's lovely little book in the glove compartment of your Toyota and
point it west, just in case.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of the West Side Highway in Manhattan, 1930 (Culver Pictures);
Photo of an early Autobahn near Frankfurt, Germany, 1942 (Henrich Hoffman/Time
Inc.)(Page 16)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              326 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHILDRENS' BOOKS;
Bookshelf

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 278 words


Additional titles of interest:

LADY WITH A TORCH. By Eleanor Coerr. Illustrated by Oscar de Mejo. Harper & Row.
$10.95. (Ages 7 to 11) One of the many books about the Statue of Liberty
centennial, this small volume with quirky black-and-white drawings well recounts
the now familiar story of France's gift to the United States.

THE STAR-SPANGLED BANNER. Written and illustrated by Peter Spier.
Zephyr/Doubleday. Paper, $5.95. (Ages 6 and up) In this large-format book, first
published in 1973 toward the end of the Vietnam War, the popular illustrator
presents a historical setting around Fort McHenry near Baltimore, Md., for
Francis Scott Key's first verse and a half of the National Anthem - written in
1814 during the War of 1812 - and then moves to a montage of contemporary
America.

MY CAMP DIARY. By Suzanne Weyn. Illustrated by Ann Iosa. Bradbury Press. Paper,
$8.95. (Ages 7 and up) A spiral-bound diary, plus checklist, tip sheet, song and
joke book for new and returning campers.

LOSING SOMEONE YOU LOVE: When a Brother or Sister Dies. By Elizabeth Richter.
Putnam. $11.95. (Ages 11 and up) An affecting collection of brief interviews
with 14 teen-agers, plus two young women, ages 21 and 24, all of whom have
experienced the death of a sibling from causes that range from automobile
accidents to illness and crib death. A low-key, helpful book.

WHAT'S FOR LUNCH? The Eating Habits of Seashore Creatures. By Sam and Beryl
Epstein with Michael Salmon. Illustrated by Walter Gaffney-Kessel. Macmillan.
$10.95. (Ages 6 to 9) The eating habits of 20 seashore creatures a young
beachgoer might encounter, including clams, crabs, terns, herons and worms.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustration from ''Lady With a Torch.''(Oscar de Mejo)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              327 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PURSUING A CAREER IN FUNERAL BUSINESS

BYLINE: By ROBERTA HERSHENSON

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 8, Column 5; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1116 words


JANET RUGGIERO of Ardsley has a master's degree in social work, but she is going
to school again. In her new field, the 28-year old Miss Ruggiero will need the
same communications skills she once used as a child-care worker. Miss Ruggiero
is studying to be a funeral director.

Deborah Golden of Scarsdale holds a master's degree in special education and
taught emotionally disturbed children for seven years before stopping to raise a
family. She was active in such community groups as the Parent-Teacher
Association and the League of Women Voters and managed her husband's law office
for five years before enrolling last fall at the American Academy McAllister
Institute of Funeral Service in Manhattan, where Miss Ruggiero and 83 other men
and women of varying ages and backgrounds are also students.

Following their completion of either a 12- or 16-month program (depending on the
amount of previous college education), graduates of the school may obtain their
licenses in funeral service after meeting requirements, which vary from state to
state. Graduates wishing to practice in New York must pass an exam administered
by the Conference of Funeral Service Examining Boards (results accepted by a
majority of states), intern for a year in a funeral home, and then pass a
state-regulations examination to become licensed.

The inevitable question most funeral-service students must repeatedly answer is
''why?'' Why do they wish to become funeral directors?

''People think there must be something wrong with you for going into this
business,'' said Terry Rafferty, an exuberant 22-year-old who travels to school
from Philadelphia every day with a group of seven other students. ''They make
jokes about it, or look shocked, or they'll say 'Well, somebody has to do it.'
But I love my job.'' (He works weekends and nights at a funeral home in
Philadelphia.) ''I am meeting so many different kinds of people. It's very
fulfilling.''

As is true of many students here, Mr. Rafferty's earliest exposure to funeral
practice came from a member of the family who was in the business - in his case,
a cousin. ''Most people are here either because they've grown up with funeral
service around them or because of an unusual life experience that changed their
attitude toward death,'' said Steven Knoblauch, a psychologist who teaches
courses in psychology and bereavement counseling at the school.

''I did it to overcome a terrible fear,'' said Margaret Verhagen, a 1980
graduate of the school, as well as a chiropractor, who now teaches pathology
there. ''Losing a grandparent when I was 16 frightened the life out of me.''

Mark Mandara, a 20-year-old student from Crestwood, said his ''eyes were
opened'' about a year ago by a death in the family. ''I saw how the arrangements
were made and it made me mad,'' Mr. Mandara said. ''There wasn't enough caring.
It was run too much like a business.''

William A. McDonald, dean of students at the school and himself a
fourth-generation funeral director, is sensitive to this kind of criticism and
tries to counter it by instilling ''a very high degree of ethics'' in his
students.

''People don't know where or when they'll have to call on a funeral director,''
the dean said. ''They come to us in the most trying circumstances and put their
trust in us. It's a business, but not in the ordinary sense.''

In a traditional funeral, Mr. McDonald continued, there are 65 to 75 details
that must be attended to. ''It's a kind of domino theory,'' he explained. ''Each
detail must be given complete attention in its turn, but we are dealing with
people who are emotionally upset and who are likely to make mistakes. It is our
task to take the time to ask the necessary questions, to put ourselves in the
family's position and lift as much of the burden from them as possible.''

Since coming to the school in 1980, Mr. McDonald said he had tried to convey his
own practical experiences in the courses he taught - funeral-service principles,
business and mortuary law, professional ethics, and communications skills -
rather than take a purely textbook approach. ''I want the students to avoid the
pitfalls,'' he said. ''My purpose here is to look at the funeral director as a
whole person and to teach students to treat their clients as they would wish to
be treated themselves.''

In order to prepare themselves to help bereaved families the most effectively,
students are encouraged to explore their own feelings and attitudes toward
death. Dr. Knoblauch incorporates a four-hour workshop into his psychology
course designed to put students in touch with their ''fears and hopes, fantasies
and experiences'' regarding death.

Many of the students said they had not become inured to the grief of others.

''We're not totally unemotional at all,'' said Carolyn Whigham of Newark, whose
9-year-old son assists with funerals on Saturdays, as she did as a child. ''In
the industry you develop a better form of sensitivity. You learn to see people
grieving within.''

Mark Mayer, 22, who works with his fiancee at a funeral home in Bronxville, said
he found ''babies the hardest part'' of his job.

Bruce Parrish, a Vietnam veteran and former registered nurse, said he had found
''more death and misery'' in his work in hospitals than in his present job at a
funeral home. ''This business is very different from what it appears to be,''
said the former Hastings-on-Hudson resident. ''In funeral service you're not
serving the dead, you're serving the living.''

Mr. Parrish said he enjoyed the varied nature of the work, which might include
maintaining the yard of the home or driving out of town for a burial, as well as
counseling people who were upset.

Miss Ruggiero, whose family has owned a funeral home in the Bronx since 1877,
also stressed the diversity of the field, particularly the ''listening and
interviewing skills'' that are needed.

The educational program at the school includes such sciences as microbiology,
pathology and chemistry and courses in such subjects as ''restorative art'' and
''thanatology and society.'' Speakers on AIDS, and others who explain death to
children, visit the school regularly.

Mrs. Golden, who graduates next December, said she hoped to use her license to
open her own chapel in Westchester, where she feels there is a need, as well as
to continue her father's funeral business near Boston -founded by her
grandfather and one of the few in the area catering to the religious rituals of
Judaism.

''It all goes back to tradition,'' Mrs. Golden said. ''When you have established
a trusted reputation in the community, you hope that your family can continue to
provide service from generation to generation.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              328 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE CONSCIENCE OF A GREEN BERET

BYLINE: By Joe Klein; Joe Klein is the author of ''Payback: Five Marines and
Vietnam'' and ''Woody Guthrie: A Life.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 8, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 785 words


THE EMBASSY HOUSE By Nicholas Proffitt. 399 pp. New York: Bantam Books. $16.95.

WAR is the handmaiden of mythology, and the prevailing myth of American war
novels has been, appropriately enough, an egalitarian one: our heroes tend to be
amateurs. The platoon traditionally has been a model populist legislature of
citizen soldiers representing various ethnic factions, where democratic
consensus is achieved after struggle and misunderstanding; at which point the
men ''come of age'' on the battlefield and return home better for the
experience.

Vietnam punched holes in a great many myths about the nobility of war, but the
citizen soldier, the grunt, remained inviolate, as did the classic American
military villain, that tyrannical opponent of agrarian democracy, that ultimate
dodo, the sergeant who was a career Army noncommissioned officer - the lifer. In
Vietnam, ''lifer'' was a term of opprobrium reserved for only the most gullible
militarists. A lifer inevitably was a red-necked, thick-skulled, by-the-book
baboon who lacked the intelligence to cut it in the real world. He spoke a
bizarre, semicoherent tongue that consisted of gutteral barks and the
stockpiling of obscure military acronyms. At his most noble, the lifer was a
drill instructor whose essential barbarism was convenient for hardening men to
do battle. I may be wrong, but I can't recall a lifer in American fiction who
had a mother.

To his great credit, Nicholas Proffitt has undertaken a campaign to rescue the
lifer from cliche. Not surprisingly, Mr. Proffitt is the son of a career
sergeant and served as a sergeant himself during the Vietnam era, before going
over to the enemy and becoming a journalist (he wrote for Newsweek from Saigon,
Beirut, London and Nairobi). In his wonderful first novel, ''Gardens of Stone,''
Mr. Proffitt broke startling ground - a lifer read books, quoted Shakespeare and
cried (while pretending all the while to be a hardcase). More important, Mr.
Proffitt showed a talent for subtlety and complexity. His lifers were torn
between loyalty to the Army and the knowledge that the Vietnam War was a
disaster that might ultimately destroy the institution they loved. They knew
enough not to blame it all on politicians or protesters, though they approved of
neither.

Mr. Proffitt returns to this theme in his new novel, ''The Embassy House,''
which is the story of another professional soldier, ordered by civilians to
betray his military code of honor. The soldier is Capt. Jake Gulliver, a former
Green Beret who has been loaned - reluctantly - to the C.I.A. The Company is
interested in only one of Captain Gulliver's diverse skills - his ability to
kill people. Indeed, Gulliver has become a legend of sorts. He is known as the
Sandman. He puts people to sleep at night.

''The Embassy House'' takes place in 1970, a time when few illusions remain
about the nature of the war or its outcome. Gulliver has been assigned to the
C.I.A.'s notorious Phoenix program - the plan to assassinate Vietcong
sympathizers, real and imagined - in a Mekong Delta province. The program has
had little luck knocking off anyone but business competitors of the local
province chief, however, and Gulliver is sick of his dirty work. ONCE again Mr.
Proffitt is at his best describing the fascinating interplay of pride, skill,
morality, honor and duty that enables a professional warrior to commit acts of
utter brutality. Gulliver is a trained killer and an honorable man. He detests
the amorality of his C.I.A. control. His only friend is probably his worst enemy
- Dang, a South Vietnamese officer who may be a double agent but is at least a
pro: ''Gulliver knew that for Dang there were no grays. Gray was the color of
self-indulgence, of weakness, a dangerous color - a civilian color. Gulliver
often wished that he could see things as simply as Dang seemed to, as he himself
once did.''

But, of course, he can't . . . and the heart of ''The Embassy House'' is
Gulliver's struggle with his conscience, his gradual rejection of mindless,
immoral violence. Mr. Proffitt makes this process compelling when he sticks to
the task at hand: exploring the complicated recesses of an honorable soldier's
mind and describing military action, which he does in brilliant detail. He is
less successful dealing with civilians: C.I.A. agents like Gulliver's control,
Bennett Steelman, and women (who are, of course, the ultimate civilians). The
scenes between Gulliver and the beautiful, naive C.I.A. operative Sally Teacher
are particularly painful, especially the attempts at banter. These pass quickly,
though, and Mr. Proffitt is back leading us on a tour of a place we've rarely
been - inside the mind of a lifer.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              329 of 329 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 30, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SOUTHEAST ASIA WARS YIELD NEW CROP OF DESERTERS

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1077 words

DATELINE: PHANAT NIKHOM, Thailand


He was a student drafted into the Vietnamese Army. But when he reached his
combat unit, he said, he ''saw that the fight was terrible and unjust,'' and he
deserted.

The former soldier is Nguyen Van Tao, 26 years old, and the army he fled in 1983
was the Vietnamese Army in Cambodia.

Mr. Tao and two other deserters said in interviews in a refugee center here
recently that growing numbers of young Vietnamese were trying to avoid or escape
military service in Cambodia, where a war of attrition is now in its eighth
year.

Similar assertions are made by ''boat people'' - people who have fled Vietnam by
boat across the South China Sea, many of them draft-age men - and, occasionally,
by residents of Vietnam willing to talk about the subject to foreign reporters.

In Hanoi, a Vietnamese Army officer acknowledged recently that there were some
desertions among the estimated 150,000 Vietnamese soldiers in Cambodia, saying
that in every society there were ''boys who don't have the strength to be
soldiers.''

'Not a Clear War for Us'

But a Vietnamese civil servant had another explanation: ''Cambodia is difficult
because it is not a clear war for us, one we all understand.''

The reality is brought home to Vietnamese cities and towns by amputees in their
20's.

Many Vietnamese families, having suffered through the dangers and deprivations
of three decades of fighting, are now fearful of losing another generation of
sons to another war.

When reporters visited a commune in northern Vietnam earlier this year, a poor
farmer who had lost a leg in the independence struggle against the French more
than 30 years ago showed visitors a portrait of a young man in uniform and
explained: ''He was my son. He died in Cambodia.'' The old man didn't know
where, or how.

''A lot of people don't want to go to fight away from Vietnam,'' said Nguyen Tri
Hieu, a 24-year-old draft resister and deserter, adding that this did not mean
they loved their country less or that the deep patriotism of the Vietnamese had
diminished.

''In Cambodia there is no main goal,'' he said. ''We are not fighting for our
land. I would bleed for Vietnam, but I did not want to die for someone else's
country.''

Mr. Hieu said he had just completed secondary school in 1979 when Hanoi, which
was fighting in Cambodia and, on its northern border, against a Chinese
invasion, began a major conscription drive. Seeing his hopes of higher education
fading, he said, he fled his home in Da Nang ''to a northern province.'' He said
he evaded army recruiters for three years before surrendering in 1983, when he
heard that his mother had been arrested.

He was inducted and, after training, sent to the Thai-Cambodian border, where he
deserted in 1984.

''I never wanted to go in the army; I wanted to go to the university and become
an engineer,'' he said in English. ''I worked hard in school, and my mathematics
marks were very high.''

Mr. Tao and Mr. Hieu are now among the 426 Vietnamese deserters -most of them
soldiers, but some of then civil servants - living in a refugee processing
center near this market town in eastern Thailand. They are posing a problem for
Thai authorities, who say that nobody wants these men.

''No country is willing to interview them,'' said Amornpan Nimanan, the refugee
camp commander. ''No one wants deserters. But almost all of them are good people
who are seeking freedom and want only a new life. They are all young, strong,
and single.''

The former soldiers - living among more than 7,300 boat people also awaiting new
homes - say others who fled did not make it.

''We experienced many dangers coming to Thailand,'' said Mr. Tao, who defected
with five other soldiers. ''Many of us disappeared in the jungle, or were
killed, or caught by the Khmer Rouge, or lost their legs stepping on mines. We
were the lucky ones.''

Some Vietnamese deserters who find their way to Thailand say they had problems
that predated what they describe as major call-ups in 1979 and in 1982, when
they say Hanoi thought another Chinese invasion was imminent.

Vu Van Tri, 29, came from a Roman Catholic family in Ho Chi Minh City, formerly
Saigon. His father had been in the South Vietnamese Army and had worked in a
naval shipyard. Mr. Tri said many southerners remained suspect because of such
ties.

Persecution Is Charged

''It was the persecution I could not endure,'' Mr. Tri said, adding that he had
tried to escape by boat before being drafted but that his parents could never
find the money.

He said his problems began with the fall of Saigon in 1975, when he was about to
begin a university course in economics. Instead, he was sent for political
re-education and assigned to hard-labor projects in an effort to dissuade him
from an academic career. He said he went on studying anyway, by any means he
could. He was eventually allowed to finish his higher education and was assigned
to work in a local bank in Ho Chi Minh City.

''But I had no particular responsibility,'' he said. ''I was a kind of
janitor.''

''As for my religion, they did not say, 'You must not go to church,' '' he said.
''But they told me it was no use to be a Catholic. They said this over and over
until I got upset and confused.''

Mr. Tri was drafted in the 1982 call-up. ''I was told that if I should return to
Vietnam after military service, I would probably have little chance to study
more, or work,'' he said.

In 1985, stationed in Sisophon in western Cambodia, he paid a local resident a
few ounces of gold that his parents had raised with the help of a relative and
bought his way into Thailand.

''Some Khmer people in Sisophon town took me to Son Sann's troops,'' he said,
referring to the guerrilla army of the non-Communist Khmer People's National
Liberation Front. ''The Son Sann troops kept me a month, and then they gave me
to the Thais.''

Mr. Tri has a sister in Melbourne, and hopes to be considered for resettlement
in Australia. Refugee camp officials say his case is rare; most deserters have
no contacts in the West.

The deserters have been told by refugee officials that because they have been
members of a Communist organization - and because some were imprisoned on
arrival in Thailand - there may be insurmountable legal barriers to emigration
to some countries.

''We were soldiers in a Communist army; that's right,'' Mr. Tao said. ''But that
does not mean we are Communists. We were forced into the army, and we escaped
from it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Vietnamese deserters at refugee camp (NYT/Barbara Crossette)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
