
                               1 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 31, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. AGAIN SAYS NO TO CAMBODIA ROLE FOR KHMER ROUGE

BYLINE: By YOUSSEF M. IBRAHIM, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1058 words

DATELINE: PARIS, July 30


In a strong reaffirmation of American policy, Secretary of State James A. Baker
3d said today that the United States opposes any role for the Khmer Rouge in a
future Cambodian government.

Mr. Baker, at an international conference on Cambodia that opened here today,
said Washington will support Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the former Cambodian
leader who heads a coalition of two non-Communist factions and the Khmer Rouge
that is fighting Vietnamese forces occupying the country since December 1978.
The Khmer Rouge, led by Pol Pot, took power in 1975 and imposed a brutal regime
under which at least one million Cambodians died.

But Mr. Baker warned the Prince and the other Cambodian factions that ''the
strength of our support for any Cambodian government, however, will directly and
inversely depend on the extent of Khmer Rouge participation, if any, in that
government.''

Others Support U.S. Position

A senior State Department official said the statement should be interpreted as a
clear signal that the United States will penalize Prince Sihanouk if he persists
in advocating an alliance with the Khmer Rouge. Diplomats said that Mr. Baker's
assertion was the strongest and clearest public statement of United States
policy on the future of Cambodia.

Similar positions were echoed by Britain, the Soviet Union and several Asian
countries represented at the conference. China, the main power backing the Khmer
Rouge, will present its position on Monday.

Representatives of 19 countries gathered here for a month of negotiations to try
to settle the decade-long civil war that has ravaged Cambodia. Vietnam, which
has occupied Cambodia since late December 1978, has promised to remove its
remaining 50,000 troops from Cambodian soil by the end of September. Vietnam's
departure, which has been a consistent demand of the United States and other
countries, has brought new urgency to the question of who will rule Cambodia.
The conference is aimed at finding a comprehensive solution to the problem.

Accusation of Genocide

United States representatives and most of the 11 delegates who spoke today
accused the Khmer Rouge of committing genocide between 1975 and 1978. They
argued that this record disqualifies the Khmer Rouge from gaining a role in
governing the country.

''The United States strongly believes that the Khmer Rouge should play no role
in Cambodia's future,'' Mr. Baker told the conference.

The United States, Britain, France, the Soviet Union and representatives of
several Asian countries said they agreed in principle that United Nations forces
should supervise a cease-fire after the scheduled withdrawal of Vietnamese
forces. They said the cease-fire should be followed by free elections.

But there were major differences on the timing of the cease-fire and its
enforcement, the preservation of the present Government, which is backed by
Vietnam, and the allocation of power in a new government among the four
Cambodian factions.

Baker Calls for Safeguards

Mr. Baker said in his opening remarks to the conference that ''there must be
safeguards that Pol Pot and other Khmer Rouge leaders responsible for mass
murders will never dominate Cambodia again.''

The conference opened after a week of preliminary talks among the four factions
- the Khmer Rouge, represented by Khieu Samphan; the two non-Communist rebel
groups, led by Prince Sihanouk and former Prime Minister Son Sann; and the
pro-Vietnamese Government in Phnom Penh, led by Prime Minister Hun Sen.

About the only issue on which the Cambodians agreed was to sit together as one
delegation at a wide rectangular conference table in the Kleber Center near the
Arc de Triomphe that grouped the five permanent members of the United Nations
Security Council, the six members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
and Vietnam, Japan, Laos, India, Canada, Australia and Zimbabwe.

Alignments With Power Blocs

Today's proceedings reflected the alignment of the Cambodian factions with the
major international power blocs. The United States and its allies back the
non-Communist rebels; the Soviet Union and its allies back Vietnam, and China
backs the Khmer Rouge. Officials from various delegations said here today that
it is far from clear whether China is willing to abandon support for the Khmer
Rouge.

While the United States supports Prince Sihanouk, it does not support his
position that the Khmer Rouge must be given some role in a new Cambodian
government.

The Prince's principal concern is to get the Vietnamese out of Cambodia and keep
them from returning. He has said that the Khmer Rouge, which with 40,000 armed
fighters is the strongest and best organized faction, would likely keep fighting
unless it is included in a new government. The Prince's faction has 12,000
troops; the non-Communist guerrilla group headed by Son Sann also has 12,000
troops. The Hun Sen Government has an estimated 50,000 regular troops and
approximately 50,000 militias.

The Soviet Union agrees with the United States that the Khmer Rouge should be
kept out of a new government and advocates a cease-fire to take place after the
final phase of the withdrawal of Vietnamese troops, which Mr. Hun Sen said today
is expected between September 21 and September 26.

Vietnam and the Soviet Union appeared ready to allow Prince Sihanouk to share
power with Mr. Hun Sen, but are not willing to go along with the proposal by the
United States that the Vietnamese-backed Government be removed altogether and
that elections be allowed to determine who governs Cambodia.

Success Rides Partly on China

Foreign Minister Roland Dumas of France said that although the early talks
''appeared difficult'' they were not discouraging. He emphasized that the
conference is taking place because ''it is now possible and urgent to put an end
to one of the most murderous, and most unfair conflicts in history''.

The Chinese foreign minister, Qian Qichen, who met with Soviet Foreign Minister
Eduard A. Shevardnadze today, made no comments. But Mr. Shevardnadze said
without elaboration that he was ''more optimistic.''

To a large extent, success here rides on China's willingness to reduce its
military and financial aid to the Khmer Rouge and on its ability to influence
them to accept a subsidiary role in shaping the future of Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, who was supported yesterday by the
United States, being greeted by Cambodian supporters in Paris. (Reuters) (pg.
A1); Foreign Minister Qian Qichen of China, Prime Minister Hun Sen of Cambodia,
Sec. of State, James A. Baker 3d and Prince Norodom Sihanouk attending the
opening session in Paris of the International Conference on Cambodia (Reuters)
(pg. A6)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 31, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Living With Murderers in Cambodia

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 469 words


The core problem facing the international conference on Cambodia just under way
in Paris is to define a realistic future role for the Khmer Rouge. When this
group of fanatics held absolute power in the late 1970's, it was responsible for
the deaths of a million people and the devastation of Cambodian society. It
remains the single strongest indigenous military force in the country.

Khmer Rouge military power could again prove decisive after Vietnam completes
its scheduled withdrawal Sept. 30. The challenge to the Paris conferees is to
devise a formula that provides enough incentive for the Khmer Rouge to join a
settlement without allowing it to regain power. That was the message of
Secretary of State Baker at yesterday's formal opening of the 19-nation
conference.

The major powers at the conference back different Cambodian groups: China arms
and supports the Khmer Rouge. The United States backs the Khmer Rouge's
non-Communist allies, especially Prince Norodom Sihanouk, and the Soviet Union
stands behind the Vietnamese-installed Cambodian regime. But the powers now
appear agreed on the need for a political settlement.

Left to themselves, Cambodian politicians could barely agree on seating at the
peace table. And they now have barely two months left before the Vietnamese
withdrawal to establish an interim regime, find ways to share power and
integrate four armies, and devise mechanisms to verify Vietnam's departure. What
will be still harder to find is a formula for bringing the Khmer Rouge inside
without letting it take over the tent.

Cambodia's former head of state, Prince Sihanouk, and his non-Communist ally,
Son Sann, see the Khmer Rouge as an essential counterweight to Prime Minister
Hun Sen, the Vietnam-backed Communist. For his part, Mr. Hun Sen proposes a
coalition excluding the Khmer Rouge, but resists internationally monitored
elections and won't give the non-Communists the constitutional guarantees they
need to protect their role in a multiparty system.

The Bush Administration has backed the Prince in his justifiable pressure for
those guarantees. Dubiously, it has won from Congress discretionary authority to
provide arms to Cambodia's non-Communist resistance. Fortunately, Secretary
Baker made clear yesterday that the U.S. could not support any settlement that
gave a share of power to the Khmer Rouge.

Rudimentary decency should preclude any association with Pol Pot or senior Khmer
Rouge leaders suspected of crimes against humanity. And simple prudence argues
against giving any Khmer Rouge leader authority for Cambodia's military or
security policies. It is up to the outside powers to convince the Khmer Rouge of
two things: that its supporters' political rights will be protected -but that
its leaders can never again expect to tyrannize Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 1, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

GROUP IN BEIRUT SAYS IT HANGED U.S. COLONEL; 2D THREAT ISSUED; BUSH CONVENES
SECURITY PANEL;
Videotape Released

BYLINE: By IHSAN A. HIJAZI, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1578 words

DATELINE: BEIRUT, Lebanon, July 31


A terrorist group in Lebanon said today that it had hanged a hostage Marine
colonel, and distributed a grisly videotape that showed a figure identified as
the American twisting at the end of a rope.

A second group, one of many Shiite Muslim cells with links to the Party of God,
a pro-Iranian organization in Lebanon, threatened to kill a second American
hostage by nightfall on Tuesday unless Israel freed a Muslim cleric abducted
from Lebanon on Friday.

The group that said it killed the marine, Lieut. Col. William R. Higgins, had
threatened to hang him after Israel abducted the cleric, Sheik Abdul Karim
Obeid, a fiery Shiite preacher and a senior leader of the Party of God.

Israeli Suggests a Trade

The sheik was seized with two companions in an Israeli commando raid on the
southern Lebanese village of Jibchit. A Lebanese neighbor of the sheik was
killed by the Israelis.

This afternoon, a few minutes after the announced deadline for Colonel Higgins's
killing, Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin offered to trade Israel's Lebanese
prisoners for all the hostages, Israeli and Western, held by Shiite groups in
Lebanon. [Page A7.] The Organization of the Oppressed on Earth, a Shiite Muslim
cell with links to the Party of God, had said it was responsible for kidnapping
Colonel Higgins, the chief of an observer group attached to a United Nations
truce-monitoring force in Lebanon, on Feb. 17, 1988.

'An Opening Gift'

The group said today in a typewritten statement to Western news agencies in West
Beirut that it killed Colonel Higgins, calling the action ''an opening gift'' to
Israel and the United States.

Accompanying the statement was a grim half-minute videotape, the first half gray
and grainy, showing a man dangling from a noose, his bare feet bound, his head
tilted to the left and his body turning slowly. The camera panned up the body,
showing the man's face half-covered with a white gag.

The second segment showed a closeup of a face identifiable as that of Colonel
Higgins, the eyes bulging slightly. The statement and tape were delivered to
Western news agencies at 4 P.M. Beirut time. The statement said he had been
hanged an hour earlier.

''Since criminal America and the Zionist enemy did not take our decision to
execute American spy Higgins seriously, and since Sheik Abdul Karim Obeid and
his two brethren were not freed by the specified deadline, the execution of
American spy Higgins was carried out by hanging exactly at 3 P.M.,'' the
statement said.

Threat Against 2d Captive

The message was quickly followed by a warning from another group, calling itself
the Revolutionary Justice Organization, threatening to kill Joseph James
Cicippio, a 58-year-old American who was acting comptroller of the American
University of Beirut when he was kidnapped on Sept. 12, 1986 A threat to kill
the British hostage Terry Waite, an aide to the Archbishop of Canterbury who was
kidnapped while trying to arrange the release of hostages, was delivered after
the message about Colonel Higgins. It came in a telephone call to The Associated
Press bureau in Nicosia, Cyprus, but that threat was discounted because the
kidnappers have usually left messages with news agencies in Beirut.

The message about Mr. Cicippio said: ''The organization announces its quick
resolve to execute the death sentence against the American-Israeli spy Joseph
Cicippio if the struggling sheik is not released by 6 P.M. Tuesday.

''Then the deadline will be set for the execution, which will be broadcast on
all the screens in the world.''

Photo of Cicippio

Accompanying the statement was a photograph of Mr. Cicippio wearing a brown and
pink wool sweater over a blue pullover. The presence of a photograph has become
the standard means of authenticating the claims of Lebanese kidnappers.

The deadline set by Mr. Cicippio's captors falls at 11 A.M. Tuesday, Eastern
Daylight Time.

The message regarding Mr. Cicippio arrived at An Nahar, Beirut's most respected
independent newspaper, whose offices are in West Beirut. It came five hours
after the message announcing the death of Colonel Higgins.

Despite the videotape, it was far from clear that Colonel Higgins was in fact
hanged.

There have been several unconfirmed reports that Colonel Higgins was killed
earlier. One such report held that he was killed after the U.S.S. Vincennes shot
down an Iranian jetliner on July 3, 1988. Last December, his kidnappers said
they referred him to a special court, which sentenced him to death. There have
also been rumors among United Nations personnel in southern Lebanon that he died
of maltreatment after an escape attempt.

Buckley and Kilburn

Two American hostages are known to have been killed in Lebanon: William Buckley,
who was kidnapped while serving as the Central Intelligence Agency station chief
in Beirut, and Peter Kilburn, a librarian at the American University of Beirut.
Six other hostages of various nationalities are known to have been killed, and
another is missing and presumed dead.

Islamic Holy War said it killed Mr. Buckley in October 1986 in retaliation for
what it called American complicity in an Israeli air strike against Palestine
Liberation Organization offices in Tunis. But American intelligence officials
believe that he died in Iran earlier while being tortured.

Colonel Higgins, a decorated Vietnam veteran and a former aide to Defense
Secretary Caspar A. Weinberger, was seized in February 1988 by bearded gunmen as
he drove near the port city of Sidon.

Today's statement said he was hanged at the precise hour set for the release of
Sheik Obeid. The hour was set in an ultimatum issued on Sunday ''as a lesson and
punishment because the United States and Israel had not taken the threat
seriously.''

Accused of C.I.A. Role

It was not known where Colonel Higgins was being held. The videotape today
showed no evidence of where he might have been hanged. In a succession of
statements in the last year, the captors accused the American of using his
United Nations position as a cover for spying activity for the C.I.A.

The Organization of the Oppressed on Earth is widely thought to be the most
radical of the Shiite groups operating in Lebanon. The same group asserted
responsibility for the hijacking of a TWA ariliner in Beirut in June 1985. In
that hijacking, one passenger, Robert Dean Stethem, a United States Navy diver,
was killed.

The statement today did not say what the organization intended to do with
Colonel Higgins's body. In April 1986, Mr. Kilburn, 61, was killed and his body
dumped in the hills outside Beirut along with two British hostages after the
American air strikes against Tripoli and Benghazi in Libya.

In October that year, Islamic Holy War said it killed Mr. Buckley, who was
abducted in March 1984.

Trained by Iran

Mr. Buckley's body was never recovered. Two years ago, Islamic Holy War offered
to exchange Mr. Buckley's remains for Palestinian prisoners held by Israel.
Despite repeated denials of involvement in hostage-taking, the Party of God,
indoctrinated, financed and supplied by Iran, is often mentioned in news reports
as the umbrella group for organizations holding Western hostages in Lebanon.

West Beirut and other Muslim areas in Lebanon were paralyzed by a general strike
today. It was called by the Party of God and the other Shiite militia, Amal, to
protest Sheik Obeid's abduction. Both the Party of God and Amal, which have long
been rivals, ordered mobilizations hours after Sheik Obeid's abduction was
reported. Their leaders earlier this month announced after holding talks in
Teheran that they decided to end their conflict and join hands in fighting
Israel.

A spokesman for Amal said the group will not agree to swap an Israeli Air Force
navigator for Sheik Obeid.

The aviator was captured by Amal militiamen two and half years ago when his jet
was shot down during a raid on south Lebanon.

A senior Party of God leader, Sheik Hussein Musawi, had already said that
exchanging Sheik Obeid for three Israeli soldiers held by the fundamentalists
was out of the question. The three soldiers were captured during a raid north of
Israel three years ago.

Outrage in Middle East

NICOSIA, Cyprus, July 31 (AP) -Reports that Colonel Higgins was hanged by his
pro-Iranian captors prompted outrage in the Middle East today and criticism of
Israel's abduction of Sheik Obeid.

Syria, which supported Iran in its war with Iraq, said, ''Killing Higgins, who
was not guilty of anything, is a crime that violates all humanitarian principles
and norms.'' Iran did not comment after the announcement of the hanging of the
colonel, but a leading official earlier defended the kidnappers' threats to kill
him.

''It is very natural that the Islamic clergy and militant groups throughout the
world will take action against the interests of Israel and the United States,''
the Interior Minister, Ali Akbar Mohtashemi, was quoted as saying in an official
Iranian report monitored here. Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Velayati said that
''the threat against Higgins has nothing to do with us,'' adding, ''We condemn
any kind of kidnapping or death threat.''

Nasouh Majali, Jordan's Information Minister, called the report ''horrible.''
Before the report that Colonel Higgins was killed, Mr. Majali called the
abduction of Sheik Obeid ''an act of terror.'' He said Israel was ''condemning
terror and they are using the same means.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Col. William R. Higgins (AP & Agence France-Presse); Maj.
Robin Higgins (NYT/Michael Geissinger)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 1, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Beijing Insists Khmer Rouge Share in Rule

BYLINE: By YOUSSEF M. IBRAHIM, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 872 words

DATELINE: PARIS, July 31


China defied the United States, the Soviet Union and other countries meeting
here to negotiate a peace agreement for Cambodia by insisting today that its
Cambodian Communist ally, the Khmer Rouge, be allowed to play a role in
governing the country.

The apparently irreconcilable positions led some Asian diplomats here to predict
that the monthlong International Conference on Cambodia, which opened Sunday,
may be doomed in its effort to arrange a comprehensive solution to the country's
civil war.

But Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the non-Communist who leads the alliance of three
guerrilla factions opposing the Phnom Penh Government, said he was ''fairly
optimistic'' that the conference would reach a compromise because ''a strong
current to settle the conflict'' was evident among all those attending.

Vietnam Opposes Khmer Rouge

Vietnam, which invaded Cambodia in December 1978 to oust the Khmer Rouge
Government of Pol Pot and installed the current Government, opposes a return of
the Khmer Rouge because of the bloody legacy of their three-year rule, which
left more than one million Cambodians dead.

Using the strongest language to denounce the group, Vietnam declared that any
lasting solution to the Cambodian civil war requires the permanent eradication
of the Khmer Rouge.

''The genocidal Pol Pot regime must be eradicated definitively in the same way
as were the fascist regimes in Germany and Italy and the militarist regime in
Japan following the end of World War II,'' Nguyen Co Thach, Vietnam's Foreign
Minister told foreign ministers and other representatives of the 19 countries
attending the second day of the conference.

The Khmer Rouge representative, Khieu Samphan, responded with a speech in which
he made effusive pledges of loyalty to Prince Sihanouk and accused Vietnam of
plotting to dominate Cambodia culturally, economically and militarily.

China Accuses Vietnamese

In China's first major foreign-policy initiative since its military crackdown on
the democracy movement in June, Foreign Minister Qian Qichen joined with Mr.
Khieu Samphan in insisting that the Khmer Rouge must play a role in any interim
government.

Mr. Qian also cast doubt on Vietnam's pledge to withdraw its army from Cambodia
by September, contending that thousands of Vietnamese paramilitary personnel
would stay, passing themselves off as Cambodians.

In remarks to reporters today, Prince Sihanouk described China's insistence on a
strong Khmer Rouge presence in any Cambodian government as a ''reasonable
position as it stands.'' The Khmer Rouge is by far the strongest of the three
factions opposing the Vietnamese-backed Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen.
The two other factions are led by the Prince and by former Prime Minister Son
Sann.

American Objection

Prince Sihanouk seemed to brush aside the United States' strong opposition to
any role for the Khmer Rouge in future Cambodian government, which was
emphatically expressed on Sunday by the Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d.
Mr. Baker said the United States would withhold financial aid from any
government that included the Khmer Rouge.

The Associated Press reported tonight that Mr. Baker and Mr. Qian agreed in a
private meeting that the Khmer Rouge should have some role in a Cambodian
transitional government, but that the Chinese were seeking a greater role for
the Khmer Rouge than the United States would like.

The account of the meeting was provided by a senior United States official on
Mr. Baker's plane traveling back to Washington. The meeting reportedly took
place at Mr. Baker's request despite a ban on high-level contacts between
Beijing and Washington imposed by President Bush after the crackdown on the
democracy movement.

Prince Sihanouk, who is recognized by all parties as the potential head of any
interim government, said that Mr. Baker had told him privately that he ''simply
does not want to see the Khmer Rouge hold many portfolios or exercise much
power'' in a provisional government.

A Diplomat Is Pessimistic

An Indonesian diplomat said that despite the Prince's optimism, the positions
expressed by China, Vietnam and the Khmer Rouge almost certainly will insure the
failure of the conference to find a comprehensive settlement.

The Indonesian and other Asian diplomats here said they had hoped that China
would soften its position to regain some international sympathy after the June
crackdown.

In affirming that the Khmer Rouge must be included as a legitimate Cambodian
partner, Mr. Qian said such a move only reflected the reality of the group's
presence on the ground as a fighting force.

''This reality must be recognized,'' Mr. Qian told the conference. ''No attempt
to bring about the monopoly of power by any single party or to exclude any one
party will ever succeed.''

Most of the foreign ministers will be leaving Paris on Tuesday as the conference
breaks up into working groups that are to work on the details of a settlement
over the next month. Mr. Baker left today.

Working sessions are scheduled to start tomorrow. At the end of the negotiating
period, the foreign ministers of the 19 countries represented here will return
to preside over the end of the conference.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Prime Minister Hun Sen and Khieu Samphan (AP) (pg. A9)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 1, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Before His Abduction, Higgins Talked of Risks

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 826 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 31


Two weeks before Lieut. Col. William R. Higgins was kidnapped, he told a
Norwegian television correspondent traveling with him of the dangers that
members of the United Nations observer force faced in Lebanon.

''We can be kidnapped,'' the journalist quoted Colonel Higgins as saying during
their trip through southern Lebanon. ''We can be shot at. We can be robbed. But
this is a part of our daily lives.''

Any American officer serving in the Lebanon Observer Group, part of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization, assumes many risks. In fact, the chance
to serve in a ''hot zone'' when the United States is not at war makes a slot in
the observer force highly coveted by ambitious officers.

But many Pentagon officials say the risk may have been even greater than normal
for Colonel Higgins, who was commander of the observer group when he was
kidnapped.

Service in Pentagon

Because he was a military aide to Caspar W. Weinberger, then Defense Secretary,
from June 1985 until he went to Lebanon in June 1987, Colonel Higgins's transfer
had been opposed by Marine Corps staff officers who feared his access to
sensitive information would make him a tempting target.

But their objections were overruled, since the assignment, which Colonel Higgins
had avidly sought, came from the office of the Secretary himself, Pentagon
officials said.

Colonel Higgins, a 44-year-old Vietnam combat veteran who wrote in his high
school yearbook that his ambition was ''for my family to always be proud of
me,'' was widely described as a bright, aggressive officer, a ''gung ho''
marine.

Colonel Higgins's wife, Maj. Robin L. Higgins, a Marine officer who works in the
Pentagon's public affairs office, spent today with her stepdaughter, Christine,
19. Christine is Colonel Higgins's daughter from a previous marriage to Bonita
Spalding, who lives in Louisville, Ky.

They held a grim vigil at the Pentagon, waiting for a satellite transmission of
the grainy, black-and-white videotape purporting to show her husband's body.

A Call From the President

Bolstered by a telephone call from President Bush, who encouraged them to remain
resolute, and a meeting with Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, Robin and Christine
Higgins watched the tape in the offices of Henry S. Rowen, the Assistant
Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs.

About an hour later, Major Higgins left the Pentagon, grim-faced, to return to
her home in a northern Virginia suburb. She refused to talk to a reporter.
''They came out of the room and all Chrissy said was, 'I want to go home,' ''
said one official.

Major Higgins issued a statement through her lawyer in which she said, ''The
news from Beirut is not pleasant. I must, however, await confirmation. I have
seen the reports and have not reached any conclusion myself.''

''One thing I have learned over the past 17 months is that the truth is hard to
find and it remains so,'' she said. ''But I am determined to know the truth.''

In an interview earlier this year, Major Higgins charged that the United States
Government and the United Nations were not doing enough to get her husband
freed.

William Richard Higgins, known to all his friends, colleagues and family as
Rich, was born on Jan. 15, 1945, in Danville, Ky., and was commissioned as a
Marine second lieutenant on April 19, 1967.

Attended War College

Colonel Higgins served in Vietnam in 1968 and 1972. He later was a rifle company
commander in Okinawa, assistant director of the Staff Non-Commissioned Officers
Academy in Quantico, Va., and operations officer of the 2d Marine Division at
Camp Lejeune, N.C.

Colonel Higgins earned a master's degree in human resources from Pepperdine
University in 1976 and a master's degree in political science from Auburn
University in 1980. He also attended the National War College at Fort McNair, in
Washington, in 1985.

He served in two Pentagon administrative posts before Mr. Weinberger made him a
military assistant in June 1985. Two years later, he was transfered to Lebanon.

In January 1988, Colonel Higgins became commander of the observer force under an
arrangement in which an American officer holds the post for the first half of
the year and an Austrian holds it for the second half.

A Family Clings to Hope

The family of Joseph James Cicippio, the American hostage whose captors say he
may be the next to die, hope that he will be spared because he, like his
captors, is a Muslim.

''We are praying that that will protect him in some way,'' said his brother,
Thomas Cicippio, from his home in Norristown, Pa.

Joseph Cicippio, born a Roman Catholic, converted to Islam before marrying
Elaham Ghandour, a Lebanese, in Beirut in 1985. Ms. Ghandour, a secretary in the
United States Embassy in Beirut, has stayed there despite pleas from her
husband's family that she come to the United States. ''She says that she wants
to come back with Joe,'' Thomas Cicippio said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of President Bush on the South Lawn (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 1, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam to Allow Prisoners Who Aided the U.S. to Leave

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 81 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 31


Vietnam has agreed to resettle in the United States at least 19,000 former
prisoners who had been closely associated with the United States-backed
Government in Saigon, State Department officials said today.

The agreement could mean that more than 100,000 Vietnamese - prisoners and
family members combined - will emigrate to the United States, the officials
said. The two countries expressed hope that the first group of 3,000 will have
departed Vietnam before the end of the year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 1, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Military Recruiting Hurt By Tight Labor Market

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1181 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 31


Although no one is yet predicting a crisis, experts say that after six years of
enlisting large numbers of well-qualified young men and women, the United States
armed forces may well be heading into a time of troubles in recruiting.

Specialists in military personnel say that as the labor market has grown
tighter, it has become harder to enlist young people with high school diplomas
and good scores on aptitude tests.

Martin Binkin of the Brookings Institution said he was surprised it had taken so
long for the signs of danger to show up. ''It's something a lot of us expected
to happen much sooner,'' he said. ''All of the factors indicated that the
services would run into problems sooner or later.''

''The danger signals and the red lights are flashing for the Army,'' said Robert
L. Goldich of the Congressional Research Service. Most specialists agree that
the Army sets the trend because it is the biggest and often the most difficult
service for which to recruit.

Missed Recruiting Goal

Indeed, figures released late last week for half of this fiscal year showed that
the Army missed its overall recruiting goal for the first time in 10 years, as
did the Marine Corps. And the Army doubled, to 11 percent, the number of young
men and women who scored in the lowest aptitude category allowed.

The Navy filled its quota, but 17 percent of its recruits failed to graduate
from high school. The standard calls for taking no more than 10 percent without
high school diplomas because non-commissioned officers have maintained that
graduates absorb military training better. The Navy also saw its share of
least-qualified recruits rise to 11 percent, from 8 percent a year ago.

David J. Berteau, a senior Pentagon officer, pointed last month in Congressional
testimony to what he characterized as ''a more serious concern,'' the continuing
decline in the proportion of recruits who sign enlistment contracts up to a year
in advance. The program has reached 42 percent of its objective so far this
year, compared with 49 percent at this time last year.

'Spoiled by Our Own Success'

Among more postitive signs, however, is the retention of experienced
noncommissioned officers and skilled technicians, which has been generally
strong. And Lawrence J. Korb, a former Assistant Secretary of Defense for
personnel, was guardedly optimistic about the future.

''After six good years, we're kind of spoiled by our own success,'' Mr. Korb
said. ''I don't think there's anything that can't be cured with more aggressive
management and throwing a few bucks at it.''

Similarly, Mr. Berteau said computerized projections showed that enough good
people could be enlisted if sufficient money was put into advertising,
recruiting, pay and bonuses. But, he cautioned, ''we do need to continue to pay
attention'' to the overall recruiting and retention problem.

Mr. Binkin said, ''There's leeway for some drawdown before we start panicking
about the volunteer force.''

'Hollow Army' Decried

After the end of the draft 1973, less than 70 percent of the young men and women
who enlisted in the volunteer force were high school graduates, lower than than
the national average. In 1979, every service missed its recruiting quota.

The Army's Chief of Staff, General Edward C. Meyer, told Congress in 1980 that
he led ''a hollow Army.'' The Chief of Naval Operations, Adm. Thomas B. Hayward,
lamented ''a hemorrhage of talent.'' And Charles Moskos, a sociologist at
Northwestern University, testified: ''The all-volunteer force is on the ragged
edge of survival.''

Military experts agree that the disparity between military and civilian pay, and
cutbacks in money for training and operations, housing and benefits contributed
to the rocky start of the volunteer force, as did a general distaste for
military service after the war in Vietnam.

Raise Brought Turnaround

A turnaround began with an 11.7 percent pay raise proposed by President Carter
in 1980 and a 14.3 percent increase requested by President Reagan the next year.
In the early Reagan years, high civilian unemployment, especially among youth,
nudged people into the armed forces, and in the Reagan military buildup, more
money was alloted to housing, medical care and family programs.

In 1983, about 91 percent of the recruits were high school graduates, and 89
percent scored average or higher on aptitude examinations.

The 90 percent ratio of high school graduates became the benchmark. Since then,
a nongraduate could enlist only by scoring in the upper half on the aptitude
exams. To stay in the service, he or she must complete high school.

Soldiers Who Can Think

In a sampling of senior noncommissioned officers two years ago, most were
enthusiastic about their troops. Master Sgt. Claude Foreman, first sergeant of
an artillery battery at Fort Sill, Okla., said: ''There's no comparison between
the soldiers of today and the soldiers of the 1970's. In those days, a lot of
them couldn't read or write. Now we're getting soldiers who can read and write -
and not only that, they can think.''

But the pool of youths between the ages of 18 and 24 has been shrinking and will
continue to decline until the mid-1990's. In addition employment in general is
up, and unemployment, particularly among young people, who make up the
recruiting pool, is down.

But cuts in the armed forces to help reduce the Federal deficit has eased the
pressure of a tight labor market. From a recent high point of 2,174,000 people
in 1987, the size of the armed forces will drop to 2,129,000 this year and
continue down to 2,120,000 in 1991. If conventional arms control agreements are
reached with the Soviet Union, the forces will be cut even more.

Raises Scaled Back

On the other hand, pay raises for troops have been scaled back. For the fiscal
year that begins Oct. 1, the Pentagon had planned a 4.6 percent increase,
slightly above projected growth in civilian wages. But the Pentagon cut the
raise to 3.6 percent to preserve money for weapons programs, and in budget
deliberations so far, Congress has sustained that raise.

Beyond that, appropriations for advertising, recruiting, bonuses and educational
benefits were cut to $1.39 billion last year from a high of $1.44 billion in
1986. The Pentagon got $1.46 billion for this fiscal year and has asked for
$1.49 billion for the next fiscal year.

In spending that money, Mr. Berteau told Congress, ''advertising is about as
effective as adding recruiters to stimulate quality applications, and both are
twice as effective as enlistment bonuses.'' But bonuses help to guide recruits
to hard jobs and to retaining skilled technicians later.

Mr. Goldich said, the recruiting problems could be solved ''by spending a few
hundred million dollars on more recruiters and advertising.'' He contended that
pay was not so important for recruits as it was in retaining career soldiers.

''You can't keep people in the service with any amount of money if they don't
like military life,'' he said. ''But you can drive them out by not paying them
enough.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 2, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. Team Will Be Sent to Cambodia

BYLINE: By YOUSSEF M. IBRAHIM, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 894 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Aug. 1


An international conference meeting here decided today to send a United Nations
fact-finding mission to Cambodia.

The move was one of several steps adopted on the third day of a monthlong
conference of 19 countries to resolve the civil war as Vietnamese occupiers
prepare to leave Cambodia.

Foreign Minister Roland Dumas of France said the United Nations mission was
exploratory and would report information that will help the conference assess
the logistical situation in Cambodia, the conditions under which a cease-fire
could be established and the possibility of holding free elections to install a
democratic and nonaligned government.

Mr. Dumas and Foreign Minister Ali Alatas of Indonesia, who jointly presided
over the ministerial-level opening session of the conference, hailed the move.
Mr. Alatas cautioned, however, that ''now comes the phase of very hard work and
tough negotiations.'' External Affairs Secretary Joe Clark of Canada said at a
news conference that he did not expect the meeting ''to settle in a few weeks a
conflict that has lasted for 10 years.'' How Much Discord?  The views of other
officials here were mixed, with some arguing that the big powers were all agreed
on the need for a settlement of the Cambodian situation, and others maintaining
that differences among the Cambodian factions would undermine any accord.

Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the non-Communist who leads the alliance of three
Cambodian guerrilla factions opposing the Vietnamese-installed Phnom Penh
Government, expressed optimism. He said China played a significant role on
Monday night in ''pressuring'' its Khmer Rouge allies, who raised objections to
virtually all proposals, tying up the conference until late Monday night.

But other Asian diplomats said that China's stand is tactical and that its basic
support of the Khmer Rouge, who are part of the guerrilla alliance, remains
unchanged.

Several diplomats cautioned that in the end the credibility of any agreement
depends on reconciling the differing views held by Cambodian factions on how to
share power.

Troops on the Ground

One Asian diplomat said that time and the current balance of military forces
seem to favor the Phnom Penh Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen, who is backed
by Vietnam. The Khmer Rouge are also militarily strong, with some estimates
saying that the Communist faction fields 35,000 to 45,000 fighters. The
Vietnamese invaded Cambodia in December 1978 to oust the Khmer Rouge Government.

The United States, Britain and the Soviet Union, among others, strongly oppose a
role for the Khmer Rouge in any future Cambodian government, as does Vietnam and
its ally, Mr. Hun Sen. China and Prince Sihanouk insist on their participation.
The argument goes back to the guerrilla movement's performance in office, from
April 1975 to the end of 1978. During that time, the Khmer Rouge presided over a
brutal remaking of Cambodian society, in which more than one million died.

The political talks now going on here are to continue through August, with all
participants organizing their delegations around three committees that will
negotiate the terms of a potential accord.

Mr. Dumas said that one panel, called the control committee, will work out
arrangements for controlling Vietnam's announced withdrawal of all its troops,
which Hanoi says will occur Sept. 26. It will also deal with the establishment
of a cease-fire and the ending of military aid to the various factions. This
committee will also work out election arrangements, as well.

Neutrality and Refugee Issues

A second panel, the guarantee committee, will look into ways of securing the
territorial integrity and future neutrality of the country. A third committee,
under the chairmanship of Japan and Australia, will examine ways to repatriate
hundreds of thousands of Cambodian refugees and obtain financial help for
Cambodia.

All 19 countries will take part as members of each committee.

The four Cambodian factions will be part of an ad hoc committee headed by
Indonesia and France that will offer their views on all arrangements proposed by
the other conference members.

Any agreement must be unanimously arrived at, the French Foreign Minister said.
Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach of Vietnam said the present arrangement would
enable each of the four Cambodian factions to veto any decision, but former
Prime Minister Son Sann, a faction leader, said he and Prince Sihanouk had
agreed not to veto any item.

Ministerial-level meetings broke off today after two and half days of
negotiations, with the participants seeming to stumble at various points.

Yet Mr. Dumas said that despite occasional exchanges of ''hard words,'' the
conference had ''an excellent working atmosphere'' - the result, he said, of a
political will among the big powers to settle the Cambodian conflict.

French and Asian participants said the fact-finding mission will be put together
by the United Nations Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar, as soon as
possible and could comprise as many as 25 observers. Mr. Clark of Canada, whose
country will take part in the mission, said it ''may leave in the next few
days.''

Representatives of all participants will resume meetings on Wednesday. The
foreign ministers are to return on Aug. 28 to close the conference and sign any
accords that may be reached.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of the presiding officers of the Paris conference on Cambodia,
Ali Alatas, left, the Indonesian Foreign Minister, and his French counterpart,
Roland Dumas, at a news conference after yesterday's meeting. (Agence
France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 3, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

House Rejects Exclusion of Aliens in Census

BYLINE: By FELICITY BARRINGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 390 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 2


The House has rejected an attempt to make the Census Bureau exclude illegal
aliens from the population count that will be used to reapportion Congressional
seats after the 1990 census.

But before the procedural ruling Tuesday that doomed the census proposal, the
measure won unexpected support in a vote pointing up regional anxieties over how
the 1990 census will redistribute the 435 House seats. In making the proposal,
Representative Tom Ridge, a Pennsylvania Republican, was seeking to exclude the
undocumented workers not from the basic census count, but from the tally used
for reapportionment.

A Debate Over Fairness

Meanwhile, the Commerce Department, the bureau's parent agency, announced the
census would include overseas employees of the Defense Department and their
dependents, 1.2 million to 1.6 million people. Such military personnel were
counted in the 1970 census at the height of the Vietnam War but not in the 1980
census.

With this decision, the department eliminated one of the arguments put forth by
Representative Ridge and his supporters: that it would be unfair to include the
aliens and exclude the overseas military employees in the count used for
reapportionment.

Such a case was made Tuesday at a brief House subcommittee meeting on the census
and later when the debate moved to the House floor.

Representative Tim Valentine, a North Carolina Democrat, argued for the
exclusion of the undocumented aliens. ''I'm not asking that these people be
deprived of any benefits,'' he said. ''I don't want to reward the localities
where these people illegally reside. That is not fair. It may be constitutional,
but it just isn't right.''

The constitutional mandate under which the census is conducted requires the
counting of all ''persons,'' a term that Federal courts have interpreted to
include noncitizens.

A study by Jacob S. Siegel, a former chief demographer for the Census Bureau who
is now senior research scholar at Georgetown University's Center for Population
Research, estimates that the demographic shift of population southward and
westward will mean 17 of the 435 Congressional seats will be reapportioned out
of one state and into another.

Of the 17, about 3 seats might change hands solely as a result of the inclusion
of illegal aliens in the count, Mr. Siegel's estimates show.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 3, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Collectible Cards Give Facts on Vietnam War

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section C; Page 11, Column 1; Home Desk

LENGTH: 342 words


This pack of cards does not come with a stick of gum and it has ''Vietnam''
emblazoned in red across its wrapper. Inside are ''Vietnam Fact Cards,'' part of
a 66-card set developed by a Canadian collector, Dino Frisella, making it
possible to swap two Khe Sanhs for a Ho Chi Minh Trail, or a Richard M. Nixon
for a Lyndon B. Johnson.

''The time to make a decision on whether the war was right or wrong is long
past,'' said Mr. Frisella, whose Dart Flipcards Inc. produced the set. ''We
thought if we stuck with facts - major incidents, major players - it would stir
up conversation. It's struck a real nerve with collectors.''

Mr. Frisella said from his home near Montreal that the cards were intended as an
educational tool to teach children 8 to 14 years old about Vietnam, although
many have been bought by collectors.

The cards, half a dozen to a pack, are 2 by 4 inches. A full set costs $8.50.
The Vietnam cards are sold in some stores that sell baseball cards; sets can be
ordered from Dart Flipcards, P.O. Box CP785, Pointe Claire-Dorval, Quebec,
Canada H9R425. On the front most cards have color depictions of events like the
Battle of Xuan Loc, or of leaders from the era, 1945 to 1975.

They have one thing in common with baseball cards: the back is filled with
information about what is on the front. ''We had about 400 source books and
hundreds of hours of tape we went through,'' Mr. Frisella said.

One of his greatest fears was angering Vietnam veterans who might see the cards
as trivializing the war.

But the sets have won some acceptance. Military museums in Johnson City, Ill.,
and Massillon, Ohio, have displays promoting the cards. Barbara Tate, director
of the Ohio Society of Military Information, said of the Massillon display:
''Basically, we get all military-oriented people. We thought at first some
people would be upset, but that hasn't happened.''

Some response has been negative: an unidentified veteran was quoted in Baseball
Cards magazine as saying that the Vietnam War did not belong on bubble-gum
cards.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 4, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

A Celebration on Film of la Vida Latina

BYLINE: By GLENN COLLINS

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1062 words


MANO DE BRONCE: Hand of Bronze.

No, this new film award is nowhere near as illustrious as the Oscar, the Golden
Globe, or the Palme d'Or. And how could it have achieved such fame yet? This
year is the first time that the Festival Latino's film series is presenting the
Mano de Bronce to the best of 60 feature films, documentaries and short subjects
from Spain, Latin America and the United States.

''We are hoping the award will focus attention on these wonderful film makers,
and help establish a public - and a market - for their work,'' Cecilia Vega
said. She and her husband, Oscar Ciccone, are co-directors of the Film '89
series. It is part of the New York Shakespeare Festival's ''Festival Latino in
New York,'' the celebration of film, theater, music and video that began this
week.

Screening of the festival's feature films will run from Sunday through Aug. 19
at the Biograph Cinema in Manhattan. Showings of the festival's documentaries
and short subjects will begin tonight, and end Aug. 13, at the Public Theater.

There are films from 16 countries including Argentina, Brazil, Cuba, Colombia,
Mexico, Puerto Rico, Spain and Venezuela. Among the featured actors are Liv
Ullmann, Hana Schygulla, Daniel Lopez, Victor LaPlace and Cipe Lincovsky. The
festival will also screen a series of six films based on stories written by
Gabriel Garcia Marquez, the Nobel Prize-winning novelist. All of the feature
films have English subtitles.

The Mano de Bronce awards - made of bronze, naturally, and designed by the
Colombian sculptor Enrique Grau - will be presented for Best Feature Film, Best
Documentary, Best Short Subject and Most Popular Film.

''We hope the award designation will become meaningful to audiences,
distributors and presenters,'' said Ms. Vega, ''and that soon moviegoers will
associate the award with films of high quality, artistically and technically.''

Ms. Vega said that ''there are more than 30 million Latinos in this country, and
many of them are not exposed to Latin-American films.'' Ms. Vega, a native of El
Salvador, added: ''They, like non-Latinos, aren't aware of the richness of our
culture. And many are not aware that Brazil and Argentina started their own film
making almost simultaneously with Hollywood.''

Among the highlights of the festival's feature films is the world premiere of
''En el Aire'' (''On the Air,'' Monday, Wednesday and Aug. 13.), directed by
Pastor Vega of Cuba. The film, which has caused controversy in Cuba for its
criticism of life in that country, is sort of a serious ''Good Morning,
Vietnam'': the tale of a disk jockey who gets into trouble with his radio
station for broadcasting interviews with ordinary people about the difficulties
of their lives.

Film Starring Liv Ullmann

The festival is also offering the American premiere of ''La Amiga'' (''The
Friend,'' Sunday, Thursday and Aug. 17), an Argentine film starring Liv Ullmann
and Cipe Lincovsky, and directed by Jeanine Meerapfel. It is the story of two
childhood friends, one of whom becomes a famous actress, and the other, a
homemaker, who finds herself to be the mother of one of the Argentines who
disappeared at the hands of the military.

Another American premiere, ''Doida Demais'' (''She Can Drive a Person Crazy,''
Monday, Thursday and Aug. 17), is a comedy directed by Sergio Rezende of Brazil.
It stars Vera Fischer as a beautiful art forger who, meeting a pilot in the
backlands of Brazil, becomes embroiled in a series of misadventures.

''Diario de Invierno'' (''Winter Diary,'' Wednesday, Thursday and Aug. 13),
another American premiere, is directed by Francisco Regueiro of Spain. It stars
Fernando Rey in an updating of the Biblical story of Cain and Abel.

''Tecnicas de Duelo'' (''A Matter of Honor,'' Sunday, Thursday and Aug. 18),
directed by Sergio Cabrera from Colombia, is a comedy about a teacher and a
butcher in an Andean village, two friends who challenge each other to a duel to
the death over the love of a woman.

Politics and Nightmares

One of the most anticipated documentaries to be shown at the festival will be
''Krik? Krak!: Tales of a Nightmare.'' The 82-minute political film blends
documentary and fictional techniques in attempting to capture the mood of Haiti
under two generations of Duvalier rule. It will be shown at the Public Theater
tonight and Sunday.

Another highlight is ''A Night in Havana,'' a 1988 documentary directed by John
Holland, chronicling Dizzy Gillespie's first visit to Cuba, where he was the
headliner at an international jazz festival. It will be shown at the Public
Sunday and Wednesday, In addition, the film festival will screen ''Amores
Dificiles'' (''Dangerous Loves''), a collection of six films directed by Spanish
and Latin American directors from stories written by Mr. Garcia Marquez. The
films, which are receiving their first American theatrical release after their
premiere at the Museum of Broadcasting last fall, include ''Milagro en Roma''
(''Miracle in Rome''), directed by Lisandro Duque Naranjo; ''Fabula de la Bella
Palomera'' (''Fable of the Beautiful Pigeon-Fancier''), directed by Roy Guerra,
and ''El Verano de la Senora Forbes'' (''The Summer of Miss Forbes''), directed
by Jaime Humberto Hermosillo. All will be shown twice at the Biograph from Aug.
14 to 19 at night.

Among the notables expected to attend the screenings of their works at the
festival are Paul Leduc, director of ''Barroco'' (''Baroque''), an experimental
Mexican film; Alejandro Legaspi, director of ''Juliana,'' about a Peruvian
street urchin, and Ramiro Lacayo, director of ''El Espectro de la Guerra''
(''The Specter of War''), the first feature film ever produced in Nicaragua.

Other Actors Attending

Also in attendance will be such actors as Daniel Lopez of ''El Escandalo''
(''The Scandal''); Cipe Lincovsky, featured in ''La Amiga''; Vera Fisher of
''Doida Demais,'' and Daisy Granados of ''Plaff!'' (''Splat!''), a Cuban family
comedy.

Among the judges voting for the Mano de Bronce awards will be Maria Luisa
Bemberg, the Argentine director of ''Camila,'' which won an Academy Award
nomination; Pastor Vega, the Cuban film director who heads the International
Latin American Film Festival in Havana; Richard Pena, chairman of the selection
committee of the New York Film Festival, and Henry Laguado, director of the
Bogata Film Festival.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Liv Ullmann with Cipe Lincovsky (pg. C1); Vera Fischer (pg.
C8)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 4, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Reviews/Art;
In New Jersey: A Prussian and Some Passions

BYLINE: By MICHAEL BRENSON

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1442 words


There is not just one exhibition worth visiting at the New Jersey State Museum
in Trenton; there are two. ''Oscar Bluemner: Landscapes of Sorrow and Joy'' is a
retrospective of an early, largely unknown American modernist. ''A Density of
Passions'' brings together 15 intense, obsessive artists who are either part of
or related to the tradition of ''outsider art'' that has aroused particular
interest in the United States this decade.

As different as these exhibitions are, both are involved with artists
distinguished by their force of personality and belief. A number of the objects
in ''A Density of Passions'' are devoutly religious. Indeed, this exhibition
suggests the depth of resistance outside New York to the skepticism,
self-consciousness and irony that remain synonymous with New York art. 'Oscar
Bluemner' Bluemner was born in Prussia in 1867 and trained as an architect. He
came to the United States in 1892 in search of greater opportunity. His
architectural practice in the Midwest did not satisfy his need for a new
creative spark. His meeting with Alfred Stieglitz around 1910 did.

He threw himself into oil painting, spent a year in Europe learning old and new
art, and participated in the 1913 Armory show. He loved and hated theory, loved
and hated isolation. He spent his life as a painter swinging back and forth
between success and oblivion. His work is never great but almost always
convincing.

The Bluemner retrospective was organized by the Corcoran Gallery of Art in
Washington, in collaboration with the New Jersey State Museum and the Amon
Carter Museum in Fort Worth. It includes more than 100 works, from architectural
drawings made soon after the artist arrived in the United States from Germany in
1892, to the rhythmic cityscapes he did as a member of Stieglitz's group, to
sketches for unrealized paintings inspired by the poet Eirene Mungo-Park shortly
before Bluemner killed himself in 1938 at the age of 70.

He remained a bridge between American and European modernism. He had a European
feeling for music as a model for composition and color. He painted landscapes
and cityscapes of New York and New Jersey with an architectural romanticism
remininscent of German Expressionists like Lyonel Feininger and Franz Marc.

But his work has little of the insistence of German Expressionism. His paint is
not thick; part of his importance was his ability to find a way of trapping
light and giving his surfaces the consistency of watercolor. With all the
introspection and solitude in his paintings, there is a sense of color and light
as new building materials. His European-based work remains upbeat, almost
utopian, in a very American way.

Bluemner seems to have been caught between city and country in a way that many
current New Yorkers will understand. He needed both. He believed in the pure
nature he found in New Jersey and Long Island, which helps explain the almost
mystical feeling for natural shapes that suggests Georgia O'Keeffe and his
friend Arthur Dove. And he believed in industrial progress, which helps explain
his sympathy for the kind of hard, clear architectural shapes that predict
Precisionism.

There was a lot that Bluemner could do. Many of his drawings are confident and
fresh. In his blocked-out, almost blueprinted paintings, he defined shapes
crisply and filled areas with color in ways that encourage the emotional
response he wanted. He identified with parts of nature, like trees, and also
with parts of the city. There is an almost ubiquitous glowing red house - with
high, plain, fortresslike walls and one window -that occupies his paintings like
a large, protected, all-seeing eye, and that seems to be him.

Sometimes he could make images of real power. The 1926 gouache called ''Death''
is an expressive, almost Oriental work inspired by his sense of loss after the
death of his wife, Lina Schumm. To the right of the bare landscape is a bare and
tormented apple tree, its trunk bowed, its branches raised in a painful gesture
that seems to be casting a hex. In the earth are intimations of two prostrate
human shapes entombed together.

But there was also a lot that Bluemner could not do. His feeling for pictorial
space was limited. And without an overriding pantheism or mysticism, the absence
of people in his cityscapes and landscapes becomes uncomfortable. The
anthropomorphism of his natural and urban shapes can be so obvious that they do
not seem a legitimate answer to the problem of how to put people and nature
together. Bluemner is an artist of character and intelligence but limited
imagination, 'A Density of Passions' None of the artists in ''A Density of
Passions'' - organized by the assistant curator of the New Jersey State Museum,
Alison Weld - have Bluemner's modernist feeling for form. Many of the artists,
of which Howard Finster and Joseph Yoakum are probably the best known, are
self-taught. Much of the work is linear and intuitive. The involvement with
process is total. The degree to which the artists are wrapped up in their
private artistic worlds helps explain the show's almost seamless concentration.

It also explains why most work in this show is so distinct. Gerald Hawkes uses
matchsticks like bricks as he painstakingly builds small monuments with
references to tribal and folk art. His works are a combination of sculpture,
architecture and decorative art that many ''high'' artists search for and few
attain.

The same driving single-mindedness is present in the paintings of Gregory van
Maanen, whose search for tiny and economical images of danger and transformation
are inspired by his service in Vietnam. It is also present in Judith Robertson's
mosaic sink and ''Self-Portrait'' - a headless and armless woman with a tile
neck and buttons and pearls as skin.

And it is there in Stella Waitzkin's ''Details of a Lost Library,'' an almost
claustrophobic installation that has been evolving since 1950, with heads in
cigar boxes and shelves of death masks and shelf upon shelf of old books that
seem to have been cast into memorial candles.

Some of the most startling objects in the show are by Adrian Kellard. There is
almost feverish religious intensity not only in her imagery, but also in the
passion with which she constructs her wood boxes, chairs and shrines. In her
simple chairs that look like thrones, her ''Sacred Heart Shutters'' with its
larger-than-life image of Christ with black stigmata, her ''Veronica's Box'' and
her ''St. Francis Screen,'' the wood is carved and painted like German woodcuts
large enough to live in. Rutgers Assemblages There are two exhibitions at the
Jane Voorhees Zimmerli Art Museum on the Rutgers University campus in New
Brunswick, N.J., both drawn from the permanent collection, both instructive
about the museum.

''Assemblages and Works in Related Media,'' with about 20 objects spanning 50
years, is a reminder of how long offbeat materials, thrown together in
unexpected ways, have been a staple of modern art. The works by the few
well-known artists - Joseph Beuys, Joe Zucker and Alan Sonfist - are small and
modest.

The real interest of the show is its attention to lesser-known artists -which
reflects the focus of the museum's program. One of the most effective is Bonnie
Lucas. Her baby blanket encrusted with buttons, ribbons and beads is a mosaic of
bubbling pink pattern. Her ''Song,'' with hair curlers for hair, a bracelet for
a mouth and a doll's body for legs, is not a lullaby but a lament about violence
to women.

Among the curiosities in the show is the 1946 ''Couple'' by Laurence Vail - the
first husband of Peggy Guggenheim - with its man and woman, all slime and goofy
aggression, staring in each other's face.

Benjamin's Benno's ''Venus'' from 1938, with its nasty sexual humor, underlines
the historical link between the brash constructions of Francis Picabia and the
meditative webs of Brice Marden. Peruvian Pottery The second show at the
Zimmerli, ''Pre-Columbian Ceramics: Selections From the Mr. and Mrs. Erich K.
Harkna Collection,'' includes about 35 objects from the collection of Peruvian
pots given to the museum in 1977. The integrity and economy of shape and the
architectonic use of paint give this handsome group, extending from the Chavin
culture to the Inca empire, its own atmosphere.

Some of the strongest painting is abstract. There are many pots in the shape of
figures, some with expressions of a ferociously businesslike severity. Animals
seem not so much represented on pots as sealed within their skins. Throughout
the show is an elegance and purpose that will make many people new to
pre-Columbian pottery eager for more.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of works by Jane Voorhees Zimmerli and Oscar Bluemner

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 5, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

HOUSE CUTS FUNDS FOR THE MILITARY

BYLINE: By SUSAN F. RASKY, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 619 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 4


In another slap at the Pentagon, the House today approved a $286.4 billion
military spending bill that provides no money for the Advanced Tactical Fighter
and slashes funds for the advanced cruise missile.

The spending bill, approved on a 312-to-105 vote, allocates money for the
programs and weapons systems agreed to in a $305 billion military budget bill
the House adopted last week. And like the broader military budget measure, the
legislation adopted today eakes significant cuts in strategic weapons systems
sought by the Administration, including the new Stealth, or B-2, bomber, the
''Star Wars'' anti-missile program and adds money for programs the
Administration wants to cancel.

The Senate, which approved a military budget bill much more in tune with
Administration priorities, will not take up its version of the military spending
bill until Congress returns from its summer recess in September.

Mr. Bush's qdvisers have said they would recommend that he veto the military
spending bill in its present form. $1.2 Billion for the F-14 The Administration
had requested $1.2 billion for research and development of the advanced fighter,
which is intended to replace the Air Force F-15 and the Navy F-14 fighters in
the late 1990's. But last week the House insisted on keeping production going on
the F-14, which is built by the Grumman Corporation of Bethpage, Long Island.
Today's spending measure provides money for 24 new F-14's and improvements to 12
existing planes, at at cost of $1.26 billion for the new planes and $107 million
for the improvement program.

Language in the committee report accompanying the spending bill does direct the
Navy to plan for an orderly shutdown of F-14 production once the 24 new planes
are received. The military budget bill adopted last week made no such
stipulation.

The spending bill cuts $2 billion from the amount requested by the
Administration for a variety of classified weapons programs, including
development of the advanced cruise missile. The radar-evading missile, which is
launched from an aircraft, is part of the Administration's program to improve
long-range attack abilities.

In other action in Congress, the Senate approved an $18.4 billion spending bill
that covers expenses for the Treasury Department, the Postal Service and the
Executive Office of the President after settling a a floor fight over whether
Congress should restore Oliver L. North's military pension.

The former White House aide lost his $23,000-a-year pension from the Marine
Corps after being convicted for his role in the Iran-contra affair.

Senator Jesse Helms, a North Carolina Republican, wanted to add an amendment to
the spending bill that would have exempted Mr. North from a law denying
retirement pay to any Federal official convicted of destroying Government
documents. That was one of three felony counts on which Mr. North was found
guilty.

''Regardless of what you think about the whole Iran-contra thing, Ollie North
served his country honorably,'' Mr. Helms said. Two Vietnam veterans now serving
in the Senate, Bob Kerrey, Democrat of Nebraska, and John McCain, Republican of
Arizona, took opposing sides in the ensuing debate. ''I believe Oliver North
served with distinction in combat and deserves a pension,'' said Mr. McCain, a
former Navy pilot who spent five and a half years as a prisoner in North
Vietnam.

But Mr. Kerrey, who lost part of his leg in combat, said it was wrong for
Congress to intervene on behalf of individual veterans who fail to qualify for
particular benefits.

Mr. Helms agreed to drop the amendment after the Senate majority leader, George
J. Mitchell of Maine, pledged that it would be brought up as a separate bill.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Sen. Jesse Helms (NYT)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 5, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Paul Tortelier, a Cellist Of Political Commitment

SECTION: Section 1; Page 16, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 804 words


When the French cellist Paul Tortelier appeared in April with the New York
Chamber Symphony at the 92d Street Y, he ended a 35-year absence from New York
City concert stages. While such a long time away may seem peculiar, Mr.
Tortelier offers a simple explanation.

''For me the place is not important,'' he said by telephone recently. ''I was
very glad to come back to New York. But as long as I can play, wherever it may
be, I am happy.''

Mr. Tortelier, who is 75 years old, is returning to play Tchaikovsky's ''Rococo
Variations'' at the Mostly Mozart Festival on Tuesday and Wednesday.

''It seems I have a new start in the United States,'' he said. ''People have
been so enthusiastic and friendly.''

Large Repertory

The appearances mark a new phase in the career of a man widely considered one of
the foremost cellists playing today. He has been praised by critics for his
singing tone and brilliant technique in a repertory that ranges from Bach to
Shostakovich.

Although he received praise almost everywhere on his American tour in 1954,
several factors kept him from coming back, he said.

''My manager back then perhaps didn't do all that he should have for me in the
beginning,'' Mr. Tortelier said. ''But after, when I was invited by Lorin
Maazel, I refused because of the Vietnam War. I felt it was wrong, this war. I
disagreed. At that time I was a little involved in politics, more than now.''

He finally returned to this country in the early 1980's, and has since performed
in Philadelphia, Boston, San Francisco and other cities. But until recently he
had received no invitations to play in New York, he said, and he had not felt
compelled to return here.

''I am not a man of - how do you say? - of intrigue,'' he said. ''I am not in
search of success. As long as I play, while I play in London, or Amsterdam, or
Milan, or Rome, I cannot at the same time be in New York.''

A First Prize at 16

Mr. Tortelier was born in Paris in 1914 to ''poor, working-class parents.'' His
talent was recognized as outstanding early on. At the age of 16, he was the
youngest student to win first prize in Gerard Hekking's class at the Paris
Conservatory.

In 1950, when Pablo Casals held a summer festival in Prades, France, Mr.
Tortelier was chosen to lead the cello section. He said that for him, Casals
represented ''the embodiment of music itself.''

''There was a perfect balance between his head, his heart and his body,'' the
cellist said. ''He was at the same time a big lover, a singer, a dancer, a
storyteller. He was an architect; his music was so strongly structured. He was a
painter; he had all the colors in his music. He was a sculptor, a poet, a
missionary. He said the purpose of music does not stop at music itself, but to
help mankind. I feel I received this message from him.''

Mr. Tortelier lives in Nice, on France's Cote d'Azur, where in addition to his
recital and orchestral engagements, he teaches at the music conservatory. He is
a composer who has written piano, violin and cello concertos as well as numerous
solo cello works. An inventor as well, he designed the bent endpin, or
''spike,'' now used by cellists around the world. He is also an active conductor
and recording artist.

Influenced by Social Issues

Mr. Tortelier has a deep political awareness. He attributes this to his father,
a cabinetmaker and a Marxist who would spend many hours discussing politics,
ethics and the new social order. He said social issues had influenced many of
his decisions, citing not only his protest at America's Vietnam policies but
also his decision in 1955 to put his performing career on hold to live on a
kibbutz in Israel.

''It was the happiest year of my life,'' he said. ''There I lived for the real
value in life, which is brotherhood, without money.''

''I am not a Jew,'' he continued. ''I went there for the sake of solidarity, of
brotherhood. ''

Thirty years ago, Mr. Tortelier, after a near airplane crash, experienced a kind
of spiritual awakening.

''On that day I decided I should do more than be a simple musician,'' he said.
''From that moment, I decided to do something for peace.''

To that end, he has written several anthems, including ''The Great Flag,''
dedicated to the United Nations, and ''May Music Save Peace,'' which he will
play in New York in February.

''You know, we live in a dangerous time,'' he said. ''We are sinking, I think;
the arts are sinking. There is a lack of tenderness, a lack of love, in the
creations of today. I think all the true masterpieces are the product of a
great, great, great love, in addition to science. Whether it is a love of God,
of mankind, or of nature, like Debussy, or country, like Tchaikovsky, or
theater, like Verdi, or just the love of life, like Mozart, music can do a lot,
because music unites.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Paul Tortelier

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 6, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

'83 Strike on Lebanon: Hard Lessons for U.S.

BYLINE: By BERNARD E. TRAINOR, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 653 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 4


The only time the United States sent its bombers over Lebanon, as President Bush
was reportedly prepared to do again this week, the mission ended in a fiasco,
with two planes shot down and one damaged, one pilot killed and and one crewman
captured, and little to show for the effort.

The memory of that December 1983 raid, which came only six weeks after 241
American servicemen were killed in the bombing of their barracks in Beirut,
remains vivid among senior officers in the Pentagon as they await the outcome of
diplomatic efforts to end the current hostage crisis.

The ill-fated Navy air attack on Dec. 4, 1983, was against Syrian anti-aircraft
guns located around the village of Hammana, east of Beirut. It was launched in
retaliation for Syrian anti-aircraft fire the day before against an American
reconnaissance plane supporting the Marine peacekeeping force.

Planning for the attack was marked by confusion along the chain of command. When
President Reagan ordered retaliation, one of the Navy aircraft carriers, the
Kennedy, was about to leave for the Suez Canal and had already stored its bombs.
The aircraft of the other carrier, the Independence, were armed with heavy bombs
in anticipation of orders to attack a different target. Those bombs had to be
replaced with a type more suitable for use against anti-aircraft emplacements.

Then, for reasons that remain obscure, the time of the attack was moved from 11
A.M. to 6:30 A.M., over the objections of the commanding admiral. This did not
leave enough time to rearm all of the 28 aircraft taking part in the strike, and
the formation became ragged as stragglers sought to catch up with those already
in the air. That eliminated surprise, and the Syrian gunners were waiting.

The early launch forced the pilots to attack with the rising sun directly in
their eyes. Then, a morning ground haze obscured the targets they were sent to
destroy and the pilots had to fly low into the intense fire of the anti-aircraft
guns in an attempt to spot the targets.

Inexplicably, the attacking squadrons also massed their planes for the attack -
a tactic that made them further vulnerable to ground fire and that had been
discredited years before in the Vietnam War. Two planes were shot down, with the
pilot of one of the aircraft, a single-seat A-7 attack plane, parachuting into
the Mediterranean Sea, where he was rescued. The pilot of the other plane, a
two-seat A-6, was killed, and his navigator, Lieut. Robert O. Goodman Jr., was
captured. He stayed in a Syrian prison for a month, until the Rev. Jesse Jackson
went to Damascus and obtained his release.

A few Syrian guns were destroyed, but the intensity of the Syrian fire forced
many of the planes to unload their bombs away from the targeted positions.

Accomplishments vs. Losses

The Pentagon declared that the raid was a success, but its accomplishments were
disproportionate to the American losses.

Six weeks earlier, an air raid planned against an Iranian Revolutionary Guard
barracks in Baalbek in Lebanon's Bekaa region was never carried out because of
indecision by Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger and some of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff. The White House was eager to retaliate for the Marine barracks
bombing, but the top Pentagon officials worried and debated about the uncertain
consequences of the attack.

The French ultimately conducted an air strike against Baalbek in retaliation for
an attack against their peacekeeping forces on the same day as the Marine
barracks bombing. This allowed the United States to shelve its own plans. The
French suffered no losses but did only minor damage to the barracks.

The Baalbek barracks is said to still house the Iranian Revolutionary Guards in
Lebanon. It is also still on the list of prime targets for the American military
forces in the event that they are ordered to make a retaliatory strike against
an Iranian target.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Military Analysis

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 6, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Women's Caucus Is Focusing on Abortion Rights

BYLINE: By E. J. DIONNE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 18, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1052 words

DATELINE: ST. PAUL, Minn., Aug. 5


The National Women's Political Caucus, a group that has often been overshadowed
by feminist organizations with sharper demands, pledged this weekend to work
within the two-party system and to make abortion rights the focus of its work in
the next year.

At the caucus's annual meeting here, speaker after speaker said the abortion
issue had the potential to mobilize new support for the cause of feminism,
especially among younger women who until now have not been heavily involved in
the women's movement. ''Abortion is the Vietnam of this generation,'' said
former Representative Bella Abzug of New York.

But several speakers warned that an emphasis on the right of women to choose an
abortion should not be allowed to drive other issues off the agenda of women's
groups. They argued for continued emphasis on issues like parental leave and
child care.

''Reproductive freedom must have our priority,'' Prof. Eleanor Holmes Norton of
Georgetown University said in her keynote address Friday. ''But we must avoid
the single-issue monomaniacal approach of the anti-choice crowd.''

'Beleaguered American Family'

Professor Norton added: ''Thas is no time to forget that poverty is a condition
of the female gender. This is no time to leave the beleaguered American family
without your support on issues central to women.''

Ann Richards, the Texas State Treasurer and a candidate for the Democratic
nomination for Governor, said, ''The question seems to center on that moment of
birth.''

Instead, said Ms. Richards, who strongly supports abortion rights, ''the
question should center on what we do for our children,'' and she added, ''the
living deserve our attention.''

Caucus members active in the Republican Party, meanwhile, pledged to try to move
their party way from its general opposition to abortion rights. Mary Louise
Smith, former head of the Republican National Committee, said that while she
remained a loyal Republican, ''party loyalty does not demand silence.''

This year's meeting of the caucus, founded in 1971 to encourage the election of
women and advance equality and abortion rights, comes at a crucial juncture for
the women's movement, following by a few weeks the Supreme Court's decision to
expand the ability of states to regulate abortion.

With that decision focusing so much attention on electoral politics,
particularly on the battle for control of state legislatures, it is likely to
enhance the importance within the feminist world of groups like the Political
Caucus, which specializes in winning elections.

Third-Party Idea Rejected

At this weekend's meeting, members of the caucus rejected a call by the National
Organization for Women last week for a study of whether a third party should be
formed to support women's rights. Though there was no formal vote on the issue,
that sentiment was made clear both in formal sessions and in conversations
outside.

''To divert yourself from the established power structure, which will go on and
continue to make decisions anyway, to pull yourself out of it, is absolutely
stupid,'' said Maxine Berman, a Democratic State Representative in Michigan.

''Everybody here laughed at that thing,'' said Lana Pollack, a Democratic State
Senator in Michigan. Many here predicted that the third-party idea would fade
quickly.

Irene Natividad, whose term as caucus chairwoman is ending, asked members to
speak respectfully of NOW, emphasizing the need to avoid the appearance of a
rift in the women's movement. At the same time, she took the opportunity to
carve out a distinct identity for her group, referring to it as an organization
of ''savvy'' and ''practical'' women ''interested in winning, not
grandstanding.''

Unity Is Given Emphasis

In her speech, Profesor Norton, the former chairwoman of the Equal Employment
Opportunities Commission, stressed unity, arguing that even if NOW did pursue
its third-party idea, it would ''indicate a different set of strategic
directions, not disunity on the goals of the women's movement.''

Ms. Abzug said that in some districts where both major parties' candidates
rejected the goals of the women's movement, independent candidacies might be
appropriate.

Ronald H. Brown, the chairman of the Democratic National Committee, said his
party understood ''that we have to earn and re-earn the respect of women
voters.'' But he added: ''Frankly, I don't have time any longer, and I hope you
don't, for feel-good politics. I'm interested in feeling good and winning.''

At today's session, Ms. Natividad announced that one of the caucus's central
projects for the next year would be to concentrate in 10 states on electing
women legislators who favor the right to choose abortion.

The targeted states in a project called ''Empower America'' are Arizona,
Colorado, Delaware, Maryland, Nevada, North Carolina, Ohio, Oregon, South Dakota
and Wisconsin. They were chosen because shifts of just a few votes in their
Legislatures could change the balance on abortion.

She said the project excluded states like Texas, where women are running for
Governor, so caucus members there could concentrate on the gubernatorial
contests.

In discussing abortion, caucus members returned repeatedly to two points: The
issue's ability to mobilize new support for feminism, and the complexity of
public attitudes on the question.

Sharon Rodine, who will take over as chairwoman, said recruiting younger women
to the caucus and getting them to register to vote would be a major part of the
group's agenda in the coming year.

Ms. Rodine said that while younger women felt distant from the early phases of
the feminist movement, ''with the choice issue, they see something touching
their lives. It's closer to home.''

Public Is Seen As Ambivalent

Although virtually every speaker here asserted popular support for the right of
women to choose an abortion, several cited the complexity of public opinion.

''The majority has significant ambivalence of this issue and can be brought to
support restrictions,'' said Celinda Lake, a Democratic poll-taker. Ms. Lake
said opponents of abortion would seek to frame the debate as one of
''irresponsibility and excess.'' She advised advocates of abortion rights to
steer the debate to the issue of government interference with individual rights.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 6, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PHOTOGRAPHY VIEW;
Blaming the Medium for Its Message

BYLINE: By ANDY GRUNDBERG

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 2; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2029 words


It is not entirely happen-stance that photographs are at the center of the
stormy political dispute brought on by indirect Federal support of works by
Robert Mapplethorpe and Andres Serrano. Much more than paintings, sculptures,
plays, novels and poems, camera images seem to bring the world directly to our
doorstep. When the world they bring is distasteful or repugnant, it is easy to
blame the medium for the message.

Like it or not, photography's seemingly inherent realism makes it especially
vulnerable to a criticism based solely on the contents of an image. It is the
most stylistically transparent of the visual arts, able to represent things in
convincing perspective and seamless detail. Never mind that advertising has
taught us that photographic images can be marvelous tricksters: what we see in a
photograph is often mistaken for the real thing. More to the point, the subject
matter of photographs is often mistaken for their meaning and value.

This may help explain why it is photographs - specifically those by Mapplethorpe
and Mr. Serrano - that have prompted North Carolina Senator Jesse Helms to
propose that any art that is ''obscene and indecent,'' or that ''denigrates,
debases or reviles a person, group or class of citizens on the basis of race,
creed, sex, handicap, age or national origin,'' be denied money from the
National Endowment for the Arts.

A contributing factor is photography's status as a newcomer to the art world.
Only recently accredited by the arbiters of art - and still suspect in many eyes
- it represents the soft underbelly of the visual arts. Politicians may have
complained about the obstinacy and obtrusiveness of Richard Serra's ''Tilted
Arc,'' but no one asserted that the sculpture was not a work of art, or that its
maker suffered some moral defect. Yet according to Senator Helms, photographs
like Mr. Serrano's image of a crucifix seen through a veil of urine are
''so-called works of art,'' and Mapplethorpe, who died earlier this year, was
less an artist than ''an acknowledged homosexual'' whose pictures are marred by
''the homosexual theme.''

What no one has mentioned in all this tempest is that photographers have long
doted on the off-color, the outlaw and the outre. Indeed, there is a
well-established sub-canon within the art of photography consisting of images
that violate conventional taste and, yes, even community standards of decency.

In 1971, for example, the Museum of Modern Art mounted a controversial
retrospective of the photographs of Diane Arbus. Arbus's subjects - men dressed
as women, an angry child clutching a toy hand grenade, a group of mental
patients dressed in Halloween costumes - are tame by today's standards, but at
the time her bitterly pessimistic view of the world seemed intended to offend.
John Szarkowski, the director of the museum's photography program and the
curator of the Arbus exhibition, recalls that at the end of each day museum
employees had to wipe spit from the pieces of glass covering Arbus's images.

Offending conventional sensibilities is not the exclusive province of
photography, of course. Modern art is replete with attempts to epater les
bourgeois. Edouard Manet did it in the 19th century with his painting
''Olympia,'' an odalisque that scandalized his contemporaries because its nude
model dared look directly out at the viewer. The conceptual artist Vito Acconci
has done it in our times by reportedly masturbating underneath a false floor
while gallery visitors walked above him. Nevertheless, photography's special
purchase on reality seems to prompt disproportionate passions.

In the cold-war anxiety of the 1950's, the photographs in Robert Frank's book
''The Americans'' were largely perceived as an affront to the country and its
citizens. The landmark volume was published first in France, and when it
appeared a year later in the United States, critics complained that Frank's
biting images, which used the American flag as a symbol of false hopes and
unfulfilled dreams, were unpatriotic. More recently, Richard Avedon's portrait
series ''In the American West'' prompted a litany of complaints that the
photographer had recorded only convicts and drifters.

In short, photographs have long been problem children in the world of art. They
are not quite socialized or refined enough to qualify entirely as things of
beauty, and they are always chafing against the limits of esthetic doctrine.
This is one reason why commentators since Charles Baudelaire have argued against
mistaking photographs for art. True, it has been commonplace in the 1980's to
assume that this argument no longer holds water, thanks primarily to the success
of photographs in the marketplace. But Senator Helms has given it a new spin.

One cannot presume to know what the Senator's artistic taste may be. But no
doubt he would need a wide broom to sweep photography clean of all the images he
might find obscene, indecent or offensive.

He could start with the pictures of prostitutes taken by Eugene Atget, Henri
Cartier-Bresson and Brassai, three of modern photography's most imposing
figures, and work his way up to Joel-Peter Witkin's perverse version of Adam and
Eve being expelled from the Garden of Eden. (One of the figures in
Cartier-Bresson's ''Alicante, Spain'' is not only a prostitute but a
transvestite.) Perhaps Edward Weston's photograph of a toilet bowl should go as
well, along with his many nudes in which pubic hair figures prominently.

It could be argued, of course, that Senator Helms's point is not photography's
penchant for the outer limits of taste, but Federal financing. Here, however,
things can get quite sticky. The photographers mentioned above, and several of
the images cited, were recently included in Federally sponsored exhibitions at
the National Gallery of Art and the National Museum of American Art.

Worse, most of these potentially offensive photographs have appeared countless
times over the years in exhibitions financed by the National Endowment, and at
numerous institutions that receive endowment support. Should we now penalize all
of them? As with any attempt to corral free expression, the Helms amendment does
not know when to stop. (Nor, apparently do some of Senator Helms's associates.
According to Joshua Smith, the curator of ''The Photography of Invention: Images
of the 1980's,'' an exhibition that appeared this summer at the National Museum
of American Art, the Senator's office recently called him to ask why the show
included an image of convicted Communist spies. Nonplussed, Mr. Smith explained
that the image in question, a blow-up of a vintage newspaper photograph of
Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, was an integral part of an outdoor bus shelter
environment created by the New York artist Dennis Adams.) One solution to the
problems photography poses for Capitol Hill would be to exclude it categorically
from the Federal till. But any exclusion would only serve to undo the years of
favored treatment that photography has received from the National Endowment.
Once considered a special case in need of nurturing, along with such categories
as ''artists' forums'' and ''expansion arts,'' photography has benefited greatly
from the endowment's attentions. So intertwined has it become with the art world
at large that it would be impossible to imagine contemporary art without it.
Photography is a clear and as-yet-unstudied example of how Federal dollars can
affect what the art public sees and buys.

Robert Mapplethorpe, who in his lifetime wanted badly to be famous and who now
seems destined to be infamous, would probably be amused by the fuss his
photographs are now making. He might even be pleased, since his work is
predicated on trespassing the boundaries of conventional mores. That trespass
is, one could say, the ultimate subject of his art, and it is what makes even
his most unsettling images something more than pornography.

Mapplethorpe worked diligently to erase the distinctions we commonly draw
between heterosexual and homosexual desire, between female and male appearances,
between what is accepted as beautiful and what is not. His method was to achieve
a kind of overriding elegance, which for him had the force of a moral
imperative. He was a Platonic idealist whose energy was focused on redeeming
precisely what conventional moralists find offensive.

This crucial aspect of Mapplethorpe's career is much more clearly drawn in
''Robert Mapplethorpe: The Perfect Moment,'' the exhibition that is at the
center of the Helms controversy, than it was in a retrospective organized by the
Whitney Museum of American Art a year ago.

The Whitney show, which attracted much attention but little outrage, presented
the photographer as a sculptor manque, obsessed with framing and finish as much
as with his subjects. ''The Perfect Moment,'' which was organized by Janet
Kardon of the Institute of Contemporary Art in Philadelphia, concentrates much
more on what he chose to photograph - including, in addition to faces, flowers
and perfect physiques, graphic tableaux of sadomasochism and homoeroticism.
(''The Perfect Moment'' was originally scheduled to be shown in Washington at
the Corcoran Gallery of Art, which changed its mind at the eleventh hour, citing
fears of political fallout. The show currently is on view at the Washington
Project for the Arts, an artist-run exhibition space.) Mr. Serrano's
now-notorious image of a crucifix floating in a field of yellow can be
interpreted as an attempt at exorcising the artist's Roman Catholic upbringing.
Whether this is blasphemous is arguable, but it does bring together the sacred
and the profane in an economical, confrontational way. Lacking the pristine
elegance of Mapplethorpe's pictures, the crucifix image cannot pretend to be
beautiful independent of its content. It is a work of art in part because it is
so uncomfortable to look at, and because it bears the stamp of an authentic
conflict.

The urge to make visible what society at large would prefer left unseen is
manifest throughout the medium's traditions. Lewis Hine, for example, is
included in the histories of photography not as a stylist but because he used
his camera to reveal social conditions that were all the more appalling for
being ignored. His images of children working in textile mills and coal mines
helped persuade Congress to pass legislation outlawing child labor. Before Hine,
Jacob Riis created a groundswell of support for urban reform with his pictures
of life in New York City slums.

Photography also functions to reveal things we may not wish to know. During the
years of the Vietnam War, photojournalistic images of that conflict's cruelty
and suffering shocked American consciousness. Eddie Adams's image of a
street-corner execution, Nick Ut's picture of naked Vietnamese children fleeing
a napalm assault, and Larry Burrows's color record of haggard and wounded
Marines helped sway public sentiment against the war, much to the dismay of the
Johnson and Nixon Administrations. Only days ago, a terrorist group in Lebanon
provided yet another gruesome example: an image of a hanged American hostage,
Lieut. Col. William R. Higgins, that was reproduced on newspaper front pages and
shown on television.

Admittedly, photography has also been a manufacturer of the dreams and myths
societies live by - witness advertisements, fashion magazines and the enduring
popularity of Ansel Adams's pristine landscapes, which call up the country's
long-vanished frontier past. But it has never been merely a medium of civic
boosterism. There will always be another Robert Frank to stick pins in our
complacent self-image, another Larry Burrows to remind us that life is not a
John Wayne movie.

This is a sign of health, not sickness, for the medium as well as for society.
And it is what makes art like Robert Mapplethorpe's significant, even if it is
not immediately likable. Members of Congress may well object to certain
photographs on grounds of moral outrage or political expediency, but they risk
losing a vital part of our cultural heritage when they seek to punish museums
and other arts institutions for showing them.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Henri Cartier-Bresson's ''Alicante, Spain'' (1933) (Magnum)
(pg. 1); ''Prisoners, Bexar County Jail, Texas,'' from Richard Avedon's portrait
series of the American West (Amon Carter Museum, Fort Worth); one of Diane
Arbus's photographs of mental patients taken in 1970-71 (Lent by Doon Arbus)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 6, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TV VIEW;
On Television: News, Lies and Videotape

BYLINE: By FRED R. FRIENDLY; Fred W. Friendly, a former president of CBS News,
is the Edward R. Murrow Professor Emeritus, Columbia Graduate School of
Journalism.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 2; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1812 words


''What do you mean Felix Bloch might not be guilty - I saw him do it on
television.'' The conversation took place at the Denver airport, and it was with
a top editor of a major metropolitan newspaper. My friend, the editor, had heard
the ABC News correspondent John McWethy report that the United States diplomat
Felix S. Bloch was under F.B.I. investigation and had had his State Department
passport revoked for allegedly passing top-secret information to a Soviet K.G.B.
agent. My friend was aware that the F.B.I. had previously refused to comment,
but what this experienced editor saw on the ''ABC World News Tonight'' was a
videotape of ''Felix Bloch'' passing a briefcase to a ''Soviet agent.''

The videotape looked and sounded authentic; it was grainy, as hidden-camera film
or tape often is. It was complete with an electronic time code, which law
enforcement evidence usually carries, and there were even cross hairs in the
picture to make it look more like genuine surveillance. My friend and, one can
assume, millions of Americans perceived the briefcase sequence as an impressive
ABC News scoop.

Peter Jennings, the network anchorman, introduced the report as an ABC
exclusive, together with a lead-in containing one line of poetic irony: ''We
begin with a harsh reminder that secrecy sells.'' That was followed by the
superimposed label ''Exclusive.'' It was exclusive, all right. These startling
and dramatic pictures were a fraud; a fraud perpetrated by ABC News, using an
actor who resembled Mr. Bloch. It matters little that later that night a second
feed of the ABC News report carried a superimposed disclaimer - ''Simulation'' -
at the top of the screen. Most viewers thought they were watching smoking-gun
evidence.

What ABC News reflects is a growing trend in television away from documented
news film and videotape to staged re-enactments. CBS News is dropping its
ill-conceived ''West 57th Street'' for ''Saturday Night With Connie Chung,''
where the very kind of re-enactment techniques that contaminated ABC News in the
Bloch affair will be used. NBC News has just launched its ''Yesterday, Today and
Tomorrow,'' which originates in Hollywood, where make-believe is a high art, and
which is interlaced with hard-news documentaries. The producer, Sid Feders,
calls re-creation of news events ''an idea whose time has come.'' It has been
reported that the new NBC show is a vision of the president of the network's
entertainment division and is being produced in partnership with the news
division. That line never used to be crossed.

The ABC News incident of July 21 is not only an outrageous demonstration of
shameful journalism, it also brings to national focus two ever-increasing sins
of irresponsible reporting shared by many other news organizations, print and
broadcast. First, there is a sloppy habit of permitting ''unnamed sources'' to
spread undocumented attacks on a wide variety of public officials and others who
have neither been formally charged nor indicted. I know little of Felix Bloch,
but I do know that Government leakers, presumably in the State Department, have
triggered newspaper reporters and broadcasters to print and show material that
has convinced millions of readers and viewers that Mr. Bloch is a superspy.
President Bush appears to have endorsed Mr. Bloch's accusers with his widely
reported concern over the ''very serious matter,'' which he says he has ''known
about for some time.'' Other leaked reports of allegedly guilty officials have
caused considerable embarrassment to those who worry about integrity in the
newsroom. One example is the unofficial Navy suggestion that the battleship Iowa
disaster that killed 47 sailors was somehow caused by a frustrated homosexual
seaman who had sabotaged the Iowa's 16-inch guns. If the United States Navy
wishes to explain what happened, there is a proper, official way for the Chief
of Naval Operations to release what evidence his investigators have uncovered,
and an equally proper way for the news media to report it.

In the matter of the ABC News and the so-called Bloch re-enactment, it is
difficult to imagine how Mr. Jennings, whom I have always considered to be among
the most responsible anchors, could have condoned this double infraction of the
gatekeeper function. Staff members were being used as actors to create a
''docudrama'' out of ''supposed evidence'' that no reporter or producer at the
network had any justifiable or evidentiary reason to support - other than the
leaks from Mr. Bloch's masked accusers. Even if the network had truly hard
evidence from identified sources, a simulation of any wrongful act would be a
scam reminiscent of the quiz-show scandals of 1959.

The on-air apology that Mr. Jennings delivered four days later for not labeling
the simulated portion of the piece as clearly as was possible certainly was
called for - but for him simply to have dismissed ABC News's action as a
''production error'' is to miss the larger point. The dialogue created by this
lamentable lapse of standards at ABC News could prove worth the hassle, since it
occurs at a time when television news in general is going through an identity
crisis. Is it to continue to be a serious and responsible instrument of
communications operating under thoughtful guidelines, or is it to be twisted
into an electronic carnival, in which show-biz wizardry and values obscure the
line between entertainment and news? To fuzz that distinction further is to
ignore the opportunity this ABC News incident brings into sharp focus.

As Ed Murrow used to say, ''There will always be some errors in news gathering,
but the tricks that microphones, cameras, film [and videotape] make possible
must never be contrived to pass off as news events that were fabricated to
document an event that we missed or which may never have happened.''

There are those who have dedicated their lives to the principle that a faked
sound effect, whether just a dubbed-in howitzer blast in Korea or Vietnam, or
canned applause at a political rally in Des Moines, is blatantly dishonest. To
simulate reality may be acceptable in a Hollywood film, but such practices have
no place in serious broadcast journalism, where what you see is precisely what
happened or ''we don't show it,'' as Ed taught us all.

The ABC News offense cannot be excused as dramatic license, as some defenders
have suggested, akin to animation of a moon landing or an artist's rendition of
a courtroom during a trial where cameras are not permitted. Such reasoning
ignores the obvious fact that the public recognizes the animator's or the
artist's pen and impression. In this exploding television age, most landmark
events have been recorded: Joe McCarthy and Joe Welch were captured on film in
1954, the Watergate hearings were recorded on videotape in 1973 and the student
demonstrations in Tiananmen Square were broadcast live via satellite earlier
this year. No one and no history can honestly doubt that those events ever
happened just the way they did. Felix Bloch will have his day in court
eventually, and his lawyers will have a Sixth Amendment field day with the
fair-trial aspects of ABC News's lapse in ethical behavior. The real losers are
the millions of Americans who may never know that the videotaped briefcase
exchange on a Paris street was staged or, at best, a producer's version of what
a leaker claimed was reality. In the end, it may turn out to have happened just
as ABC News ''reported'' it, but what the American public has a right to expect
is accurate reporting of what exactly happened to the extent it is known, and
not what a producer guesses happened.

I have always opposed the concept of docudramas, especially when it involved
journalists and news-division imprimaturs. Today, the docudrama, blurring
reality news and contrived theater, is everywhere. The actor who played Oliver
North in a recent docudrama could not help but show the former White House aide
in a false light, because neither he nor the screenwriter was privy to actual
conversations involving the President and the director of the C.I.A. and Colonel
North. To those viewers who see him as a heroic figure or as a villainous
manipulator, the contrived dialogue remains as the lasting impression of the
facts.

Recently, the docudrama technique has begun to encroach on news programs,
specifically in such syndicated newsroom spinoffs as ''Inside Edition,'' ''A
Current Affair'' and ''America's Most Wanted.'' As I watch these broadcasts, I
am concerned whether the millions of viewers who take them seriously can
distinguish that blurred line between the real and the unreal.

A half-century ago, I frowned on ''The March of Time,'' a radio program
employing actors to impersonate President Roosevelt, Chancellor Hitler, Prime
Minister Churchill and others to depict reality. It was a phony technique, even
if it was prior to the invention of the tape recorder. Now all those bad habits
of the re-enactment are coming back to haunt an industry addicted to ratings,
hype and the search for ever-increasing profits.

Perhaps the embarrassment the ABC News hanky-panky has caused will make its two
rival networks understand the lessons that a half-century of broadcast
journalism should have taught us all. Those who command these vast and vital
organs of communications, who proclaim ''this is news'' or ''that's the way it
is'' - in whatever lingo - have a sacred obligation to keep it honest. When we
wander from those standards on which most Americans depend for what Walter
Lippmann called a picture of reality on which the citizen can act, we endanger
the entire principle of a free people and a free press. ABC News, in its
insatiable appetite for the sensational picture, may have alerted us all to the
dangers that await those who play fast and loose with a fundamental tenet of
journalism.

In the final analysis, responsibility rests with top management. The current
chief executive officers of the major networks have emerged from the ranks of
money managers and manufacturers who are not steeped in the tradition and
standards of broadcast journalism. In William Saroyan's classic play ''The Time
of Your Life,'' one of the characters muses, ''No foundation. All the way down
the line.''

The tradition today has become the constant crush for hot pictures in pursuit of
ratings and revenues, not journalistic integrity. The warning signal flashing at
ABC News and in newsrooms all across America is ''danger.'' Television
journalism is at risk of losing its credibility. Anyone who teaches journalism
is well advised to keep a videotape of the Bloch re-enactment in his or her desk
drawer, and a still-frame from that tape of the briefcase being passed to a
''K.G.B. agent'' should be posted in every newsroom, lest the lessons of those
10 seconds of national television ever be lost.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of part of ABC News's ''re-creation'' of a U.S. diplomat giving
secrets to a Soviet agent (NYT/Jim Wilson) (pg. 1); Felix Bloch with a K.G.B.
agent (NYT/Jim Wilson) (pg. 27)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 6, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER;
A Canadian Builder Strides to Broadway With 'Shenandoah'

BYLINE: By PATRICK PACHECO; Patrick Pacheco is a freelance writer who
specializes in the arts.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1860 words


Howard Hurst, who heads a Canadian real estate development corporation, is not
by nature an impulsive or emotional man. Indeed, sitting in an office backstage
at Broadway's Virginia Theater, the impeccably tailored and soft-spoken
chartered accountant appears to be the picture of cautious deliberation. Yet,
last June, by his own description, he was a man ''obsessed,'' and the reason for
that, he says, was the musical ''Shenandoah.''

It began when Mr. Hurst's company became the landlord of Toronto's 1,300-seat
Queen Elizabeth Theater, which had been built in 1957 as a studio for the
Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. To inaugurate it as a legitimate house, the
neophyte producer invited Philip Rose to direct a production of ''Shenandoah,''
the musical he had originally produced, directed and co-authored (with Peter
Udell and James Lee Barrett) for Broadway in 1975. The show, starring Hal Linden
and a company of Canadian actors, opened for a five-week engagement in June.

Standing at the back of the theater night after night, Mr. Hurst got caught up
in the story, based on the 1965 James Stewart film, about a peace-loving
Virginia farmer's efforts to keep his family from being engulfed by the Civil
War. A family man himself, Mr. Hurst was moved by the drama and enthralled with
the standing ovations it received regularly.

Two weeks into the run, he suggested to Mr. Rose that they take the production
to Broadway. The director, in turn, proposed a ''true reprise'' of the show with
John Cullum re-creating the role for which he had won a Tony award. As it turned
out, the star was available (at least through the summer) and was brought to
Toronto to rehearse with the company. Other elements quickly fell into place.
The show opens this Tuesday for a limited engagement at, appropriately enough,
the Virginia Theater.

When it opened in 1975 on Broadway, ''Shenandoah'' elicited what Mr. Cullum now
describes as a ''great schism of feelings.'' People then were as passionately
divided on its virtues as the tableau of blue- and gray-uniformed soldiers that
opens the show. Those who embraced its homespun homilies and simple melodies (by
Gary Geld with lyrics by Mr. Udell) found an ally in Walter Kerr, who in The New
York Times praised it as ''plain-spoken, undecorated, infinitely touching.''
Others, however, found it not so much old-fashioned as regressive, not so much
moving as maudlin and manipulative. ''Conventional claptrap,'' said Brendan Gill
in The New Yorker. Few were as noncommittal as Clive Barnes, who in his Times
review praised the show's aspirations, ''despite a distressing sentimentality.''

''Shenandoah'' struggled in its first weeks but eventually found an audience and
ran for 1,050 performances, recouping 80 percent of its $500,000 investment, the
remainer of which, plus a small profit, was earned by touring companies. It has
since proved a popular item on the community theater and summer stock circuits.
This revival is capitalized at nearly three times the original amount and Mr.
Hurst acknowledges that a full return of the investment will require an
extension of the Broadway run or a national tour, both of which he hopes will
materialize.

The revival also received mixed reviews in Toronto, but business built steadily
over the run, which the producers thought augured well for a move to New York.
That, however, still hinged on Mr. Cullum's availability. ''With him in it, we
felt we had a proven product,'' says Mr. Hurst. ''There was a whole new
generation who hadn't seen the musical. Opening in August would put us in a
position to take advantage of the family tourist trade. We will still probably
tour, but Broadway seemed the more logical step.''

Yet, one gathers that the venture is as much a personal statement as a
commercial one for Mr. Hurst, who, oddly, claims he did not review the
box-office receipts for the first production. ''I didn't want it to affect my
judgment,'' explains the 45-year-old Canadian who is producing the revival with
his wife, Sophie, and his partner Peter Ingster. ''I really didn't think those
figures were as important as the changes that have occurred over the last 15
years.''

What Mr. Hurst is referring to, of course, is the fact that in 1975 America was
emerging from Vietnam and Watergate. Given the national cynicism at the time,
some people were apt to cast a skeptical eye on a show like ''Shenandoah.'' It
promoted samplerlike American virtues when the country's leaders, who touted
those same values, had just been uncovered as scoundrels. While sentiment has
always been at home on Broadway, it was then being served up modishly in such
musicals as ''The Wiz,'' which beat out ''Shenandoah'' for the Tony that year.
Now, Mr. Hurst and his partners are hoping that, after eight years of Ronald
Reagan, the word ''corny'' has earned a new currency.

Mr. Cullum believes that the play will work better now because, as the memory of
Vietnam has receded, so has the ''antiwar message'' of the play. ''I think
people will concentrate more on the story,'' he says, while relaxing between
performances in his dressing room. ''Quite frankly, I never felt comfortable
playing the political angle, which I thought made the show too preachy.''

Yet both Mr. Udell and Mr. Rose acknowledge that they were attracted to the idea
of musicalizing the film primarily as a vehicle to express those antiwar
sentiments. For a 1975 audience there would have been added resonance to the
lyric, ''What was the dying for?'' from the opening song of Act I, ''I've Heard
It All Before,'' in which Mr. Cullum, as Charlie Anderson, spells out the
reasons for his isolationist stance. Indeed, during the initial run, cheers
frequently broke out in the theater when Mr. Cullum, legs akimbo and his dukes
up, declared, ''I don't owe my sons to the state.''

''I'm hoping people won't attach that kind of significance to it any longer,''
Mr. Cullum says. ''I think we suffered a great deal because people thought we
were trying to make some great statement on one hand, and were being too folksy
on the other. And, boy, we were milking it! I think we've moved away from that.
We were all taking ourselves too seriously back then.''

If Mr. Cullum admits to being a bit embarrassed by the sententiousness of the
piece, he is grateful for a dashing role that he calls his ''Man of La Mancha''
- a tailor-made, larger-than-life character that is as inextricably linked to
him as Don Quixote is to Richard Kiley, or the King of Siam was to Yul Brynner.
After ''Shenandoah,'' the actor won another Tony for ''On the Twentieth
Century,'' enjoyed a long run in ''Deathtrap'' and has made television movies
(''The Day After''). Most recently, he says he has been single-mindedly
developing a film, a bizarre comedy-thriller based on the novel ''The Secret
Life of Algernon Pendleton'' by Russell H. Greenan. Although he says he turned
down offers to be in the new Broadway-bound musicals ''The Grand,'' ''Meet Me in
St. Louis'' and ''The Threepenny Opera,'' the call to play Charlie Anderson was
irresistible. ''It gives me a surge, a power to play him,'' he says.

His return to the role finds him closer in age to the character (he was only 44
in 1975) and seasoned by experiences he hopes will enrich his performance as a
''strong, virile and opinionated'' widower in charge of a large brood. ''I've
now gone through confrontations with my own son that are similar to those
Charlie has with his boys,'' he says. ''And I think I've grown more tolerant
with time.''

As an example, Mr. Cullum points to a final scene in which he visits the grave
of his long-dead wife, Martha, to seek guidance after his world has been ripped
apart. His answer is tolling bells summoning him to church. ''I used to hate
that scene,'' he says. ''I thought it was cliched, corny, pat. It bothered me
that we didn't offer any answers except to say that a man has to keep trying to
do the right thing. Now I've lived long enough to be more humble about not
having all the answers. Maybe it is enough to just keep trying.''

Mr. Cullum says that a measure of the show's ambiguity toward the issues it
raises is that during the initial run, both ''hawks'' and ''doves'' counted
Charlie Anderson on their side. While the isolationist farmer seems to espouse
the pacifist point of view at first, he is drawn inexorably to violence after
one of his sons is kidnapped, burning prison trains and arbitrarily killing a
young soldier. ''I think he's somewhere in the middle,'' says Mr. Cullum,
''trying to stay out of both extremes.''

Mr. Rose, for his part, feels that the pacifism of ''Shenandoah'' is clear.
''Once you say that some violence is justified, it becomes a trap,'' he says,
sitting in the theater's lobby. ''There are no answers but one does have to face
the consequences.'' Although Vietnam has faded as a political issue, he believes
the message is as important as ever, given the conflicts in the Middle East and
Northern Ireland, as well as the violence in America's streets. As someone who
was once described in the press as ''an old-time liberal,'' he finds the show's
popularity with conservative audiences somewhat ironic. ''Shenandoah,'' he
points out, played well on tour in 1977 in the South and the Far West, where one
might think people would take exception to the pacifism of Charlie Anderson's
cracker-barrel philosophy. ''I think they relate to Charlie as this mythic
American individualist-father figure,'' he says. ''This stand-tall-in-the-saddle
guy who fights for what he believes in. We can all appreciate that, no matter
what our political beliefs are.''

When it is suggested that he has just described some of the reasons for Ronald
Reagan's electoral success, the ''old-time liberal'' says, ''I'd rather compare
the character to Harry Truman.''

Charlie Anderson's wide appeal is even more understandable when one considers
that James Lee Barrett, who created the character for Jimmy Stewart to play,
also wrote films for such American stalwarts as Henry Fonda (''The Cheyenne
Social Club'') and John Wayne, including the hawkish film, ''The Green Berets.''
But Mr. Rose insists that neither the film nor the musical based on it are
''polemical.''

''If it had only been that, it wouldn't have been successful,'' he says. ''The
audience gets involved with this family because this is a musical with a solid
book. Those tears at the end are there.''

As to the criticism that the show is manipulative, Mr. Rose says, ''I accept the
accusation. We don't step back from doing it. If it's honest, the audience will
go with it. I think people are tired of cynicism, they're tired of going to the
theater and not feeling anything. I'd rather draw a strong emotional response,
one way or the other, than a bland one.''

Mr. Cullum, too, says he is no longer embarrassed by the show's surfeit of suds.
''I rather like playing those sentimental moments that people cringe at,'' he
says. ''Who knows, maybe 'Shenandoah' will catch on and I'll be playing Charlie
Anderson until I'm too old to dance or lift a rifle, much less shoot it. They'll
have to bury me with my boots on.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of John Cullum, who won a Tony as the plain-spoken farmer in the
1975 ''Shenandoah,'' in the revival (NYT/Marilynn K. Yee) (pg. 5); the producer
Howard Hurst (NYT/Marilynn K. Yee) (pg. 10)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 6, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE DISCREET ANXIETY OF THE BOURGEOISIE

BYLINE: By JEFFERSON MORLEY; Jefferson Morley is the Washington editor of The
Nation.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1316 words



FEAR OF FALLING
The Inner Life of the Middle Class.
By Barbara Ehrenreich.
292 pp. New York:
Pantheon Books. $18.95.

I was a teen-age neoconservative. I came of age politically in the 1970's with a
low tolerance for the foibles of my parents and an all-too-cool critique of the
1960's, especially of the decade's ''permissiveness.'' The cultural
contradictions of capitalism seemed less disturbing (and more fun) to me than
the cultural contradictions of Communism, and I imagined I was rejecting
middle-class culture. But in fact, as Barbara Ehrenreich's ''Fear of Falling''
makes clear, it defined my every thought.

For me, not the least of this book's achievements is its explication of my
peculiar coming of age. But any citizen of the educated middle class will find
something even more useful here: a persuasive account of an intellectual dispute
that has been simmering in the superego of the American professional-managerial
class for the last 30 years or so. This dispute has helped shape American
politics.

Ms. Ehrenreich, an intellectual journalist with a gift for aphorism and the
author of several books, picks up her story of middle-class anxiety in the late
1950's. At the time, it was claimed there was no need for a major political
restructuring of society, although divisions of class and race remained powerful
elements in American life. Frequently, conflicts were dealt with
euphemistically. Affluence, Ms. Ehrenreich notes, became ''a way of talking
about wealth without talking about class.''

A larger problem was ''discovered'' in the early 1960's: poverty. After millions
of Americans were revealed to be impoverished, a number of leading sociologists,
together with a spate of cover stories in the news weeklies, blamed the
condition not on class but on a lack of character, deficient morals among the
poor. This explanation, Ms. Ehrenreich observes, served as a kind of
psychological projection. The poor represented ''what the middle class feared
most in itself,'' she says - a ''softening of character, a lack of firm internal
values.''

The emergence of the counterculture in the mid-1960's, however, mocked the
pretensions of the American middle class. There was no longer any need for it to
project its anxieties onto the poor. Its own children were softening up the
sturdy internal middle-class values with large dosages of drugs, sex and rock
music.

The latter, Ms. Ehrenreich says, was especially important. ''If theories of the
'culture of poverty' were the middle-class critique of the poor, rock was a
critique of the middle class, bubbling up from America's invisible 'others.' ''
Rock, she notes, was the music of the underclass, and by the late 1960's its
influence extended literally everywhere in America.

As a result of this youthful upheaval, several leading writers of the
intellectual middle classes took up the theme of ''permissiveness,'' and this,
according to Ms. Ehrenreich, has been the central insight of American
conservatism since the 1960's. Ivy League professors, intellectuals of the Old
Right, astute bureaucrats in corporate public relations and all manner of
aspiring Washington policy makers built a school of political thought around the
permissiveness problem.

Concurrent with the emergence of permissiveness in mid-70's intellectual
discourse was the discovery of the working class, especially in its ''silent
majority'' incarnation. This group was said to be imbued with traditional
values, scornful of countercultural foolishness and confident of American
purpose abroad. Increasingly, it was argued that the intellectuals of the
educated middle class would do well to emulate these folk. I can personally
attest to the appeal of this argument, at least to the adolescent mind.

Ms. Ehrenreich is again on firm ground in diagnosing projection. The anxious
middle class was once more seeing what it wanted to see. Yes, there was an
emerging Republican majority, at least in Presidential elections, but the
working class in the late 1960's and early 1970's could not be neatly
encapsulated, particularly when it came to the war in Vietnam. As Ms. Ehrenreich
points out, the American working class was more, not less, opposed to the war
than was the population as a whole, and more, not less, inclined to regard the
conflict as a criminal enterprise and not an exercise in mistaken idealism.

But middle-class scholars and analysts, Ms. Ehrenreich insists, were not eager
to perceive rebelliousness in the working class. ''Its activism - the upsurge of
strikes and militant job actions in the late sixties - was scantily covered
relative to the movements of students or minorities, and was never framed as a
'crisis,' a challenging new phenomenon with its own media heroes and
personalities.''

Instead, the conservatives among middle-class intellectuals, with an impressive
sense of self-importance, blamed intellectuals in general for society's
permissiveness, employing a rather simplified version of Milovan Djilas's notion
of the New Class. Mr. Djilas, a Yugoslav dissident, noted that under Communism a
new class, whose authority was based on its command of ideas, had come to power
in Eastern Europe. In the United States, neoconservatives argued, a permissive
New Class was dismantling the traditional American value system and substituting
its own secular and countercultural, if not socialistic, values.

By making this argument, Ms. Ehrenreich declares, the conservative intellectuals
were defending their own professional interests. Black nationalism, rock music
and other cultural innovations were entirely in the American grain. But they
called into question the relevance of the work of middle-class intellectuals,
who were afraid of falling out of positions of authority.

Even in the late 1970's, the inadequacy of the neoconservatives' diagnosis was
plain. The kind of mindless hedonism that could ruin character did not originate
solely in the 1960's counterculture, as any student of disco and cocaine could
see. In American society, the tensions between modernism and tradition,
consumerism and self-discipline were being played out not among the isolated
left-wing intelligentsia, but in the marketplace. The multibillion-dollar
cocaine industry, to cite but one example, is hardly the work of permissive Ivy
League intellectuals. It is the creation of profit-seeking entrepreneurs - many
of whom have impeccable right-wing credentials.

The American working class, as the object of the conservative intellectual's
affections, fared pretty badly once the conservative agenda was enacted under
President Ronald Reagan. Ms. Ehrenreich explains that capital was shifted from
manufacturing to speculation; that the maldistribution of income grew worse;
that the possibility of buying a house receded, and that well-paying jobs grew
scarcer. There were, however, plenty of job openings for New Class conservatives
in Washington. And the problem of permissiveness had spread to Wall Street, to
the savings and loan industry, to the Department of Housing and Urban
Development.

Ms. Ehrenreich blames the conservative intellectuals for discrediting the idea
that the educated middle class has any duty or ability to contribute to public
life. She insists it does - if it puts aside status anxieties and the sometimes
strange language of current political debate. At present, American society seems
divided between its allegiance to the speculative free market and its yearning
for productive work. The intellectual can make a contribution to the debate over
the marketplace, she says, simply by asserting the value of pleasurable work.
''The pleasure of work is the middle class's tacit rebuttal to capitalism,'' she
says, ''a pleasure that cannot be commodified or marketed, that need not
obsolesce or wane with time.'' It is a modest, humane and (I'm tempted to say)
neoconservative suggestion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 6, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE SUMMER REPORT: Endpaper;
New Kid On Campus

BYLINE: By Frederic J. Oates; Frederic J. Oates, proud father of the author
Joyce Carol Oates, is still going to sign up next semester for courses on
writing and European fiction.

SECTION: Section 4A; Page 58, Column 1; Education Life

LENGTH: 1398 words


EVERY NOW AND THEN I come across articles in magazines or letters to the editor
describing the problems that older people have with their spare time at
retirement. As a rule they go to Florida that first winter, then on to other
parts of the nation, until they get the wanderlust out of their systems. Major
repair and replacement projects around the home take up more of their time. But
not for long.  They sign up at a local high school for classes in painting and
music, calligraphy and all the other things they thought they would like as
hobbies. But the short-term nature of these classes soon finds them in need of
something deeper to which they can apply themselves.

That is very much how I felt. That's why I went to college at age 70.

Like many others who lived their earlier years during the Great Depression, I
had to quit school and go to work, although I eventually acquired a high school
equivalency diploma.

My first taste of higher education came in January 1985, some time after my
retirement from Harrison Radiator in Lockport, N.Y., where I spent 40 years in
the tool and die department. I had decided to enroll in the senior citizens'
auditor program at the Amherst campus of the State University of New York at
Buffalo, near my home in Millersport. (The university has a second campus in the
city.) There are no fees, and no credits are offered; no tests or written work
are required, but if you turn in work your professors will evaluate it.

My initial concern was that I would be conspicuous among students so much
younger than I. But upon arrival on campus, I felt far more apprehension over
the physical reality of what I had let myself in for.

Never had I seen such a sprawling complex of buildings. The campus spreads out
over 1,100 acres. Fortunately, I came equipped with maps; they helped minimize
first-day confusion, but not first-day fears and second thoughts.

The university bookstore was like a madhouse - crowded with students trying to
find their assigned books. Many of them, like me, were astonished at the cost;
even some paperbacks were priced as high as popular hard covers.

I walked into my first class in Slee Hall wondering how I was going to get along
in my new setting and in my new identity as a senior-citizen auditor. I knew,
for example, that students' wearing apparel had changed over the years. But I
was still taken aback when I found that the only two people wearing a coat and
tie were the professor and I. The professor, by the way, was young enough to be
my son.

In fact, most of the students looked far too young to be attending college. But
as the semester wore on, they proved to be up to the task of learning.

Music Courses First

I started with music courses because I had some previous experience - three
years of violin beginning when I was 12 years old, plus three or four years of
piano, begun about 30 years ago with a local teacher. But I had learned only the
very basics of theory, harmony and composition, and not too much at that.

My first course emphasized the classics and included most of my favorite
composers. It was also the first class in which I dared to answer a question my
professor asked when no one else among the 80 or 90 students present
volunteered. The music being played was one of Franz Schubert's songs, ''The Erl
King,'' and we were asked to identify a section that signified a change in
meaning or intent. It was no problem for me, because it was one my former piano
teacher had assigned.

I believe that not a few students began to think I knew something about music,
because some of them started asking my opinion on the problems we were assigned.
I was something of a celebrity in the cafeteria; kids came up to talk to ''the
guy who answered that question in class.'' One woman even asked me to take notes
for her because she was going away for a week.

My next music class focused considerably more on contemporary and popular music.
It, too, was a lecture course consisting of 80 or 90 students. This was where
one student expressed his displeasure with rock-and-roll, calling it ''bad
music.'' The professor admonished him, saying, ''There is no bad music, only
music played badly.''

I, for one, agreed with the student, but not out loud.

In sharp contrast to these courses was one I audited a couple of years later.
There were only seven students, and the subject was the life and music of only
one composer: Franz Shubert. We had the pleasure of listening to and discussing
his works in an intimate setting, free of the annoyances encountered in larger
classrooms.

Next, Literature

After music, I felt secure enough to try literature. I inherited a love for
poetry from my mother, who always had collections of her favorite poems about
the house.

The fiction that was available to me at that time was the usual adventure
stories, like ''Tom Swift,'' ''The Rover Boys'' and, a little later,
''Gulliver's Travels,'' ''Tom Sawyer'' and such. I know there was something
different about the two types of stories, something more than one of them being
entertainment for children. I wasn't to know the extent of the differences,
however, for some years to come. You see, although I became an avid reader of
fiction and poetry, I rarely paused to probe my reading in terms of its
significance. I soon learned, however, that the practice of the university is to
analyze, judge, look beneath the surface, question prejudices and easy
assumptions - to make you see and hear and think in terms altogether different
from those of daily life.

This should not have been a revelation, since my daughter has been a university
professor since 1963. But it was. I am a firm believer, however, in the saying,
''You are never too old to learn.'' And you are never too old, I later found, to
take pleasure being among serious-minded people who have the same desire to
learn.

There have been other lessons as well, not all of them book-learned. For
example, the curriculum the professors write up for class is not a haphazard
collection of readings, but one that teaches the relationships of events, or
values and attitudes -like the class in which we compared the ''ivory tower''
viewpoint of Emerson during the mid-19th century and that of Twain from a raft
on the Mississippi: same country, same era, two different worlds.

Another plus for classroom study is that some books laid aside years ago because
they seemed obscure can be brought to life - with a little prodding from the
teacher. One that comes to mind is Faulkner's ''The Sound and the Fury.'' How
many of us, I wonder, bogged down in the first section, April 7th, and just got
tired of what seemed to be gibberish? That story was given a fresh outlook after
Benjy's ''narrations'' were brought into focus. For me, it became one of
Faulkner's best.

'Poetry in Motion'

By now, I had become sufficiently at home in a college classroom to do something
daring. About a year and a half ago I came to English class early and, without
my professor's knowledge, distributed copies of a poem he had written, which I
had seen in a local publication. The poem, titled ''Braille,'' was about people
touching the names of the dead on the Vietnam War memorial in Washington, D.C.
We got the professor to talk about the poem, and it led to one of our most
fascinating discussions and an excellent impromptu reading. We experienced
''poetry in motion,'' and I doubt any of us will forget it.

Another of my recent courses combined several subjects, dealing with the lives
and works of 18th-century writers, architects, painters and composers as they
related to one another. We read selections by the major writers of the period -
Pope, Swift, Boswell, Voltaire, Addison and Steele. We discussed and viewed art
of that era. We not only discussed John Gay, the composer, but also listened to
a modern production of his ''Beggar's Opera,'' which delighted me because a
textbook for the course contained the complete score; I could read along with
the tape.

The part devoted to Christopher Wren and Inigo Jones, the architects, became
important to me only now, however: I am going to England later this summer. It
is my first time, and some of the beautiful estates - with their formal and
landscaped gardens - are on my itinerary. I know they will come to life in a
manner that I had not anticipated when I was in class.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: after retiring from the tool and die business, Frederic J. Oates began
auditing courses at SUNY Buffalo at age 70. (NYt/Joe Traver)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

71 Boat People Feared Dead In Pirate Attack Off Malaysia

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 136 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia, Aug. 8


A group of pirates who stormed a boat carrying 84 Vietnamese stole valuables,
raped women and sunk the vessel, and 71 of the refugees were feared dead.

The attack brought to 271 the number of boat people missing and believed dead as
a result of piracy off the coast of this Southeast Asian nation this year,
United Nations and Malaysian officials reported.

The officials, quoting the 13 survivors of the latest attack, said the refugees
left Vietnam last week. They were off the Kuala Trengganu coast, 180 miles
northeast of Kuala Lumpur, when they were attacked Saturday night by pirates in
two boats. In the past, refugee officials have blamed Thai pirates for most of
such attacks.

Three survivors were rescued on Sunday by oil-rig workers in the South China
Sea, and fishermen picked up the 10 others.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Theater;
'Shenandoah' Is Back, but the Era Has Changed

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 911 words


Many of the qualities associated with the term old-fashioned musical are
abundant in the 1975 show ''Shenandoah,'' which is back on Broadway for a
limited run at the Virginia Theater.

A Civil War yarn adapted from a 1965 movie that starred James Stewart,
''Shenandoah'' has a red-blooded ambiance, and its homey folk-pop score by Gary
Geld with lyrics by Peter Udell grasps at the essence of Americana. But it
misses.

The best thing about ''Shenandoah'' is its main character, Charlie Anderson. A
rugged John Wayne type who rules firmly over a family of six boys and one girl,
he is a cranky, opinionated widower with a warm heart under his leathery
exterior. When things get too tough, he repairs to the family plot for soulful
communion with his revered dead wife.

Because Charlie is the only figure in ''Shenandoah'' who is more than a sketch,
any production of the show demands a leading actor who crackles with the craggy
machismo of a stubborn frontiersman. John Cullum, who reprises his original Tony
Award-winning performance, fits the bill perfectly. In Mr. Cullum's detailed,
vocally forceful performance, Charlie is thunderously willful, maddeningly
superstitious and hot-tempered, but also strong, caring and likable.

The wrinkle in Charlie's personality is that he doesn't believe in fighting
other people's wars. When the Civil War comes to the Shenandoah Valley of
Virginia, where he and his children tend a prosperous farm, he refuses to let
anybody in the family enter the fray. Lest anyone think the Anderson boys are
shrinking violets, however, they assure us in the song ''Next to Lovin' (I Like
Fightin')'' that they are just itching to raise some hell on the battlefield.

The Andersons ultimately learn the hard way that when everything around you is
in flames, you are bound to catch some of the heat. One day Union soldiers
abduct the youngest boy, Robert, because he happens to be wearing a Confederate
cap. All but one of the Anderson men leave home to look for him. James,
Charlie's oldest son, is instructed to stay on the farm and care for his wife
and newborn child, and they become the victims of scavenging soldiers.

Both musically and in its moral tone, ''Shenandoah'' aspires to be the equal of
''Oklahoma!'' or ''South Pacific,'' two Rodgers and Hammerstein shows that
celebrate American machismo while exploring the meaning of courage and the
nature of the male fighting spirit.

The score, though tuneful, lacks any songs with the kind of majesty so abundant
in Rodgers and Hammerstein. And the more closely Geld and Udell try to follow
Rodgers and Hammerstein, the more they stumble, as in ''It's a Boy,'' a feeble
echo of the ''Soliloquy'' from ''Carousel.'' Ballads like ''Violets and
Silverbells,'' the wedding song of Charlie's daughter, Jenny, and her soldier
husband, Sam, strive for a classic simplicity but sound only self-consciously
cutesy.

When ''Shenandoah'' opened on Broadway 14 years ago, it had a historical
resonance. America's divided emotions over the Vietnam War were still fresh and
its wounds were just beginning to mend. In the new production, that resonance is
lost.

Because the book, by James Lee Barrett, who wrote the original screenplay,
succeeds in developing only one full-blown character, the show generates no
strong sense of family or community. The other members of the Anderson clan have
little more substance than the tacky painted scenery through which they move.

''Shenandoah'' is well constructed in a paint-by-numbers sort of way. The songs
are carefully folded into the book's copious dialogue. Instead of an overture,
the show uses a martial prologue, ''Raise the Flag of Dixie,'' to set the scene.
The story itself is symmetrically framed by scenes of the Anderson family in
church. Hearty set pieces on the Anderson homestead are interwoven with
Charlie's graveside soliloquies and with playful conversations between Robert
(Jason Zimbler) and Gabriel (Roy McKay), his black playmate.

Except for the quavery-voiced performance of Thomas Cavanagh in the role of a
shy husband who marries into the family, the supporting cast is adequate. But
while the singing and occasional dancing are smooth, the acting under the
direction of Philip Rose seems strictly by rote, the exception being Mr. Cullum.

That may help explain why a show that deals with the passions of war feels so
cold, mechanical and morally weightless. ''Shenandoah'' never acquires the
dramatic urgency of a serious musical play.

OLD-TIME MACHISMO, SOULFUL COMMUNION - SHENANDOAH, book by James Lee Barrett,
Peter Udell and Philip Rose; lyrics by Mr. Udell; directed by Mr. Rose; music by
Gary Geld; choreographed by Robert Tucker; set design by Kurt Lundell; costumes
by Guy Geoly; lighting design by Stephen Ross; production stage manager,
Mortimer Halpern. Presented by Howard Hurst, Sophie Hurst and Peter Ingster. At
the Virginia, 245 West 52d Street.

Charlie Anderson...John Cullum
Jacob...Burke Lawrence
James...Christopher Martin
Nathan...Nigel Hamer
John...Stephen McIntyre
Jenny...Tracey Moore
Henry...Robin Blake
Robert (The Boy)...Jason Zimbler
Anne...Camilla Scott
Gabriel...Roy McKay
Reverend Byrd, Engineer...Donald Saunders
Sam...Thomas Cavanagh
Sgt. Johnson...Jim Selman
Lieutenant...Casper Roos
Tinkham...Richard Liss
Carol...Jim Bearden
Corporal...Stephan Simms
Marauder...Sam Mancuso
Confederate Snipers...David Connolly, Gerhard Kruschke

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of John Cullum (NYT/Marilynn K. Yee)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Bush Plans to Name Colin Powell To Head Joint Chiefs, Aides Say

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 763 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 9


President Bush will name Gen. Colin L. Powell of the Army to be the new Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, an appointment that would make him the first black
officer to hold the nation's highest military post, Administration officials
said today.

The choice is expected to meet little opposition in the Senate, whose approval
is needed for the appointment. General Powell is considered a forceful leader,
is highly respected in the diplomatic community and, like the man he would
replace, Adm. William Crowe Jr. of the Navy, is a considered a military
intellectual.

General Powell has also worked closely with Mr. Bush as President Ronald
Reagan's last national security adviser and earlier as the military assistant to
Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger. [Man in the News, page B6.]

Scramble for Job

The Administration officials said Mr. Bush could make the announcement of the
nomination as early as Thursday.

General Powell's selection could stir some resentment at the Pentagon. Admiral
Crowe's decision to retire set off a scramble for the post, and General Powell,
who commands Army units in the United States from headquarters at Fort
McPherson, Ga., was chosen over more than 30 other four-star generals.

At the age of 52, General Powell is among the youngest four-star generals in
American peacetime history. He was promoted to that rank in April.

As Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, General Powell will be the principal military
adviser to the President, the National Security Council and the Secretary of
Defense and a member of a new Pentagon executive committee that was established
by Defense Secretary Dick Cheney as a means of advising the Secretary on
everything from military budgets to military strategy.

Although not legally in the chain of command, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
in recent years has in effect commanded American forces in the name of the
President and the Secretary of Defense. Commands pass from the President through
the Secretary of Defense to the Chairman and on to commanders of multiservice
forces like those in the Atlantic, Pacific and Europe.

High Visibility

In the speculation about who would succeed Admiral Crowe, some military officers
and political analysts suggested that appointing General Powell would be a
political asset for President Bush who, like other Republicans, has been trying
to attract black voters to the party.

As a serving officer, General Powell is forbidden to participate in party
politics. Nonetheless, he would be highly visible as he goes about his duties in
the Pentagon and the White House and as he testifies on Capitol Hill about the
military budget, arms control negotiations and military strategy.

But for Mr. Bush, the appointment of General Powell would also complete the
selection of his own national security advisers, who have in common among other
things a pragmatic and collegial approach.

General Powell, like others in the circle around the President - including Brent
Scowcroft, the White House national security adviser, Secretary of State James
A. Baker 3d, and Secretary Cheney - works smoothly with colleagues and likes to
build a consensus in policymaking.

Indeed, many associates in the military services and civilian life have said
that General Powell made his mark by being consummately skilled at encouraging
staff work, then melding proposals from many sources into a coherent policy
recommendation. Helped to Rebuild N.S.C. General Powell first came to the White
House in 1972, in a program for young military officers as a White House Fellow,
and returned in 1986, after two tours in Vietnam and then two in the Pentagon,
as deputy to President Reagan's national security adviser, Frank C. Carlucci.

With the National Security Council by then demoralized by the Iran-contra
scandal, General Powell was credited with rebuilding its staff.

President Reagan named General Powell his national security adviser in late 1987
when Mr. Carlucci replaced Mr. Weinberger as Secretary of Defense. Before
leaving office, President Reagan nominated General Powell for his fourth star.

When General Powell returned to the Army, it was assumed that it was only a
matter of time before he came back to Washington, either as Chief of Staff of
the Army or as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs.

The general was deeply involved in the details of negotiating the treaty with
the Soviet Union that bans medium-range nuclear missiles based on the ground,
but he opposed proposals to limit President Reagan's plan to build a shield
against nuclear missiles.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Gen. Colin L. Powell (AP)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

WASHINGTON TALK;
Politics

BYLINE: By Andrew Rosenthal, Special to The New York TimesDTLrrWASHINGTON, Aug.
9 -

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 619 words


During the Administration of Lyndon B. Johnson, at the height of the Vietnam
War, Senator Mark O. Hatfield, a Republican, said: ''They told me if I voted for
Goldwater in 1964 that we'd have more war and higher prices. Well, I did, and we
do.'' Mr. Hatfield's point has regained currency in the seventh month of the
Bush Administration.

Gov. Michael S. Dukakis is gone from the national political scene. But there are
times when the spirit of his Presidential campaign stalks the corridors of
Congress and even the White House.

Representative Les Aspin, the Wisconsin Democrat who heads the House Armed
Services Committee, first focused on this political haunting after the House
voted to eliminate the Midgetman missile and slash funds for the MX missile, the
Stealth bomber and the development of a shield against nuclear missiles.

''We've got a Michael Dukakis defense budget,'' he said. ''Mike won the
election.''

As a candidate, Mr. Dukakis had opposed the two missiles, expressed reservations
about the bomber and wanted to cut sharply into the anti-missile program.

The Pentagon is not the only place where the outlines of what might have been a
Dukakis Administration can be seen, even if faintly, as these examples show:

* Mr. Dukakis suggested expanding the American negotiating position to include a
ban on the Soviet Union's SS-18 missiles. The idea got little attention, since
Mr. Dukakis made a famous blunder that week by riding in a tank and looking
silly. It is now part of the Administration's thinking as it reassesses arms
control strategies.

* Mr. Bush often ridiculed Mr. Dukakis for suggesting that the United States
should go it alone less often in foreign affairs and aimed barb after barb at
Mr. Dukakis's ''boutique'' of advisers from Harvard. This week, the White House
spoke with pride about the ''bazaar'' of ideas from countries trying to help end
the newest hostage crisis.

* On June 29, the House Appropriations Committee voted for a one-year ban on oil
drilling off the entire coast of California; a long stretch of the mid-Atlantic
shoreline; Alaska's Bristol Bay, and Georges Bank, a major fishery off New
England. Mr. Dukakis proposed that in the campaign; Mr. Bush was strongly
opposed. The Administration criticized the House vote, but a White House aide
said he doubted that Mr. Bush would veto the measure.

That Democrats in Congress would espouse some of the views of a vanquished
Democratic candidate comes as little surprise. The melding of some of Mr.
Dukakis's ideas with Bush Administration policy is more striking.

''Bush tried to draw this stark contrast between liberal and conservative,''
said Norman Ornstein of the American Enterprise Institute. ''But the only place
where he could find the contrast was in pseudo-cultural issues like the Pledge
and Willie Horton. Apart from taxes, the differences were not great on economic
policy, American-Soviet relations, anti-communism and the role of government in
society.''

White House officials attribute the phenomenon to Mr. Bush's success at
capturing customarily Democratic issues, like education and the environment.

''George Bush is no Mike Dukakis,'' said one official. ''But governing obviously
gives you a bias toward the center, and we think of it as good government. As
someone once said, the goal is to achieve liberal ends with conservative
means.''

Mr. Dukakis takes little comfort from watching some of his ideas transformed
into policy.

''If you can't win, then what's the point of saying, 'They're doing what I was
recommending anyway,' '' he told the syndicated columnists Jack W. Germond and
Jules Witcover recently. ''That's not the point. The point is that you didn't
win.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

WASHINGTON TALK;
Order of Battle Is Set In Campaign to Mold Well-Read Marines

BYLINE: By BERNARD E. TRAINOR, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 911 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 9


From the sands of Iwo Jima to the shores of Grenada, marines who stormed the
beaches typically had a Mickey Spillane or Zane Grey paperback tucked in a
pocket to read during a lull in the battle. No more. Today they would carry
Thucydides and Clausewitz onto the beachhead.

Gen. Alfred M. Gray Jr., the pugnacious Marine commandant who roams the halls of
the Pentagon in field camouflage, is determined that his marines be not just
warriors, but well-read warriors. To that end he has published a military
reading list of 192 titles, from fiction like Stephen Crane's ''Red Badge of
Courage'' to Charles W. Oman's weighty classic, ''The Art of War in the Middle
Ages.''

''I firmly believe that professional reading is essential to professional
growth,'' the no-nonsense, four-star general said in a recent interview. ''In a
time of peace it substitutes for the lessons of war. Marines fight better when
they fight smarter.''

To make sure his troops get smart, General Gray has made clear that each year
marines throughout the corps are expected to read a specified number of books.
They are grouped in six categories designated for the ranks of noncommissioned
officers through generals. The more junior marines must read two to four books a
year, while senior officers are expected to read three to six.

Separate Reading Lists

Some of the books, like John Keegan's ''Face of Battle,'' which deals with the
theory and nature of war, appear on both the sergeants' and officers' list.

Military reading lists are not unusual in the armed services, but they are
normally reserved for officers attending staff and war colleges. None of the
other services have a mandatory reading list for all ranks, and some
interservice ribbing took place at the Pentagon when the Marine Corps list was
announced.

Marines stationed in Washington and at the nearby base at Quantico, Va., are
reacting favorably to the reading program, although some complain that there is
little time for reading when they are already working 12 hours a day. ''They are
always quick to give us more to do but rarely lighten the load,'' said one
major.

General Gray, who came up from the ranks to become commandant of the Marines,
only smiles when officers say they do not have the time to read. The general's
personal library consists of almost 3,000 books on a variety of subjects,
heavily weighted toward the study of warfare. He says he has read them cover to
cover or in part over the 40 years he has been in Marine Corps.

Another officer criticized the program as lacking focus, saying, ''It's like
going to college, reading selected works from the bookstore for four years and
then claiming to be educated.'' Most officers expect commanders to give
direction to the program by scheduling periodic unit seminars and discussions on
specific subjects.

General Gray is not overly concerned about enforcement of his reading order.
Field commanders, he said, are responsible for the professional development of
the marines under their charge and are free to tailor the program to match
operational requirements.

There will be no quizzes or inquiries among the marines. ''It's better to create
a spirit of 'want to' rather than 'have to,' '' said General Gray, a veteran of
the Korean and Vietnam wars. He believes marines are professionally motivated to
want to keep up with their calling without needing someone to check on them.
''If they are not,'' he said, ''they shouldn't be in the corps.''

Noncommissioned officers are flattered that they are included in the program and
are enthusiastic. A young staff sergeant observed, ''One way to get the officers
to read the books is for them to know we're reading them.''

Few of the books glorify war, and some, like ''The Forgotten Soldier'' by Guy
Sajer, which recounts the author's grim experience during two winters on the
Soviet front with the German army in World War II, are enough to make the
toughest marine think twice about glory.

Among the books are standard classics that a student of military affairs would
expect to see on a reading list, including two by the same name, ''The Art of
War.'' One is the ancient Chinese tome by Sun-Tzu, the other a 19th-century
treatise on Napoleanic warfare by Henri Jomini. But marines can also read about
America's failure in Vietnam in works like Neil Sheehan's ''Bright and Shining
Lie'' and two others, ''People's War, People's Army'' and ''How We Won the
War,'' by North Vietnam's victorious general, V. N. Giap.

MARINE CORPS READING: A SAMPLER

Noncommissioned Officers

Sergeant

Swinton, E.D. ''The Defense of Duffer's Drift'' (tactics)
  West, F. ''The Village'' (guerrilla warfare)

Master Sergeant

Keegan, J. ''The Price of Admiralty'' (seapower)
  Stokesbury, ''A Short History of Airpower'' (airpower)

Sergeant Major

Shaara, M., ''Killer Angels'' (Civil War)
  Heinl, R.D., ''Victory at High Tide'' (operations)

Commissioned Officers

First Lieutenant

Masters, J., ''Bugles and a Tiger'' (memoir)
  Webb, J.H. Jr., ''Fields of Fire'' (fiction)

Captain

Hastings, M., ''Battle for the Falklands'' (operations)
  Montross, L., ''War Through the Ages'' (history)

Major

Dupuy, T.N., ''A Genius for War'' (history)
  Mao, T., ''On Guerrilla Warfare'' (low-intensity conflict)

General

Paret, P. ''Makers of Modern Strategy'' (strategy)
  Van Creveld, M., ''Command in War'' (command)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

MAN IN THE NEWS: COLIN LUTHER POWELL;
A General Who Is Right for His Time

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 914 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 9


In choosing Gen. Colin L. Powell to be Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
President Bush would be turning to what many consider to be the very model of a
modern Army general for a time when diplomatic finesse and foreign policy
expertise may be as important as combat experience.

As President Ronald

Reagan's deputy national security adviser and then as national security adviser,
General Powell was a crucial player in the summit meetings and negotiations that
have brought the United States and the Soviet Union closer than the two nations
have been since World War II.

Politically, such a choice was seen as adroit; not only is General Powell the
first black to be the Chairman, but he is also widely admired on Capitol Hill
and within the Bush Administration.

He has close ties to Brent Scowcroft, the current national security adviser, and
he was strongly supported by Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, then a member of the
House Republican leadership, when the general was appointed national security
adviser in November 1987.

Praise From Thatcher Adviser

General Powell has also had extensive contacts with the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization allies and has earned high praise from Charles Powell, the
principal foreign policy adviser to Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain.
Mr. Powell once called the general the most impressive American miltary man he
had ever dealt with.

Colin Luther Powell was born on April 5, 1937, in the South Bronx, the son of
Jamaican immigrants, and has spent more than 31 years in Army uniform.

He was commissioned a second lieutenant in the infantry after completing Officer
Candidate School at Fort Benning, Ga., in June 1958. He also completed two tours
of combat duty in Vietnam, serving in 1962 and 1963 as an adviser to South
Vietnamese units and in 1968 and 1969 as executive officer of an infantry
battalion and as a division operations officer.

He was wounded in combat and holds the Purple Heart. He also holds the Defense
Distinguished Service Medal with oak leaf cluster, the military's highest
noncombat decoration.

Reputation as an Intellectual

Like Adm. William J. Crowe, whom he would succeed as Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs, General Powell is considered an intellectual. He earned a bachelor's
degree in geology from the City University of New York and a master's in
business administration from George Washington University.

After a series of military assignments, including command of an infantry
attalion in South Korea and a brigade in the 101st Airborne Division at Fort
Campbell, Ky., General Powell, then a major, came to the attention of Washington
officials in 1972, when he became a White House fellow.

In July 1977 he began the first of a series of posts in the office of the
Secretary of Defense, working his way up to military assistant to Caspar W.
Weinberger, then Secretary of Defense, in 1983. After three years in that job,
General Powell returned to his first love, soldiering, when he commandered the
Army's Fifth Corps in Western Europe.

Although it was his political experience as much as anything else that qualifies
him for the Chairman's job, General Powell strongly resisted joining the White
House staff when Frank C. Carlucci became national security adviser in January
1987.

A Personal Plea From Reagan

At first the general pleaded with Mr. Carlucci to find someone else, arguing
that he wanted to stay in the Fifth Corps. ''I gave him every reason I could
think of,'' General Powell recalled. But Mr. Reagan called the reluctant general
a few days later, and he took the post.

General Powell was promoted to national security adviser when Mr. Carlucci
replaced Mr. Weinberger as Secretary of Defense. Like Mr. Carlucci, General
Powell won high marks for his adroit handling of a job that had been badly
discredited in the Iran-contra scandals.

''He never, never usurps the authority of the President,'' Mr. Carlucci later
said of General Powell. ''But his position is always so reasoned that by and
large he carries the day.''

Before he left office Mr. Reagan nominated General Powell to his current
four-star rank and assigned him to lead the Forces Command, the Army's largest,
overseeing all troops in the continental United States with responsibility for
the defense of the American mainland.

Legendary Self-Control

Although he is a cordial, good-humored man, General Powell's icy self-control is
legendary. He and his wife of 26 years, Alma, were devastated when their son
Michael, an Army officer stationed in West Germany, was seriously injured in a
jeep accident in 1987. But General Powell did not slacken his pace at the White
House.

The general has always tried to play down his status as a prominent black
American, bristling at questions on the subject. But he addressed the issue with
great power once, in an essay published by The Washington Times in January.

''My family lived in Birmingham that terrible summer of 1963,'' he wrote. ''My
wife and infant son were living with her parents. I wasn't there. I was a young
infantry captain in Vietnam.

''When I returned that Christmas, I was hit full force with what had happened in
my absence,'' he continued. ''I was stunned, disheartened and angry. While I had
been fighting in Vietnam alongside brave soldiers trying to preserve their
freedom, in my own land a long-simmering conflict had turned into an open fight
in our streets and cities - a fight that had to be won.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 11, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

A Man in the News article yesterday about Gen. Colin L. Powell misstated the
source of his Army commission. General Powell was already commissioned as a
second lieutenant, through the Reserve Officer Training Corps program at City
College in New York, when he went to Fort Benning, Ga. There he attended officer
courses at the United States Army Infantry School.

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

James M. Markham Is Dead at 46; Chief of The Times's Paris Bureau

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 818 words


James M. Markham, the New York Times bureau chief in Paris, died there
yesterday, apparently of a self-inflicted gunshot wound. He was 46 years old.

Mr. Markham was one of The Times's senior correspondents. Over the last two
decades he served in Africa, Asia, the Middle East and Western Europe before
being named deputy foreign editor last month. He was due to leave France next
month to take up his new post in New York.

Police investigators said Mr. Markham was found dead at his home yesterday
morning with a head wound. He was lying on his bed in a dressing gown, a hunting
gun next to his body. No note was found.

Mr. Markham spent most of his career as a foreign correspondent and had been
with The Times since 1971.

Before becoming the Times bureau chief in Paris in 1987, he had been bureau
chief in two other European posts: Madrid, from 1976 to 1982, and Bonn, from
1982 to 1987. While stationed in Madrid he roved widely, covering revolutionary
Iran and the Israeli invasion of southern Lebanon in 1978.

Service in Beirut and Saigon

He was bureau chief in Beirut in 1975 and 1976, covering the fighting in the
civil war involving Muslim, Christian, Syrian and Palestinian factions. Earlier,
from 1973 to 1975, he was the bureau chief in Saigon, traveling from there to
report also from Laos, Thailand and Cambodia. In the course of his studies and
travels Mr. Markham came to speak French, Italian, Spanish, German and
Hindustani.

In a message yesterday to The Times's staff, Max Frankel, the executive editor,
said: ''We mourn the loss of a wise and perceptive correspondent. Jim
distinguished himself on many continents and almost every day made The Times a
better paper. Jim was also a good friend to many of us, a loyal colleague who in
many ways personified the dignity and the values of our enterprise.''

Mr. Markham's writing could sometimes be blunt. In 1978, in a reply to a letter
contending that he lacked objectivity in writing about Palestinians, he wrote in
The Times Book Review: ''I do not romanticize Palestinian gunmen, because I have
seen too many of them. I have even had them stick guns at my head and threaten
to kill me. But I have also met and talked with other Palestinians, and not all
Palestinians are terrorists.''

During his time in Vietnam, Mr. Markham was taken by the South Vietnamese police
from a bus after he had visited a Vietcong-held area. He was then held for 39
hours, during which he was questioned by the police for six and a half hours.
Notes and film that he was carrying were confiscated for a month.

A Broad View of Europe

In recent years he covered major diplomatic and political matters in Europe,
including the changes in the European Community as it prepares for increased
commercial and political unification by the end of 1992. His recent reporting
from France included coverage of the French Revolution bicentennial last month.

In a dispatch last year from Courtenay in central France, where economic
pressures were putting many farmers out of business, he mused about the French
character.

''Something deeper in the French imagination is touched by the threat hanging
over the farmers,'' Mr. Markham wrote. ''La terre - the land - has the same,
almost mystical associations for the French as the forest has for the Germans.''

James Morris Markham 4th was born on March 7, 1943, in Washington, the son of
James Morris Markham 3d and the former Mary Paul Rix. The family lived for a
time in Milwaukee, then moved to Sussex County, N.J.

Mr. Markham graduated with honors from the Lawrenceville School in
Lawrenceville, N.J., before entering Princeton, where he majored in European
history and became an editorial writer for The Daily Princetonian.

Princeton and Oxford

Mr. Markham graduated magna cum laude in 1965 from Princeton, where he was
elected to Phi Beta Kappa and was a Woodrow Wilson Fellow. He then studied for
two years as a Rhodes Scholar at Balliol College of Oxford University.

He worked for Time Magazine in New Delhi in the summer of 1966 and returned to
the Indian capital in 1967, worked briefly again for Time and then joined the
Associated Press bureau there, traveling widely on A.P. assignments in Burma,
Afghanistan and elsewhere.

Returning to the United States in 1969, he worked for the A.P. briefly in
Newark, then served on its foreign desk in New York. In 1970 he was transferred
to Lagos, Nigeria, where he was based as the A.P.'s West Africa correspondent.

After joining The New York Times, he worked for two years on its metropolitan
staff in New York and wrote about narcotics and the criminal justice system
before being sent to Saigon.

Mr. Markham is survived by his wife, the former Stephanie Reed of Intervale,
N.H., whom he married in 1966; two children, Katharine and Samuel; his parents,
who live in Moss Creek, S.C.; and a sister, Ellen Sybil Markham of Brooklyn.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of James M. Markham (NYT)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

HEALTH;
Role of Anxiety Dreams in Post-Traumatic Stress

BYLINE: By DANIEL GOLEMAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 968 words


Dreams are taking on a new importance for researchers studying the emotional
aftermath of trauma.

The researchers have discovered intriguing similarities in the dreams of people
who suffer post-traumatic stress disorder, a condition in which a traumatic
event is re-experienced in a variety of troubling ways long after its effects
would normally fade.

People with this disorder typically have terrifying dreams in which they seem to
be reliving part of the original trauma. They awaken in agitation, rage, fear or
grief. Researchers now say these ''anxiety dreams'' distinguish people with
post-traumatic stress disorder from those with other psychiatric problems, and
may offer a clue to the underlying physiology of the disorder.

The researchers believe that the disturbed sleep these dreams cause may also
lead to other symptoms like being wound up and ''hyper-vigilant,'' startling
easily, having difficulty in concentration and being irritable. The researchers
say flashbacks may also be caused by the same part of the brain involved in
anxiety dreams.

'Cardinal Manifestation'

''Anxious dreams are a cardinal manifestation of post-traumatic stress
disorder,'' said Richard Ross, a psychiatrist at the University of Pennsylvania.
''I've never met someone with post-traumatic stress disorder who did not have
them.''

Although disturbed sleep and upsetting dreams are also common in people with
other emotional problems, repetitive anxiety dreams seem distinctive to the
emotional aftermath of trauma. But even people who have anxiety disorders like
phobias do not commonly complain that they have the same anxiety-provoking dream
over and over.

In an article in the current issue of the journal Sleep, for instance,
researchers at Dartmouth report that people prone to panic attacks sometimes
have what amounts to a panic attack at night, which they experience as an
intensely upsetting dream. But they do not have the kinds of dreams found in
those with post-traumatic stress disorder.

Reenactment of Events

Most commonly, the dreams re-enact some aspect of the nightmarish experience
that has brought about the disorder. For instance, in a group of Vietnam
veterans studied by Dr. Ross, one had repetitive dreams of being trapped on a
boat on fire and not being able to save some friends, an event that occurred and
still haunts him.

Such dreams do not occur with nearly the same regularity, if at all, in any
other psychiatric disturbance, according to an article by Dr. Ross in the June
issue of the Archives of General Psychiatry.

''It's normal for most of us to have an anxious dream from time to time,'' said
Dr. Ross. ''But those with post-traumatic stress disorder have them anywhere
from once a week to every other night or so.''

In data collected from a study of distressed Vietnam veterans, Dr. Ross found
that as long as 15 years or more after the trauamtic events they went through,
many said they had intensely anxious, recurrent dreams 10 to 15 nights a month.

Dreams May Offer a Clue

Dr. Ross believes the distinctive dreams may offer a clue to the physiological
basis of post-traumatic stress disorder. He said scientists knew a great deal
about the brain chemistry and brain structures involved in sleep, and he said
this ''may lead us to a new treatment for the anxiety dream, one of the most
bothersome symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder.''

The Holacaust and Dreams

That those who remain upset by a disturbing experience in the past are more
likely to have anxiety dreams was also found in a study of surviviors of the
Holocaust, which was reported last month. The study, by Peretz Lavie, a
psychologist at the Technion-Israel Institute of Technology in Haifa, was based
on interviews with 23 men and women who had been imprisoned in concentration
camps or spent World War II hiding from the Nazis.

Those who were best-adjusted psychologically reported few dreams; when studied
in a sleep laboratory, they could recall dreaming only a third of the time when
they were awakened at key points in the night. But those less well-adjusted
could recall dreams 80 percent of the times they were awakened, and their dreams
had significantly more anxiety and aggression.

One possibility, in Dr. Ross's view, is that the anxiety dreams of those with
post-traumatic stress may be repeated, unsuccessful attempts to reclaim a state
of emotional balance that had been overwhelmed by the trauma.

Dreams as Helpers

Indirect support for this view comes from recent research by Rosalind
Cartwright, a psychologist at Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center in
Chicago. In a study of nearly 200 men and women going through separation and
divorce, Dr. Cartwright found that anxiety dreams seemed to play a key role in
helping to recover from emotional wounds.

The dreams were of a different variety, though, than those seen in people with
post-traumatic stress. The anxiety dreams of those going through divorce tended
to be long, complicated and very upsetting but did not repeat specific scenes
from a traumatic moment. Instead, they were of upsetting scenes, like being
attacked or chased or falling from a mountain or a balloon.

Not all those who were divorced were upset. In fact some were relieved, Dr.
Cartwright found.

''Those who became highly depressed had the most troubled dreams,'' she said.
Yet those who had the disturbed dreams tended to be more at peace a year later
than those who were upset but had mainly bland dreams, Dr. Cartwright found.

''The disturbed dreams seem to be attempts by a helpful internal mechanism to
solve emotional problems,'' said Dr. Cartwright. ''It's a kind of memory search
of similar problems in the past, a sort of inner therapist that makes you look
at the problem and work it through.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

An Actor Who Insists on Being Serious

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1039 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Aug. 9


As the charming but money-hungry Alex Keaton, Michael J. Fox made television's
''Family Ties'' a hit. As an ambitious climber of the corporate ladder in
''Secret of My Success,'' as a teen-age werewolf in ''Teen Wolf,'' and as
17-year-old Marty McFly who drives ''Back to the Future,'' he created box-office
magic.

But when Mr. Fox has tried to be serious - as a writer destroying himself with
cocaine in ''Bright Lights, Big City'' or a blue-collar worker trying for a
rock-and-roll career in ''Light of Day'' - audiences have stayed away.

The big question now is whether audiences will go to see Mr. Fox in ''Casualties
of War,'' the most harrowing movie in which he has starred.

The Columbia Pictures film, which is to open on Aug. 18, was shot in Thailand in
early 1988, with a script by the playwright David Rabe and direction by Brian de
Palma. It is based on an incident that took place during the Vietnam War: the
abduction, rape and murder of a young Vietnamese woman by a unit of American
soldiers. Sean Penn plays the leader of the patrol; Mr. Fox is the one soldier
in the group who questions his actions.

The Risk Factor

''Let's be honest,'' Mr. Fox said. ''If this movie makes only a buck and a half,
it's going to be things like 'Bikinis Away' for me. But to fail doing something
unexpected is no disgrace. To fail doing the ordinary is a disaster. This movie
is about how much you will risk if you have nothing to gain.''

It was lunch hour on the set of ''Back to the Future II,'' and Mr. Fox was
sitting on the front porch of a whitewashed house on a tree-lined street in a
typical American small town. Sunny, with the even temperament of a golden
retriever, he seemed to belong there.

The actor describes himself as ''fatigued'' and ''beat up'' because ''Back to
the Future II'' and ''Back to the Future III'' are being made at the same time
''and every shot is running or jumping.'' Nonetheless, he is willing to spend
his lunch hours and most of his days off doing interviews about ''Casualties of
War.''

One cannot imagine greater opposites than Mr. Fox and Mr. Penn.

''Up to the point where it infringes on other people, you're entitled to your
own way of working as an actor,'' Mr. Fox said. ''Sean's approach was that we
played enemies so we shouldn't have any contact. But it was too difficult in
Thailand for me to be a warrior all the time. Possibly to my detriment, I got up
in the morning, put everything I was going to need that day as an actor into a
'briefcase' and went to work.''

Poker Nights

When he got back to his hotel, Mr. Fox unpacked his metaphorical briefcase and
often spent the evening playing in a poker game that Mr. Penn spurned.

It was a grueling four months. For the first two weeks, the actors ate
C-rations, went on forced marches carrying M-60 machine guns or an M-79 grenade
launcher, and learned to strip their M-16 rifles under the barked orders of a
former Army major.

''It was not nuts-and-berry time,'' Mr. Fox said of the basic training. ''It was
more civilized than a handful of dried insect carcasses and a rifle. We slept in
$80-a-night hotel rooms. But the snakes didn't know it was a movie. And the
parasites didn't know it was a movie. I was in the hospital vomiting blood the
day everyone went on a grueling hike and I would have traded places with them. I
wouldn't describe myself as a method actor, but on Day 60 in the jungle, you
hate everybody and want to get the hell out.''

''I had humble empathy for the grunts,'' Mr. Fox said of American infantrymen in
Vietnam. ''We weren't 18. We were in our late 20's and we were just making a
movie. But it was hellishly hot. We were homesick. We had insect bites, burns
and sunstroke. After every take, I threw up. It certainly wasn't difficult for
me to be that guy.''

Mr. Fox has never met the soldier he plays, a man whose religious and spiritual
beliefs would not allow him to keep quiet about the rape and murder. He knows
only that Sven Eriksson - the pseudonym given his character in a 1969 article by
Daniel Lang in The New Yorker magazine on which the movie is based - lives
quietly somewhere in the Midwest.

Following Instincts

''He was not a troublemaker,'' said Mr. Fox of Eriksson. ''What he found in
himself was that when he was pushed, he pushed back. Ultimately, you're a good
guy or a bad guy, but you never know. In all of us there is an instinct to do
what is right and not what is wrong. I can say now, 'Oh, I would have done the
same thing.' But add fatigue, disorientation, immediate physical threat and the
knowledge that if you die, there's nothing you can do to save the Vietnamese
girl. I still am not 100 percent sure what I would have done in Eriksson's
place.''

Mr. Fox flew home on July 9, 1988. A week later, he married the actress Tracy
Pollan. ''I love being married,'' he said. ''I embrace domesticity with open
arms. I can't wait to go home.'' Now he also has a 10-week-old son who waits for
him after the day's shooting on the ''Back to the Future'' sequels, in which, at
the age of 28, he is once again playing a 17-year-old.

Like all of the movies Steven Spielberg produces, the sequels are shrouded in
secrecy. But little in Hollywood is really secret. A visual joke in the sequel
shows the marquee of a theater. The movie playing in that future era is ''Jaws
12,'' directed by Max Spielberg - the producer's son, who is now 3. In part, the
movies deal with alternate universes. One unpleasant future America is the
result of the success of Biff, a power in real estate who tears down buildings
to erect monuments to himself. Mr. Fox, who plays his own son as well as several
of his other relatives, past, present and future, pursues and is pursued by
Biff, the bully who beat up Marty McFly's father in the first movie.

Mr. Fox says he appreciates the audience's fervor for him in comedies, but he
refuses to remain Marty McFly forever.

''I hope it doesn't seem that I'm abusing a privilege,'' he said of his
insistence on doing serious roles. ''In a comedic film, I may be taking my pride
and putting it out there, but not my guts. If I just do comedies, I will have
blown it for myself.'' Columbia Pictures Entertainmentd(Columbia Pictures)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Michael J. Fox in ''Casualties of War''

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 11, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

On Streets Ruled By Crack, Families Die

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 3002 words


Crack is rapidly accelerating the destruction of families in poor urban
neighborhoods where mothers are becoming increasingly addicted and children are
selling the drug in greater numbers than ever before.

Though drugs have always brought misery to families affected by their use, crack
has greatly intensified that misery in recent months in inner cities throughout
the nation.

Isolation and a Sad Acceptance

But perhaps nowhere can this be seen more readily than in the doorways and
abandoned buildings of New York City's poor neighborhoods. These are some of the
elements of family breakdown that social scientists and others have observed:

* Children are taking over as heads of their families, largely because of their
incomes from selling crack.

* Young pregnant mothers are endangering their lives to get the drug, and in
many cases, people describe mothers or brothers procuring sex for the young
women in their families to raise money to buy it.

* Teen-age girls are abandoning their families and forming what social
scientists say are new and violent gangs to sell or buy crack.

* And in some neighborhoods female users outnumber male users for the first
time. For years, it had been the women, more often than not, who held poor
families together. Yet almost worse than the breakdown of the family are the
isolation and sad acceptance expressed by so many people in the affected
communities - as if crack has become a final plague they cannot overcome.

The overall picture of the unraveling family emerges in scores of conversations
and interviews with members of families hit by crack and with treatment experts
and social scientists studying the matter.

What emerges as well is the perception that very little community structure is
in place to cope with or to stop what is happening. For the most part, there are
not enough treatment centers, social workers or law-enforcement officers to give
the extensive help that is needed.

On streets where drugs have long been sold, most sellers are much younger than
their predecessors. ''The kids are taking over,'' said Dr. Ansley Hamid, an
anthropologist at the John Jay College of Criminal Justice in Manhattan.

Crack to Go - From Young Pushers

On a quiet summer day recently, a 12-year-old boy sat on an upturned milk crate
at the corner of Regent Place and East 21st Street in the Flatbush section of
Brooklyn, selling crack. His mother stood beside him, drinking from a bottle of
beer and patting his head.

Other boys waited for customers in nearby doorways. Outside, children as young
as 7, 8 and 9 waited almost nonchalantly. They were the ''layaways,'' who were
holding most of the drugs to be sold. They would help protect the sellers from
being caught with drugs in their possession. A teen-age boy called the layaways
''dumb and young,'' and said they were paid only $25 to $50 a week. Still, he
said, ''That's a lot of money for a kid.''

In West Harlem, at 132d Street and Frederick Douglass Boulevard, a boy was on a
public telephone with a customer. He signaled to two other youths who were
double-parked nearby in a 1989 white Chrysler New Yorker. The boys in the car
were to make the delivery. Crack to go.

At 140th Street between Adam Clayton Powell Jr. and Frederick Douglass
Boulevards, the once-grand brownstones are crumbling backdrops for crack
selling. But they are far from vacant. As night draws near, the ''vampires come
out,'' as one resident puts it. In nearly every doorway, clusters of teen-age
lookouts scrutinize customers. The lookouts - boys as young as 14 or 15 - are
very polite as they keep the crowds moving to avoid attracting the police.
''Move on, please,'' one says as three people congregate. Mothers escaping their
hot apartments watch from stoops nearby, holding babies sucking on pacifiers.

Inside virtually every building on the block are young guards with guns. Their
age and their inexperience with the weapons are two reasons for the sharp
increase in the shootings and in other violence in those neighborhoods, Larry
Brown, a former addict now in a treatment program, said.

Gold Teeth Set With Diamonds

A buyer passed the guards and slipped money through a slot in a door. A dealer
waited on the other side. The crack, a smokable derivative of cocaine, was
passed back through. Again, many dealers were teen-agers. ''This has not been
true before,'' said Dr. Phillipe Bourgois, an anthropologist at San Francisco
State University, who is doing research in East Harlem.

Some teen-agers who work these streets, some with grins that reveal gold teeth
with diamonds set along the edges, said they could earn as much as several
thousand dollars a week, depending on how high they climbed in the drug network.
The most successful are careful not to become addicted themselves.

Dr. Hamid said the higher-level distributors like to employ adolescents because
often they are more willing than adults to take risks and because their youthful
sense of invulnerability makes them less wary of the violence that stalks a
crack seller. The Parents Big Rewards For Blind Eyes The intensive crack
activity of those young people - selling it or using it, or both - dominates
what home life they have.

Michael H., a skinny 17-year-old who is now in a drug-treatment program, said he
paid his mother for the use of her apartment to sell heroin, which is becoming
popular among crack addicts because it brings them down from the high of crack.
Heroin acts biochemically as a sedative; crack a stimulant.

''I gave her $200 a day,'' Michael said. ''I used to open at 7:30. Went to
school at 8. I'd get the workers, get the lookout, and tell my sister to take
care of the place until I got home from school.'' He said he earned $500 a day.
''By 10:30 at night, the shop was closed.''

Parents of boys like Michael often turn a blind eye to drug dealing by their
teen-agers because they want drug money for themselves.

Balance of Power Shifts

''The parents definitely know what's going on,'' Dr. Richard Curtis, an
anthropologist at John Jay College of Criminal Justice, said. Dr. Terry
Williams, an anthropologist at City University of New York who lives and works
in East Harlem, agreed, adding: ''The kids start bringing in money, buying gifts
for Mom and clothes for little brother. The child in essence becomes the parent.
Then you can't tell them what to do. The balance of power has been shifted.
Suddenly, as a parent, you turn the other way. You are reaping the benefits of
the drug trade. This is altering the whole structure of the family.''

Dr. Peter Pinto, a clinical psychologist who specializes in drug treatment at
Samaritan Village in Queens, said even actions that a teen-ager might think are
benign can leave psychological scars. When a boy like Michael supports his
family throught drug selling, family members get ''very, very confused,'' Dr.
Pinto said.

''Every boy wants to please his mother,'' he said. ''Every kid wants Mom's
approval. The dad can never make that much money so in a sense it's emotional
incest. The kid becomes the husband.''

Stealing From Mother

The damage becomes especially acute in relationships between mothers and
pregnant daughters. Sonya H., lean, lanky and pregnant with her second child,
showed up at the door of her mother's Flatbush apartment recently, her lips
swollen and a front tooth knocked out. She said she had been beaten by a dealer
who thought she had stolen some of his crack. Sonya, who is 22, admitted that
she paid for the crack through prostitution and stealing and that she stole from
her mother.

At first glance the mother's apartment looked sparse. The living room had two
battered sofas, a low scratched table and a television set, turned on. Sonya's
3-year-old daughter and her younger sister's 2-year-old son watched a game show.

But the back bedroom, where Sonya's mother slept, was crammed with the family's
belongings. Clothes, furniture, books and mementos were stacked halfway to the
ceiling. On a table next to the bed was a Bible, and fronds collected on Palm
Sunday hung on the wall. The mother said she locked everything of value in that
back bedroom, to prevent Sonya or her associates from stealing it.

Sonya's mother and sister were afraid that Sonya would not live to 30. She has
suffered seizures, the most recent on a subway. And if the crack does not kill
her, there is another threat -the recurring beatings she suffers from men from
whom she tries to steal. She has scars on her neck, which she says were gotten
when a crazed dealer tried to cut off her head.

Recurrent Nightmares

Sonya has entered many treatment programs but usually leaves after a short time
and returns to crack. Dr. Pinto said that among teen-agers who sought help at
Samaritan Village, the drug-related experiences were so devastating that 44
percent suffered from post-traumatic stress syndrome similar to that of Vietnam
veterans. He said 70 percent had recurrent nightmares.

In any event, Sonya's mother felt powerless to control her. She has locked her
daughter out of the apartment many times but always weakens and takes her back.
So now instead of locking Sonya out, she locks herself in, behind her bedroom
door.

Parents in similar situations give up any hope, and particularly in cases like
that of Michael H., also give up dignity and authority. If the parents are using
drugs themselves, a kind of child-as-parent syndrome develops. ''The child is
taking on more of the role of an adult,'' Dr. Pinto said. ''On the surface, the
child has an exhilarating feeling of power. But inside, the little adult is an
angry deprived, lonely child who is hungry for parental nurturance.''

Prostituting Children

Family members addicted to crack go to extremes to get it, in many reported
cases prostituting their own children or siblings. Dr. Pinto said he counseled a
17-year-old girl from Jamaica, Queens, who said her two older brothers kept her
a prisoner in a crack house and forced her to prostitute herself so they could
get crack.

Sonya H. said she and a 17-year-old friend were out one night recently. The
friend's mother had told her daughter that ''she better bring her back
something,'' Sonya said. Later, the mother called down from her window for the
girl to come up. She had a man lined up for her daughter. Sonya said her friend
went upstairs and performed sex in exchange for crack for her mother.

Keith S., a tall shy, gentle-looking 17-year-old, said he and his mother used
crack. Keith also sold the drug, as did most teen-agers he grew up with. He said
his mother's increasingly severe addiction concerned him so much that he tried
to cut off her supply. ''I had a couple of conferences with my friends, you
know, and that's when I had a certain type of beef with them.''

But despite his pleas, the friends continued to sell to his mother. Still, Keith
did not cut off his friends or their crack network. Bit by bit, his mother's
apartment became a hangout, where crack was bought and sold and used. She lost
the apartment, Keith S. said. He said that he did not know where she was living
and that he drifted among the homes of friends and relatives.

Trading Crack for Grades

Family members may be alerted to a child's drug use when his schoolwork begins
to suffer and his grades drop dramatically.

But in one instance involving crack, a change in grade performance indicated yet
another aspect of an adult-child relationship turned upside down. Jon W., who is
undergoing treatment at Samaritan Village, said he raised his grades in one
class at a Long Island high school by selling crack to his teacher. ''My parents
kept wondering why I kept getting A's in this class,'' he said. ''They wanted to
know because I was bringing home C's and D's in my other classes.''

''Most of the adults,'' he said, sneering, ''they know you've got something they
want, they'll do anything for you.'' The Women Their Strength Crumbles The loss
of women to crack is clearly a powerful element in the breakup of poor families.

And there are indications that in New York City and several other urban areas in
the United States more women than men now use crack. The Justice Department
reported recently, for example, that for the first time crack-related arrests of
women were exceeding those of men in New York, Washington, Kansas City, Mo., and
Portland, Ore.

Larry Brown, the former addict who lives in West Harlem, said he saw more women
than men using crack in his neighborhood.

A young woman sat on her bed in a small, unbearably hot city-owned apartment in
Harlem watching television. She wore her hair in braids, like a child, though
she was 22. She was pregnant for the third time. And she knew that the city
would make her give up her baby at birth, because this baby, like the other two,
was going to test positive for cocaine.

But she was unwilling or unable to stop using crack.

Another young Harlem mother, of a 1-year-old girl, was flying high. She bounced
as she talked nonstop on a sidewalk. Her eyes darted and she spoke in bursts.
Presently, she grabbed the wrist of an old man on West 140th Street and led him
off. Others who watched said he would give her more crack in return for sex.

High Is Too Intense

One woman, a mother in her late 20's, strode nervously up and down another
treeless street lined with abandoned buildings. She was leery of speaking to a
reporter because she was selling crack.

Still, she could not resist stopping to bemoan the fact that crack was now being
used by children as young as 9, who sprinkle it on marijuana cigarettes to
dilute its high, which, she said, is too intense for their young brains.

While she talked about the children, she ceased selling. And when two men and
two women, in their 30's and 40's, approached to try to buy crack, she shooed
them away.

But before long she was back at it again.

Still another woman, now in a treatment program, told of how completely the
crack habit had shattered her life and kept her from functioning at any level.
Her head was shaved, and her once-beautiful face badly scarred. When she smoked
crack she was beset with visions of insects crawling on her. She would tear at
her face, trying to get rid of the bugs, and she shaved her head because of the
illusion that she had lice. The Girls New Gangs Hit the Streets Although the
sale of crack is still essentially controlled by men, some teen-age girls are
forming gangs to sell it, or to buy it. ''This is a new phenomenon in American
history,'' said Dr. William Kornblum, director of the Center for Social Research
at the City University of New York Graduate School. Many more women and girls
are selling drugs, and they are more organized, he said.

Dr. Bourgois, the San Francisco anthropologist who is doing research in East
Harlem, says the new gangs, or posses as they call themselves, have come about
as more girls move out of their homes and into the streets. Just as girls are
hanging out on basketball courts, practicing their shots, so are they hanging
out on the streets, selling drugs, Dr. Bourgois says. Girls ''used to not be
allowed to participate in street culture,'' he explained. But now they say,
''I'm going to get mine.''

Many girls leave home permanently and live on the streets or in crack houses.
Some carry razor blades for protection.

Less Likely to Be Searched

Lyvia H., an innocent-looking 16-year-old from Jamaica, Queens, who is in a
treatment program at Samaritan Village, said there were five girls in her posse.
Aided by two lookouts and two helpers, she was the seller, dressed up ''in my
church clothes'' so the police would not suspect her.

A male dealer gave her $500 worth of crack at a time, which she said she could
sell in a half-hour on a weekend night. She would work twice a week, for 12
hours at a stretch. For every $500 worth of crack she sold, she could keep $25,
she said. Lyvia said she sold about $12,000 worth of crack each night, earning a
weekly income of about $1,200, most of which she spent on drugs for herself.

Dr. Williams said higher-level drug dealers were willing to use girls as sellers
because they were less likely than men to be searched by undercover police
officers. Only policewomen search girls, and most undercover officers are men.

In the Greenpoint section of Brooklyn recently, two teen-age girls were on a
''mission,'' as they called it, looking for money to buy crack. The terminology
was from the popular television series ''Star Trek.'' The girls called crack
''Scotty,'' and getting high was ''beaming up.'' On the mission, the girls said,
they would hunt for a wallet to steal or would have quick sex for as little as
50 cents.

Searching for Family Ties

In his research on life in crack houses, Dr. Williams sees young girls, known on
the street as ''TQ's'' for teen queens, who have run away from home and who stay
in crack houses. The girls, about 14 or 15, ''are highly desirable to the older
men,'' Dr. Williams said. ''They are fresh, new,'' he said. At the crack houses,
which are usually decrepit rooms in abandoned buildings, they go on binges that
typically last for two or three days, he said. The girls often perform oral sex
in exchange for a smoke. Between binges they sleep in alleyways or abandoned
buildings.

Adults at the crack houses become the only family the girls have. They often
call the older women Ma and the older men Poppy.

Rays of hope do exist amid the suffering and misery. Some treatment centers have
clearly helped addicts to survive.

But Larry Brown said that the despair felt by Sonya H.'s mother and sister, for
example, was evident throughout New York's poor neighborhoods, where after a few
years most addicts are struck down by shooting or other violence, by the AIDS
virus that spreads through crack houses, or by illnesses caused by malnutrition.

Mr. Brown told of a saying repeated often by residents of those neighborhoods:
''There are no old crackheads.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Madison Ave. and East 131st St. (pg. A1); Dr. Peter Pinto;
Sonya with Dr. Ansley Hamid; Larry Brown (NYT/Angel Franco) (pg. A13)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 11, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

The Footsore Still Pursue Bloch's Story

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 616 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 10


After weeks of notoriety as an espionage suspect, Felix S. Bloch is
demonstrating an increasing conviviality with his ever-present entourage of
reporters, camera crews and F.B.I. agents. But that does not protect him from an
occasional angry encounter with the public.

Bound on various trips, from a walk in the park to a visit today to a Robert
Mapplethorpe photography exhibit, the former diplomat emerges from his apartment
in a leafy, expensive neighborhood every day or two, orbited by cameras,
shadowed by agents and plied with questions about anything but the allegations
of espionage, a topic that he has made clear is off limits.

He no longer turns a cold shoulder to journalists' banter. One reporter chatted
with him at length about orchestra conductors and the Viennese opera, and he has
spoken freely of his education and the decisions leading to his entry into the
Foreign Service.

At the same time, Federal Bureau of Investigation agents in their second month
of surveillance, and Washington journalists now in their second week, show signs
of fatigue, not having an apartment to duck into for a rest. One agent followed
him on a 22-mile trek Tuesday until her feet bled, and an ABC News reporter, Ken
Rudin, had to bow out of the next day's chase to nurse blistered soles.

'I Read, I Cook, I Clean'

Mr. Bloch is no happier. ''I never asked myself whether walking around would
accomplish anything,'' he told a reporter, discussing how he fills his day. ''If
I have time on my hands, I like to mix it up. I read, I cook, I clean the house.
I work on this or that and I want to get my fresh air.''

The extravaganza has become a routine part of the diplomat's life for the last
month, not only in Washington, but in Manhattan, where he visited his father,
and at his daughter's house in Chappaqua, N.Y.

The entourage materialized after ABC News reported that the Government had begun
a sweeping investigation of his activities dating back to his posting in Berlin
in the mid-1970's and including his more recent stint as deputy chief of mission
in the Vienna Embassy. The suspicions have led F.B.I. agents to watch Mr.
Bloch's house around the clock and have consigned journalists to what one
cameraman described as a death watch in case the diplomat is taken into custody
or tries to flee.

As for Mr. Bloch, who has been on leave from his State Department post since
late June, life outside the privacy of his apartment has become a seldom-amusing
circus, punctuated by recurring public hostility.

One recent morning Mr. Bloch sauntered out with his 5-year-old terrier,
Mephisto, along with the inevitable entourage, for a short walk. The crowd
followed him on an errand to a laundry, then surrounded him as he reclined on a
park bench for an hour to watch Mephisto play. There, three young children who
had been eating lunch nearby chided him. ''Bye, Mr. Spy!'' they yelled.

A Blow on the Head

But more threatening than that, he was confronted repeatedly by a man who called
himself James and said he was a Vietnam veteran. ''Did you betray your own
country, man?'' he asked Mr. Bloch.

Perhaps attracted by the presence of cameras and microphones, James hit the
diplomat on the side of the head, threw a blue backpack at him and played
roughly with Mephisto. Only when the man tried to follow Mr. Bloch home did
Federal agents intervene. Otherwise, they stood by with nervous looks after
asking the man unsuccessfully to leave.

At one point in the hourlong encounter, James asked the diplomat's name, and Mr.
Bloch replied in an almost inaubible voice: ''Felix. All I want to do is enjoy a
nice day. I'd be delighted if everybody here would disappear.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Felix S. Bloch (NYT/Andrea Mohin)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 11, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Soldier, Leader, Black American

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 393 words


America's armed forces face a different but no less daunting task today than
they did after the Vietnam War. Then, military leaders had to restore respect
for the uniform after a war for which they took an unfair public pounding. Now,
they need to shape a new strategy to fit a complicated strategic environment in
a time of declining budgets.

To meet this challenge, Americans are fortunate that Gen. Colin L. Powell has
been named as the next chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. And Americans can
count themselves equally lucky for the man who will leave that post after four
years, Adm. William Crowe Jr. As a result of recent legislation, the chairman is
no longer simply a consensus maker for the warring bureaucracies of the Army,
Navy, Air Force and Marines. He is the principal military adviser to the
President. Along with the Secretary of Defense, he helps frame U.S. military
strategy.

The services have been dragging their feet on that urgent matter, and that's
disconcerting. Military leaders know they will have to cut the size of U.S.
forces to deal with the Federal deficit. Yet they seem inclined to do the job by
trimming back a little here and there - without a coherent overall plan.

General Powell is well suited to the larger enterprise. He has had critical
experience at all levels. He fought in Vietnam, commanded an Army corps in
Germany and worked as a military aide to the Secretary of Defense. He served
several years in the White House, becoming national security adviser in
President Reagan's difficult last two years.

He guided Mr. Reagan through the aftermath of the Iran-contra affair. He
displayed a capacity to make tough calls by telling Administration die-hards
that the Nicaraguan rebels were a lost political and military cause and urging a
course of negotiations for Central America. his personal finesse, political
skills and independence win widespread praise.

Admiral Crowe has been a gem. He managed the difficult U.S. naval presence in
the Persian Gulf during the Iran-Iraq war and opened an invaluable dialogue with
his Soviet counterparts.

General Powell will become the first black officer to serve as the nation's top
military chief. His appointment is testimony to what blacks can achieve in the
service of the United States today. Above all, he has earned the chance to lead
the armed services.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PERUVIAN FARMERS RAZING RAIN FOREST TO SOW DRUG CROPS

BYLINE: By JAMES BROOKE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1747 words

DATELINE: LIMA, Peru


Driven by American and European demand for cocaine, Peruvian coca growers have
chopped down large stretches of Amazon rain forest and are dumping millions of
gallons of toxic chemicals into its highlands and headwaters.

The coca growers, who produce the primary source of 75 percent of the cocaine
consumed in the United States, have invaded two national parks and two national
forests, deforested most of a fragile cloud forest known as the ''eyebrow of the
jungle'' and destroyed an area estimated at well over 500,000 acres of tropical
forests.

''People say, 'Don't destroy the Amazon, the lungs of the world,' '' said Carlos
F. Ponce, a Peruvian conservationist who addressed a recent international
conference on the issue. But what few understand, he said, is the connection
between severe rain-forest destruction and the rapid expansion of coca
cultivation.

Largest Crop in Peruvian Amazon

With plantations growing sevenfold here in the last 15 years to meet an
increasing demand for cocaine in the United States and Europe, the coca leaf has
become the largest crop under cultivation in the Peruvian Amazon.

The result is severe pollution and deforestation, and serious erosion, in the
Upper Huallaga River Valley, a rich, genetically diverse rain forest. Known as
''the eyebrow of the jungle'' for its altitude and lushness, the Upper Huallaga
is the source of about 75 percent of the nation's coca-leaf harvest.

Preventing the process has proved difficult, in large measure because the
guerrillas of Peru's Maoist-oriented Shining Path movement control much of Upper
Huallaga.

'Mafia and Shining Path'

''Nobody dares go study there - you not only have to deal with the mafia, but
also the Shining Path,'' said Livia Benavides, an environmental engineer who
works with the Association of Ecology and Conservation, a private group here.

On May 31, Barbara D'Achille, Peru's best-known environmental journalist, was
captured and stoned to death by Shining Path guerrillas. She had lived for two
decades in the Brazilian and Peruvian Amazon and wrote frequently about the
coca-caused destruction.

Powerful economic interests held by the Shining Path were outlined last month in
a study prepared by the United States Agency for International Development.
Annual coca production in the Huallaga, it said, is worth about $540 million,
and wage laborers earn about $12 a day - which may be as much as eight times
what other Peruvian farm workers earn.

The Shining Path fighters do not usually involve themselves with the production
of coca, but the movement serves as a buffer between the peasant growers and the
Government's eradication teams. The guerrillas also protect and facilitate
dealings between the growers and the Colombian buyers.

Millions of Gallons of Chemicals

Marc J. Dourojeanni, a Peruvian forest engineer, calculated in a 1987 study that
coca growers annually dump the following volumes of toxic chemicals in the
valley's watershed: 15 million gallons of kerosene, 8 million gallons of
sulphuric acid, 1.6 million gallons of acetone, 1.6 million gallons of the
solvent toluene, 16,000 tons of lime and 3,200 tons of carbide.

Working in clandestine laboratories hidden under the rain-forest canopy, growers
use this array of chemicals to refine coca leaves, first into coca base, then
into coca paste. The final processing step, into white cocaine powder, is
usually done in Colombia. From Colombia, the cocaine is exported to the United
States.

Besides chemicals, growers use large amounts of herbicides and fertilizers,
including Agent Orange and paraquat, to clear and care for the Upper Huallaga's
estimated five billion coca bushes.

''The residues of these toxic substances are dumped into the Upper Huallaga's
rivers and streams,'' Marcelo T. Buenaventura, a forest engineer, wrote recently
in the Peruvian environmental magazine Medio Ambiente. ''Many species of fish,
amphibians, aquatic reptiles and crustaceans have already completely disappeared
from the rivers and streams.''

'The Attila of Agriculture'

Growers seeking to produce the highly potent drug preferred by American and
European customers have concentrated cultivation on the tropical slopes where
the Andes meet the Amazon. At elevations raging between 3,000 and 6,000 feet,
the soil has a high content of alkaloid, an active agent in cocaine.

Nicknamed ''the Attila of tropical agriculture'' by one Peruvian scientist, coca
cultivation has led to indiscriminate deforestation. Growers have cut down large
sections of Tingo Maria, Cutervo and Abiseo national parks and Alexander Von
Humboldt and Apurimac national forests. Five other conservation areas are
threatened.

The coca plantations also create larger rings of destruction: landing strips for
small airplanes, fields for corn, bananas and manioc to feed workers, and
exhausted lands abandoned by growers.

''One can safely deduce that since the coca boom began in the early 1970's, coca
production has directly or indirectly caused the deforestation of 1.7 million
acres in the Amazon,'' Mr. Dourojeanni, the forest engineer, wrote in his study.
The whole Amazonian rain forest is 1.7 billion acres and Peru's portion is about
190 million acres. The area of direct and indirect damage from coca production
in Peru is roughly twice the size of Rhode Island.

Stripping the Soil

Severe soil erosion is yet another problem. Normally in the natural setting, the
leaves and roots of covering vegetation keep the jungle's heavy rainfall from
eroding the topsoil on the steep slopes. But coca cultivators clear all that
protective vegetation from the hillsides. Regular weeding further disturbs the
soil. Finally, coca leaves are harvested four times a year, further exposing the
soil to the rains.

''The soil in the plots is stripped of all protection from the impact, and
superficial erosion is quickly transformed into furrows and deep gullies,'' Mr.
Dourojeanni said.

In the rush to feed the West's cocaine hunger, Peruvian farmers have begun to
ignore wisdom acquired during 7,000 years of cultivation here. Aware of the
erosion menace, Inca and pre-Inca farmers once cultivated coca bushes in
two-foot-deep trenches dug in stone-walled terraces. Shade trees and
intercropping with yucca further prevented topsoil erosion.

''Today, the ancestral practices have been abandoned with deathly results,' said
Mr. Ponce, president of the Peruvian Foundation for Nature Conservation. He and
other Peruvian environmentalists interviewed said they believed the core of the
problem lay in the United States, in reducing the demand there for cocaine.

U.S. Favors Chemical Eradication

United States officials in Peru advocate chemical eradication of the coca
fields. Last year, an eradication program came under heavy attack by the Shining
Path guerrillas. It was suspended in February.

Now the American and Peruvian scientists are testing the efficacy of two
herbicides, hexazinone, marketed by Du Pont under the name Velpar, and
tebuthiuron, marketed by Eli Lilly and Company under the name Spike.

''We have had very positive results: 95 to 99 percent of the coca bushes were
killed without major harm to the environment,'' Luis G. Moreno, deputy director
of the American Embassy's Narcotics Assistance Unit, said about Spike.

In the United States, Spike carries a label warning that the herbicide should be
kept out of lakes, ponds and streams and that it ''will kill trees, shrubs, and
other forms of desirable vegetation.'' Miss Benavides, an environmental
engineer, asserted in an inview that the team of Peruvian and American
scientists is testing eradication chemicals for their efficiency but not their
danger to the rain-forest environment.

On Aug. 2, the American Assistant Secretary of State for International Narcotics
Affairs, Melvyn Levitsky, defended the use of herbicides in a news conference
for Bolivian, Colombian and Peruvian reporters. Saying that herbicide spraying
against coca cultivation ''has to be environmentally sound,'' he added, ''We are
not going to dump unsafe chemicals in the Amazon jungle, in the Amazon region.''

''If you have looked at the amount of environmental damage that the coca growing
has done in your countries, it is absolutely astounding,'' the American official
said to his South American questioners who were linked by satellite to Mr.
Levitsky in Washington. ''Forests have been cut down. Chemicals have been used
and dumped into rivers. The environmental damage is huge.''

Fear of Lawsuits

Du Pont, when asked in the United States for comment, said it was not aware that
Velpar, which can be purchased on the open market, was being used. It said that
too much of it would have to be used to kill the coca plant to be safe for the
rain-forest environment and the company would advise against such use. Eli Lilly
said in May 1988 it would not sell Spike to the United States Government for use
in a coca eradication program.

A fear of lawsuits is reported to have led some American manufacturers to become
reluctant to allow their herbicides to be used in antidrug operations in Latin
America.

In 1985, the American and Colombian authorities sprayed 2,500 acres of coca
plants in Colombia with triclopyr, a herbicide marketed by Dow Chemical as
Garlon-4. Testing stopped when Dow refused to sell more.

Many Peruvians argue that chemical eradication, besides posing a toxic danger,
will accelerate the environmental destruction by speeding erosion.

Still another problem encountered with chemical eradication is the angry
reaction it provokes among peasants who rely on coca for their livelihood.
Demonstrations in neighboring Bolivia in 1982 forced the United States to
suspend a spraying program that used the herbicide 2,4-D.

Coca, Guerrillas and Fear

Now in Peru there is fear that local reaction could become more violent because
of the Shining Path. Walls in Tingo Maria, the largest city in the Huallaga
Valley, are daubed with slogans saying ''Down with the imperialist coca
eradication plan.''

El Diario, a newspaper in Lima that is widely regarded as the Shining Path's
mouthpiece, has denounced herbicide spraying as ''chemical warfare like that
carried out in Vietnam.''

The threat from the guerrillas presents a peculiar logistical challenge here in
cloud-covered Huallaga. Pilots have to fly low over sloping fields to spray
herbicide pellets, and crop dusters are easy prey of mountain riflemen.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of deforested hillside in the Amazon forest of Peru (J.B.
Pictures); map of Peru indicating the Upper Huallaga Valley (NYT) (pg. 12)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MEANS, NOT GOALS, SHIFT IN BASIC TRAINING

BYLINE: By DIRK JOHNSON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 2176 words

DATELINE: FORT KNOX, Ky.


A Greyhound bus rumbles along beneath the Kentucky moon, through the gates of a
mysterious new world, leaving a young man to step off into the darkness, alone.

As the bus pulls away, the journey has only just begun. This is a rite of
passage - codified, formalized, authorized - from boyhood to manhood.

A sign overhead reads, ''Welcome to the U.S. Army.''

Fort Knox is one of eight posts where this year 155,000 recruits, 22,000 of them
women, will undergo basic training, the grueling eight weeks that whip muscles
and wits into battlefield shape, a process the modern Army calls
''soldierization.''

It is a time when bravado gives way to butterflies, when a parent's pestering
seems awfully gentle after all.

''You know that scene where the sergeant goes around banging on the garbage
can?'' asked Henry Hession, an 18-year-old recruit from Greenville, S.C. ''You
keep waiting for something like that to happen.''

The typical recruit at Fort Knox is a recent high school graduate. For most,
Vietnam was a lesson in history class. For some, it was the place where their
fathers fought.

Recruits have been going through basic training since 1917, when a peacetime
Army needed to train two million civilians for World War I. Its mission remains
essentially unchanged, but the philosophy and techniques have changed markedly
since the draft ended in the early 1970's.

Soldiers from earlier times might be surprised to watch the physical training
drills in today's Army. The recruits wear running shoes, not boots. And they don
gym shorts and shirts instead of heavy fatigues. Running in boots, say Army
officials, caused shin splints and other discomforts, a notion that most
veterans do not dispute. When it comes to marching - and there is still plenty
of that - the dress code still calls for boots.

Activity on the post is regulated by a device that measures the relative heat,
humidity, wind speed and sun exposure. When conditions get too oppressive,
physical drills are modified, or halted altogether. For example, arduous
training would be halted for the day if the temperature reached 90 degrees, with
85 percent humidity, direct sunlight and little or no breeze. In the old days,
training was sometimes halted because of weather, but the extremes had to be
greater.

Aerobics to Music

Some physical training drills now include aerobic exercises set to music, but no
one wears leotards. And drill sergeants no longer announce a break by saying,
''Smoke 'em if you got 'em.'' Since 1987, cigarettes and chewing tobacco have
been forbidden during basic training.

Are there classes to help smokers quit? Yes, and they last about 10 seconds. The
drill sergeant says, ''Get rid of your cigarettes, private.'' The recruit says,
''Yes, drill sergeant.'' End of class.

The mess hall has a salad bar and piped-in music. And every spring the recruits
plant marigolds and impatiens in flower boxes outside the barracks.

There is still the ''pugil stick'' drill, where soldiers cheer for their man to
'kill' an opponent by landing a blow to a vital organ; it is about as close to
war as basic training gets. And the rifle training continues, of course, But now
a hit or miss is counted not by a scorer waving from a down-range trench but by
computer.

A more fundamental change in the Army, officials say, is the way soldiers are
treated. Drill sergeants are prohibited from hitting, shoving or poking recruits
or assaulting them verbally. Sergeants face demotion or dismissal for such
treatment.

Civility Is Stressed

The code against abuse is not entirely new, of course. Profanity was against the
rules in George Washington's days. But until recently, drill sergeants could
pretty much ignore the rules in the name of discipline.

In the old days, harassment and verbal abuse were considered tools to toughen up
the soldiers. If they couldn't 'take it' in training, the theory went, they
won't be able to 'take it' on the battlefield.

Army officials now believe otherwise. ''All the screaming you've done at a kid
in basic training doesn't do him any good when there are bullets flopping all
around,'' said Gen. Thomas H. Tait, the commander at Fort Knox. In a crisis
situation, a soldier needs to be trained and equipped. And that doesn't come
from being screamed at.''

General Tait said management consultants and sociologists, asked by the Army to
do studies, have rejected the old Army mentality. ''You can't destroy an
individual's sense of self-esteem and think you're going to build it back up,''
said General Tait.

Old-Timers Differ

Some old-timers might think today's approach is too soft, General Tait conceded.
But the physical and mental training is tougher than ever, he said.

''The youngsters today don't seem to be as physically qualified, when they come
into basic, as they were 30 years ago,'' he said.

In part, the changes in basic training grew out of a series of abuses, including
the deaths in 1976 of two recruits at Fort Jackson, S.C., who collapsed after
being forced to do push-ups as punishment in the searing heat. An Army study
group, which included sociologists and management experts, concluded in 1978
that soldiers should be treated with more dignity.

So troops are no longer rousted from their beds in the middle of the night or
forced to run around the barracks in their underwear. And Army policy instructs
officers and sergeants to address the recruits as ''private'' or ''soldier,''
and not any of the degrading, often obscene, names that generations of recruits
had to endure.

Moreover, the absence of a draft, together with the decreasing numbers of young
people, has forced the Army to strive to compete as an employer.

The recruits who will go through basic training this year are a better educated
group than ever before, with 93 percent holding high school diplomas. They have
enlisted for a multitude of reasons. Money for college ranks high on the list.
Some join out of a sense of duty and patriotism. Others come with a desire for
more discipline. More than a few see a better promise inside the military than
outside.

Greetings

Time to Be Tough, Time for Feeling

Sgt. Maj. Danny Reagor greets the new troops. For the ones who look lost, he
tells them about his recollections about his first days in basic training.

''I remember standing on the telephone, talking to my mama,'' he tells them.
''And these big old alligator tears were just a running down my cheeks.''

As the troops gather for their initial instructions, Sergeant Major Reagor asks
them about their goals.

One young man said he wanted to be a millionaire. One said he wanted to learn a
technological skill. Several said they wanted to be top-notch soldiers.

''What's your goal?'' he asked another young man.

''I want to be like my dad,'' came the reply. And Sergeant Major Reagor, the
toughened old soldier, seemed to soften.

Whatever the motivations of the recruits, the mission of the Army in basic
training remains simple. In eight weeks, before they go on to specialized
training for their individual assignments, these young soldiers must learn to
dress, fight and follow orders. They become prepared for the battlefield.

Sergeant Sets the Rules

''Ten-CHUN!'' booms Sgt. Clement Johnson, a lean man wearing a thin mustache and
a broad-brimmed hat.

His charges, newly arrived at the barracks, stand silent and still as stone.
There is a large fan in the sweltering, cinderblock room, but its blades are
still. And beads of sweat run down the faces of the nervous new soldiers.

''Any time you address me, it will be as drill sergeant,'' Sgt. Johnson barks.
''You understand?'' ''Yes, Drill Sergeant,'' comes the reply, a bit too meekly.

''I can't HEAR you!'' the sergeant shouts. ''YES, DRILL SERGEANT!'' The sergeant
paces back and forth, giving instructions in a serious, even tone. The troops
stare straight ahead.

Suddenly, the sergeant's eyes dart to one of the recruits. The young man senses
instantly that trouble surely looms ahead. Indeed, he forgot to remove his cap
when he came indoors.

The recruit's eyes widened in horror. Already, he had fouled up his military
career. Flustered, he reached for the hat, only to knock it into the air, across
the bunk bed.

But there would be no blood, no thunder, no humiliating explanation of what
mental and moral deficiencies the trainee's behavior had revealed.

Up at Dawn

Catching Up On PushUps

Well before sunrise, a platoon of about 50 soldiers, most looking fit and
energetic and, all things considered, fairly happy, is marching up and over the
steep hills that troops call Agony and Misery. They chant in unison: ''Hey
there, Captain Jack, take me down, by the track. With a weapon in my hand, I
want to be a fighting man.''

Some of the recruits, like the former high school athletes who arrive at Fort
Knox with hard bodies, seem ready to do battle. Others need a little work.

''I can tell it already,'' said Capt. Donald Bledson. ''I'm going to have some
problems with some of these guys.''

Captain Bledson supervises the 7 to 10 percent of recruits who could not meet
the minimum requirement of 12 pushups when they arrived. These soldiers have
been held back from the majority who passed the pushup test and advanced
immediately to new classes and drills. In a sort of remedial fitness class, a
dozen or so of these young soldiers struggled with the weight lifting machines,
working to build muscle, and self-esteem.

''You feel kind of like a failure,'' said Bryan Baker, an 18-year-old recruit
from Carlisle, Pa., who could manage just three pushups when he arrived. Private
Baker, who lost his hair to a traditional G.I. haircut on his first full day in
camp but did not lose his paunch, said he had worked up to six pushups, still
far short of the 20 that he must be able to do to join the others.

Sticking With It

The recruits in remedial training have three weeks to meet the standards, or
face dismissal. It is a trying time for recruits. ''Sometimes they'll say: 'I've
decided I shouldn't be here. It was all a big mistake,' '' said Captain Bledson.
''Some of them just break down into a sobbing mess.''

When that happens, Captain Bledson said he tells them to take a few minutes to
wash up, calm down and come back for a talk. That rarely fails.

By the end of training, a recruit must be able to do 32 pushups, 42 sit-ups and
run two miles in less than 16 minutes and 54 seconds. Only about 2 percent of
the recruits fail to make it through basic training at Fort Knox. Afterward,
some of those who were stragglers tell the drill sergeants, ''You really should
have made it tougher.''

Mess Hall

Loud Music But Soft Talk

The music plays loudly in the mess hall. In the old days, there was no music,
and no talking.

Each offering in the cafeteria line is marked with a card showing the calories.
And for those who arrived at basic training with a little too much padding,
there is a suggested low calorie plate.

The recruits talk quietly among themselves, and try to remind themselves not to
look into the eyes of a drill sergeant passing through. Privates are not
supposed to look drill sergeants in the eye. It's a matter of respect.

''The drill sergeant caught me eyeballing him the other day,'' said Sheldon
Perkins, an 18-year-old from Baton Rouge, La. ''He chewed me out right here in
mess hall.''

'Down to Reality'

All things considered, basic training hasn't been so bad, the troops agreed,
between bites of Southern fried chicken and green beans.

''It's really shaping me up, bringing me down to reality,'' said William
Chaffin, a 19-year-old recruit from Huntington, W.Va., who had lost 20 pounds in
four weeks. ''And that doesn't count my ponytail they cut off.''

''I'm liking it all right,'' said Private Perkins, ''but my recruiter never told
me about the gas chamber.''

The gas chamber is a drill that teaches the importance of the gas mask. Recruits
must walk into a room filled with tear gas, remove the mask and recite their
name and Social Security number. It is a reminder that the Army's mission, after
all, is fighting.

Mail Call

And Some Things Never Change

For most recruits, weary bones and bruised muscles are not the toughest part of
basic training. Rather, it's an ailment common to those who have never been so
far away, for so long a time, an ailment suffered by soldiers across the
centuries: homesickness.

''Mail call,'' shouts Pvt. Christopher Russo. It's 5:10 A.M., and the troops
hurry over to his bed.

''Letters are about the most important thing to us,'' said Private Russo. ''It
gets pretty lonely around here.'' Hakeen Harris, an 18-year-old from Laurinburg,
N.C., reread the letter from his Aunt Geneva. Private Harris conceded that he
had been down in the dumps, feeling so far from his loved ones. ''But Aunt
Geneva - she's the one who raised me up since I was a little boy - he said, 'Now
you just hang in there, 'cause you can do it,' '' he said. ''Makes me feel so
good inside.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of the mess hall at Fort Knox (NYT/G. Paul Burnett) (pg. 1);
recruits at Ft. Knox, Ky., during their morning workout (NYT/G. Paul Burnett);
Capt. John Smith checking a Botsbulb used to measure weather conditions (NYT);
Drady Polston, a civilian adviser, using a computer to monitor rifle range
scores (NYT) (pg. 18)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CAMPUS LIFE: Utah;
Burning of Flag Leads to Fight And Court Case

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 45, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 525 words

DATELINE: SALT LAKE CITY


A former vice president of the student body at the University of Utah who took
part in the burning of an American flag has accused a Vietnam veteran of
assault. The veteran, Dale H. Osborne, was found to be carrying a loaded
.38-caliber revolver.

The student, Grant Sperry, vice president of the radical Who Cares? party, was
elected last year after promising to destroy the student government. He suffered
a bloody lip after the encounter, which he described at his home here. Mr.
Osborne, 56 years old, was a prisoner of war for five years in North Vietnam.
''I'm a protester of flag burners, and he burned a flag,'' Mr. Osborne
reportedly told the police.

Mr. Osborne said he had seen a newspaper photograph of Mr. Sperry and others,
including a former president of the student body, Michael Kaly, burning a flag
in ''protest of politicians who wrap themselves in the flag.'' Mr. Osborne
reportedly told the officers that he ''blew his top.''

'You Should Die'

Mr. Sperry gave this account of the events around midnight on July 17:

''I was sitting in my kitchen talking with some friends when I saw this
middle-aged man walk into the back door. He asked me if I was the person who
burned the flag.''

Mr. Sperry said Mr. Osborne, whose right arm is disfigured, told him, ''You
should die for what you did.''

''We did not see the gun. We had no idea he had one,'' Mr. Sperry said. ''He was
just saying things like he'd been in Vietnam and had sacrificed his right arm
for the flag.''

After a brief conversation, Mr. Sperry recounted, Mr. Osborne hit him in the
face. In response, Mr. Sperry said, he ''stood up and told him I wouldn't fight
back.'' In the meantime, a friend slipped away and called the police. ''When an
officer pulled in and pulled a loaded gun out of his pocket, it just blew me
away,'' Mr. Sperry said. ''I kept muttering, 'He had a gun.' ''

Mr. Osborne has been charged with possession of a deadly weapon with intent to
assault, a misdemeanor that has a penalty of up to one year in jail.

Mr. Sperry said he hoped the case would be settled out of court. ''The man has
spent enough time in jail,'' he said. ''Plus, a jury trial would turn this whole
issue into an, 'Are you going to vote for the flag or some stupid college punk
kid who burns one?' ''

Mr. Osborne, a retired Navy commander, has been described by friends, family
members and others as a leader and inspiration to other P.O.W.'s. Shot down over
North Vietnam in 1968 and severely wounded, he was left for dead twice after
being captured. He was sent to the ''Hanoi Hilton'' prison, where he was
tortured and ordered to confess to killing Vietnamese soldiers after their
capture. He refused to sign a confession.  Mr. Osborne was released in January
1973. His honors include two Purple Hearts and the Distinguished Flying Cross.

Mr. Sperry said he did not intend to burn any more American flags. ''It's not
like, 'Gee whiz, Osborne sure taught me a lesson,' '' he said. ''One of the
major things I have a problem with is people killing and dying for the flag. It
would be hopelessly ironic for me to die for the very thing I was protesting.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

LIFE STYLE;
The Hamburger's Place In the World's Economy

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 46, Column 1; Style Desk

LENGTH: 797 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


For summer interns at the World Bank, the official language isn't German,
Spanish, Japanese or English. It's economics and politics, with a slight
sociological accent.

Despite their achievements and lofty aspirations, the interns are here to
combine pleasure with work. The variety of outlooks and the cultural diversity
at the bank make the summer exciting.

The interns seem particularly enamored of that ubiquitous American pastime the
cookout. Every weekend seems to bring another round of hamburgers, chicken and
American beer.

''European beer is better,'' lamented Filippo Cartiglia, a 26-year-old Milanese
working on a Ph.D. degree in economics at Columbia University. American beer, he
said, is ''watery.'' But on a happier note, he said he was taking salsa lessons
with several friends from the bank.

The World Bank, whose headquarters are in Washington, lends money to nations for
development projects and long-term economic improvement. The bank tries to avoid
considering the politics of a nation requesting a loan; socialist countries like
Hungary and Vietnam are members, and in the age of perestroika, even the Soviet
Union has reportedly made overtures to join.

135 Hired Each Summer

The bank hires about 135 young people from around the world - most of them
graduate students in American universities - to spend the summer as interns,
learning about the bank's lending policies and doing various professional tasks.
Interns are often assigned to a country desk, doing research and analysis that
is used to gauge a nation's long-term economic well-being.

For most interns, the program represents gainful summer employment between years
in graduate programs in fields like economics and international development; for
a few it might open the door to a staff position with the bank.

Several interns gathered on a mild evening for a cookout and to talk about their
experiences at the bank. No halfhearted discussions about how the Redskins would
fare in the coming season, nor even about the weather, were on the agenda.
Weightier subjects were in order.

A few minutes' eavesdropping showed that this was no ordinary barbecue. ''Work
hard, play hard, think hard'' seemed the words to live by. An argument raged
about the distinctions between profit-seeking and rent-seeking behavior. To a
nonspecialist, it was all but incomprehensible. To these young professionals, it
was normal workaday language.

''It's quite frequent that people discuss serious issues,'' Mr. Cartiglia said.
''Because the quality of people is so high, people want to discuss serious
questions. But sometimes it can sound nerdy.''

The bank has been criticized in recent years by environmental groups for some
projects it has financed, including the construction of a road in Brazil that
resulted in the cutting of thousands of acres of rain forest. ''As these
problems have arisen,'' one intern said, ''we are more obliged to know more
about the bank and the problems it faces.'' The intern asked that he not be
named, because the bank expects interns not to discuss specific projects with
representatives of the press.

National Rivalries Avoided

National rivalries are minimized at the bank, according to Jorge Munoz, 27, a
Bolivian who is working toward a doctorate in agricultural economics at Stanford
University. ''The bank is clearly a technical institution,'' he said. When
approaching a problem, he said, he puts political interests aside: ''I represent
the World Bank.''

Atsuko Horiguchi, 27, a Japanese studying public policy at Harvard University,
is wary of the dangers of cultural stereotyping. ''The bank is the first place
I've worked where nationality is irrelevant,'' she said.

Do the interns fear losing their cultural identities by remaining away from home
for so many years pursuing graduate studies and career opportunities?

''Being an internationalist doesn't mean you become acultural,'' said Homa
Sabet, 23, who was born in Iran and grew up in California. ''It allows me to see
the threads that bind different cultures together.

Power in Their Future

Watching them laugh and joke over weak American beer, one might forget that
these young people will someday make decisions with international implications.
To Alberto Nogales, a 27-year-old Bolivian, now is the time to begin considering
the ethical problems they will face. ''Most of these people will be in powerful
positions in their countries someday,'' he said.

Mr. Cartiglia had his own explanation of why he was hired at the bank this
summer: ''I sent in my picture.''

Another intern, 32-year-old Mark Shacter of Canada, might understand better why
Mr. Cartiglia was hired.

''Economics,'' he said, referring to his colleague's field of study, ''is the
theology at the bank.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: The theory and practice of passing the kethcup: World Bank interns at a
Washington-area cookout: Jorge Munoz, Filippo Cartiglia, Homa Sabet, Blanca
Moreno, Dan Biller and Mark Shacter (The New York Times/Andrea Mohin)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Brian De Palma Explores Vietnam and Its Victims

BYLINE: By MICHAEL NORMAN; Michael Norman, a former Times reporter, is the
author of ''These Good Men: Friendship Forged From War,'' which will be
published by Crown in January.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 13, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1383 words


At some point in their careers, most top motion-picture directors turn to the
broad canvas of war, a subject that has within it the elements - action,
character and conflict - that make for commercially successful, sometimes even
estimable, films. With his 19th movie, ''Casualties of War,'' scheduled to open
Friday, Brian De Palma at last brings his sanguineous style to the battlefield.
And the result is likely to leave Mr. De Palma in a place familiar to him - the
middle of an imbroglio.

Already, the author of the screenplay, the playwright David Rabe, is trying to
disassociate himself from the project. He is so unhappy with the way his words
were translated to the screen, he has withdrawn behind a curtain of silence. ''I
don't see how I can express it,'' is all he will say of his discontent.

Both Mr. De Palma and the film's producer, Art Linson, say the problems between
director and screenwriter stem from ''artistic differences.'' However, Mr. Rabe,
who is a Vietnam veteran and the author of a play about the war, ''Streamers,''
is known to be unhappy with the transposition of different scenes from his
original screenplay to the finished product, what he considers simplistic
dialogue and what he now sees as thinly drawn relationships between the main
characters.

What is more, even though there is a measure of justice at the end of the movie,
Mr. De Palma might take some fire from women's groups and feminists for the
film's unrelenting portrayal of rape, and from Vietnam veterans, who may see the
movie as a throwback to those years when they were cast as criminals and
cold-blooded killers.

But beyond all this, however, some critics are likely to ask questions about the
basic story itself, chiefly: What happens when a stylist like Mr. De Palma,
known for his exaggerated and violent images and his manipulative hand, attempts
to reduce to an emotional experience a paradigm of war filled with complexity
and nuance?

The central event of the film comes from a 1969 magazine article and a 123-page
book by Daniel Lang, the late war correspondent and writer for The New Yorker.
Mr. Lang's story began in October 1966, when five soldiers in the Army's First
Air Cavalry Division operating in Vietnam's Central Highlands were ordered to
conduct a five-day, long-range reconnaissance patrol to a place called Hill 192.
The morning they left, the leader of the patrol, a sergeant, stopped his men in
a village along the way, kidnapped a teen-age Vietnamese girl and took her with
them.

When they reached their destination in the hills and set up camp, four of the
men proceeded to rape her. The fifth, a 22-year-old soldier Mr. Lang identifies
as Sven Eriksson (all the characters in the book, except the victim, were given
pseudonyms), refused to participate in the ''ill-fated bacchanal'' and was
ostracized by his comrades. The next day, as the patrol encountered the enemy
and made ready to link up with its own forces, the four rapists, to cover their
crime, murdered the girl and abandoned her body in the bush.

The crimes horrified Eriksson and he reported them, first to his platoon leader,
then to his company commander. When neither man moved to arrest the wrongdoers,
Eriksson told his story to a chaplain, who went to the Army's Criminal
Investigation Division, which conducted a probe that, in March 1967, resulted in
the courts-martial and conviction of the four soldiers.

For Mr. De Palma, who said he thinks of himself basically as a storyteller, the
crime bulged with meaning and metaphor. ''It expresses the Vietnam dilemma in a
particularly dramatic and terse form,'' he said. ''The whole experience of our
involvement there is in this kind of mini-tragedy.''

Eriksson (who, fearing retribution, still lives under an assumed name somewhere
in the Midwest) is played by Michael J. Fox; Sean Penn plays the patrol leader,
Sergeant Meserve. The film, a Columbia Pictures release, was shot in 75 days
near Phuket, Thailand, in the late spring of 1988 with a crew of 67. It is
scheduled to open in more than 1,300 theaters nationwide.

In part, Mr. De Palma saw Lang's book as a story of the moral and physical
dislocation that often leads men to step outside the norms of civilized
behavior. ''It showed that we were over there basically fighting ourselves
instead of the enemy,'' Mr. De Palma said, ''that to the boys of that age the
whole world of this strange land must have been like being on a different planet
where values can get turned upside down.''

The director also thought of the book as a morality play, a story not only of
the corruption of the individual, but of society as well. ''It shows what
happens when there seems to be no moral compass at all, the whole kind of
irrationality that became the Vietnam War.''

Mr. De Palma first considered obtaining the rights to the story not long after
it was published in 1969, but discovered they were owned by someone else. Later,
when the rights became available again, the general subject of the war had
inspired so many films, Vietnam was almost a separate genre. Still, Mr. De Palma
decided to proceed, first with Paramount Pictures, then at Columbia.

''Most Vietnam movies are documentary in an episodic way, hallucinogenic or
surrealistic; you know, 'The horror, the horror,' '' he said. A simple story of
rape and murder was much more compact. ''It's a story that still brings all the
war issues to bear, and the fact that it's real makes it all the more
shocking.''

Mr. De Palma appears to follow a trend that began with Oliver Stone's
''Platoon.'' Mr. De Palma's movie captures a sense of the hard labor of combat,
the extreme discomfort of place and the pervasive fear in a war that had no
front lines.

And like other movie makers, the director and screenwriter also took liberties
with the material from the book. For example, in the climactic scene, he
substitutes a train trestle for a simple ridge line, using it as a kind of
public stage on which to re-enact the girl's murder.

At the outset of the movie, he invents a battle with a bizarre, cut-away
sequence involving a Vietcong tunnel into which an American soldier falls, and
heends the film with a ''bad dream'' scene from which the main character awakes
renewed. Lang devotes one-third of the book to the courts-martial, while Mr. De
Palma uses only a few minutes of film to depict those scenes.

Finally, there is the matter of punishment. In the film, the characters are
given stiff sentences; one, life in prison. In reality, those terms, after
appeals and reviews, were dramatically reduced. The longest any one man served
for rape or murder, according to lawyers at Columbia Pictures who reviewed the
cases, was five years.

''I felt that the reduced sentences was one more ironic turn that the movie
didn't need,'' Mr. De Palma said. ''I felt, emotionally speaking, there should
be some peace on earth for the character Eriksson and that justice was done. In
fact, they did go to prison; if we left in how fast they got out, that point
would have left the movie dramatically stalled.''

This simplification also extends to the movie's themes. The book turns on an
idea: the structure of the military, as it is embodied in the chain of command,
subverts both legal and moral justice. As long as a man followed orders, ''as
long as he stayed in line,'' Lang quotes Eriksson as saying, ''he could do
whatever he wanted.'' Clearly Lang was echoing the lessons learned during the
war crimes trials at Nuremberg after World War II. Where, he asks between the
lines, does obedience end and individual responsibility begin? Or as Christopher
Lehmann-Haupt put it when he reviewed the book in The Times in 1969, ''If the
price of defending liberty is the loss of civilization among those defending it,
is the fight worth it?''

But most movies do not turn on ideas; they turn on emotions. ''It can't be done
in a literal way,'' said Mr. Linson, the producer. ''It can only be done in an
emotional way. There is no time to give a treatise on military conduct. You have
to feel it. You have to feel the chain of command. We tried our best to present
the issues, and hopefully people will walk out and start to talk about that.
Film becomes an intellectual medium only afterward, when people begin to discuss
it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Michael J. Fox as a G. I. with a conscience, Thuy Thu Le as
the kidnap victim and Sean Penn as the patrol leader in ''Casualties of War''

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

HEADLINERS;
Higher Rank

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 110 words


Last week President Bush named as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff a man
whose combat experience has included stints at the White House and the Pentagon.

Gen. Colin L. Powell, the first black to serve in the top military post, was
President Ronald Reagan's last national security adviser and the military
assistant to Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger. Known for his cordiality
and icy self-control, he also served two tours in Vietnam and holds the Purple
Heart. Charles Powell, the principal foreign policy adviser to Prime Minister
Margaret Thatcher, once called the General the most impressive American military
man he had ever dealt with.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Gen. Colin L. Powell

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Shadow of McCarthyism Still Darkens the Land;
The Loss of China

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 277 words


To the Editor:

Tom Wicker's columns of July 11 and 25 make the point that Owen Lattimore's only
offenses were his opinions and that Mr. Lattimore was not a foreign agent or a
traitor. As proof of this, Mr. Wicker cites professors, scholars, judges,
writers and Federal Bureau of Investigation reports. Nevertheless, what is the
word, in any language, to describe the resulting catastrophic effects of a
distinguished and widely admired scholar's well-meaning opinions?

Owen Lattimore's contributions to the United States white paper on China after
World War II swayed the United States against Chiang Kai-shek and toward the
false belief, instead, that the Red Chinese ''agrarian reformers'' were
idealists. We thereupon stopped aid to Nationalist China, the Reds won, and
Chiang embarked for Taiwan.

Had we, instead, continued to support Chiang, I venture to propose that there
would have been (1) no Korean War, (2) no Vietnam War (despite the 1954 French
disaster of Dien Bien Phu) and (3) a countervailing commercial force these last
decades to Japan - with a huge and friendly Chinese market that would have
benefited all the West.

We would also have avoided the escalating puzzles of Tiananmen Square, the
divided Koreas, the future of Hong Kong (and its effect on Britain), the refugee
boat people and much worse endlessly to come.

Mr. Wicker writes that Owen Lattimore's views were ''not always wise or
defensible.'' Some of those views influenced United States policy to abandon a
friendly government, which would in turn have saved us from two futile,
demoralizing, unwon wars.

NICHOLAS C. CUMMINS
  West Chester, Pa., July 25, 1989

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Class of '72 May Have Just the Know-How for the 21st Century

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 520 words


To the Editor:

As a member of the class of 1972, I must respond to some of Clifford Adelman's
interpretations and ''insights'' into the effect on America of the choices made
by me and those of my graduating class who went to college (''On the Paper Trail
of the Class of '72,'' Op-Ed, July 22).

I am one of the many he mentions who opted for a degree in the human services (a
master's in social work), and took few courses ''necessary to maintaining a
technological economy.'' According to Mr. Adelman, my generation and I will not
be able to ''participate in the knowledge work force of the 21st century.''
About Mr. Adelman I know that his extrapolation of history is narrow and
single-mindedly focused on technology and international competition, and he is
not from the graduating class of 1972.

My peers and I were in grammar school in the hard days of the civil rights
movement (fourth grade when John F. Kennedy was killed), in junior high and high
school during the Vietnam War, the assassinations of 1968 and the Kent State
shootings of 1970. We began undergraduate school during the Watergate scandal.

Is it surprising then that we took more courses ''in ethics than in real
estate''? That we were more concerned with the study of human relationships than
with building a better oil rig? Mr. Adelman predicts that because we chose to
focus on personal health and development, instead of higher mathematics, we will
''be around longer to witness our own diminishing standards of living.'' There
is, however, more than one way to measure the quality of life, and to many of us
growing up in the 60's and 70's, the personal, interpersonal and environmental
stresses of a competitive, industrialized, high-tech world represented a lower
standard of living than we wanted for our future.

Mr. Adelman seems to discount that the valued skills in the 21st century work
force will be speaking a foreign language or providing health care and general,
not technical education. We will be ''fortysomething'' as the new century
begins. Does Mr. Adelman think us incapable of setting our own agenda as we
assume the reins of power? With the atmosphere, the land and the waters of the
earth becoming more and more ravaged and toxic, why would we follow a path of
obsessive and excessive production of the very things that have brought us to
the brink of environmental cataclysm? Wouldn't we want and need to focus on how
best to cooperate with one another politically and economically, rather than how
best to compete with one another?

In the next century, the torch will be passed to the generation born after World
War II, and those years will belong to us, just as the 20th century belonged to
those born after the Civil War. We have always known television and always flown
on jets, and perhaps it is ironic that the technology we shun has brought us
closer, physically, to our fellow beings, and indeed we know one another better.
It is my hope that we will use that knowledge to become closer in greater ways,
and that will be the legacy of the class of '72.

PETER V. LOFFREDO
  New York, July 22, 1989

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Pursuing Pipe Organs of Note

BYLINE: By CRAIG R. WHITNEY; CRAIG R. WHITNEY is chief of the London bureau of
The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 5; Page 37, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1325 words


WHENEVER I find myself in a city for the first time, I find that the best way to
start learning about its history is to visit its churches. In most countries of
Europe, historic ecclesiastical masterpieces allow a visitor, for a few moments,
to see the world the way the age of faith saw it nearly a thousand years ago.
But I have another reason. As Willie Sutton might have said, I go to church
because that's where the organ is.

The interest in pipe organs goes back to when I was a boy in Westborough, Mass.,
at a time when the Unitarian Church, whose organist was approaching 90,
prudently asked the local piano teachers whether they had any students who might
be interested in taking up the organ. I was, and eventually acquired a
respectable level of skill for an amateur. Over the years, I have served as
organist at an occasional wedding, service or concert in many a church, most
rewardingly at Grace Church in Brooklyn Heights, where we lived for six years. I
have taken shameless advantage of my work as a foreign correspondent to play
historic instruments hundreds of years old for the pleasure of hearing sounds
that musicians like Bach and Couperin heard.

Though organists and organ music have been out of the artistic mainstream more
or less since their day, specialized travel agencies do book organ tours in
Europe, and in the United States the organ crawl is a regular feature of any
regional convention of the American Guild of Organists. Such expeditions have
provided me with many unforgettable experiences. How many people, I wonder, know
that the holy water cistern in one Roman Catholic basilica in South Boston is up
among the pipes of the century-old organ, and how many priests would absolve the
sin of using it to wash the dust off one's hands? I used to watch Killer
Kowalski and Haystack Calhoun go at each other at Mechanics Hall in Worcester,
Mass., perched on the bench of the century-old Hook and Hastings organ there
before the hall became a refined cultural center and concert venue.

Even in the United States, I have heard and played pipe organs built more than
100 years ago. This is an experience that allows one to appreciate what
composers like Edward Elgar, Arthur Sullivan, Cesar Franck and Gabriel Faure,
who wrote for the pipe organs of that day - built to sound like orchestras - had
in mind. But no two pipe organs sound alike, which is part of the charm of
discovery. The largest one I have ever played, at Westminster Abbey in London,
has 7,000 or 8,000 pipes, and the smallest, up with the bats in the Saigon
Cathedral in Vietnam, still had several hundred. Things like acoustics and
resonating periods, which are many seconds long in Westminster or St. John the
Divine in New York, add eternal, spiritual overtones to the music, while in
Saigon, windows open to the cooling breezes outside let in the raucous din of
motorcycles and cyclos in the early 1970's. In 1984, when I returned, it was
much quieter, but the cathedral was full for Sunday Mass and the organ still
worked.

As an organist, I felt that being stationed in West Germany in the early 1970's
was a bit like going to heaven. Some of the most historic instruments are in
East Germany, where the Communist regime has allowed the church a small amount
of latitude in recent years. Of course, I made the pilgrimage to St. Thomas
Church in Leipzig, where Bach was Kapellmeister until his death in 1750. The
organ he played is gone, but a new one built by an East German firm, Schuke of
Potsdam, produces the clear, bright sound he would have been familiar with.

A short drive away there is an instrument Bach played on, in the magnificent
cathedral church of Freiberg, miraculously preserved from the destruction of two
world wars, with a 48-stop, 2,674-pipe organ built from 1710 to 1714 by
Gottfried Silbermann. Silvery in tone, as Bach described this and other organs
built by the Silbermann family, the instrument has a sibilant clarity that has
little in common with the mushy, dark sound of mediocre early 20th-century
instruments.

On an early November day, the inside of the church was so cold that it took me
20 minutes to warm up my fingers enough to get through Bach's Prelude in G major
- making me feel new respect for the old master, who would have had to overcome
such handicaps every day all winter long.

Martin Neary, the choirmaster of Westminster Abbey, allowed me to spend a few
minutes at the console on a weekday night after the tourists had left. What I
will always remember is not only the wonderful sound of the instrument, four
times the size of Silbermann's, but the perspective of the building from the
perch at the console in the gallery, high above the rococo tombs and monuments.
Above all that clutter, the soaring purity of that 13th-century Gothic church
emerged, bringing to life the architectural vision that the tourists heading for
Poets' Corner would not find.

Alsace has some splendid pipe organs built by Andreas Silbermann, Gottfried's
brother. One of the best preserved is in the Baroque former abbey church at
Ebersmunster, a tiny village south of Strasbourg. Having learned that it was
there, I thought the best way to play it would be to drop in on the elderly
parish priest. First he wanted to talk politics - what the Germans across the
river were up to, what I thought of the French Government of the day, etc. After
this I went up to play for an hour.

On the music stand above the three keyboards was a hand-lettered sign: ''Please
contribute toward the cost of electricity - it's only justice!'' In Silbermann's
day, I would have had to hire a man or several boys to work a treadle bellows
while I played - nowadays motors provide the wind, and I was happy to pay a few
francs' tribute. The last time I went, I found that Father Elter had gone to his
reward.

My father sensibly discouraged me from any thought of becoming a professional
organist when I was a child, and having seen since how badly paid and poorly
rewarded most organists are in our country, I have often been glad of his
advice. But if there is such a thing as reincarnation, let me go back as an
organist in the Soviet Union. The Russian Orthodox Church did not use organs, so
the instrument and the music both have a certain novelty that has only grown in
appeal under glasnost, if a sellout concert by Garry Grodberg in the Moscow
Conservatory last winter was any guide; he even had groupies.

THE East German companies have built organs in concert halls around the Soviet
Union, even in Siberia, but the greatest instrument is in the former Lutheran
cathedral in Riga, Latvia, a four-manual German instrument built by the E. F.
Walcker company of Ludwigsburg, Germany, in the middle of the last century.
Brigitte Mieze, the organist there, let me play that in 1979, before all the
thousands of pipes were taken out and restored by the Flentrop company in the
Netherlands. I wonder now whether this place, called the Dom Concert Hall, will
become a real Dom - German for cathedral - again!

But Riga brought me in a curious way back to Massachusetts. In the splendid
Methuen Memorial Music Hall, an auditorium with glorious acoustics in Methuen,
Mass., built especially for the organ, there is a Walcker instrument very much
the size and sound of the one in Riga, built by the same company during our
Civil War. The case housing the organ is worth a visit all by itself, with great
wooden giants groaning and bearing up the 25-foot-high pipes of the facade.

I have met two former heads of government who are also organists, Helmut Schmidt
in West Germany and Edward Heath in Britain. I think I can probably play better
than the former Chancellor, but the ex-Prime Minister is clearly in a class
above either of us, conducting orchestras in concerts all around Europe. His
successor, Margaret Thatcher, to whom he has been something of a nemesis in
recent months, probably wishes he'd stick with music.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Martin Neary playing the pipe organ at Westminster Abbey, where he is
director of music and choirmaster. (Jonathan Player)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FLOOR WARS

BYLINE: By Cathleen Schine; Cathleen Schine writes about popular culture. Her
second novel, ''To the Birdhouse,'' will be published in January.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 29, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3447 words


When I was a child, I used to dig for worms in the garden.

Once I found an old horseshoe too, but usually just worms and the occasional
bowlegged plastic cavalry-man. Children digging for worms in that suburban
garden today, 30 years later, would probably find no horseshoes. They wouldn't
find a toy soldier either, and if they did they would be smart to have it
appraised. For, after centuries of active duty, the rows of Scots Guards and
cuirassiers, of hussars, dragoons and lancers, Tommies, Yanks and Rebs have
retreated from toy-store shelves to collectors' cabinets. Gone, too, is the
entire culture of childhood in which the toy soldier played such a glorious
role.

Their replacements are perhaps best described by the adjective that all branches
of the childhood industry - toy, soft-drink, candy, television - seem to favor
right now: wacky. Wacky warriors are a peculiarly American invention, the
equivalent of sugar-free soda, an expression of simultaneous indulgence and
restraint. Violence has survived, flourished actually, as a theme in children's
playthings. Even frilly creatures like My Little Pony, aimed at girls, live
brutal cartoon lives. But toy soldiers are no longer acceptable in any
historically realistic form. The new warriors fight, but only on a fantasy field
of battle.

Toys tell us what we want our children to know, which is what we think is good
in the world, and worth doing: We no longer think becoming cannon fodder is
worthwhile, it is clear. It is no accident that toy Vietnam-era soldiers are
rare. After the carnage of World War I and before the patriotic fervor of World
War II, many companies cut back on toy soldiers. Britains Ltd., perhaps the most
important manufacturer in the world of lead soldiers, literally beat its swords
into plowshares - it began making farm sets.

America's post-Vietnam dismay certainly has not led to plastic farms. On the
contrary, toy weapons are more sophisticated than ever. Ominous Uzi water guns,
laser pistols, shrill and blinking, miniature missile launchers and amphibious
nuclear subs - this souped-up machinery of violence dominates play battles.

Children used to lie on their stomachs intently setting up dignified, nameless
toy soldiers in careful formations. The solemn intensity with which a child once
contemplated strategy and tactics is now often aimed at something quite
different - at weapons and vehicles for jolly creatures with goofy names, at
fitting the pieces together, making jokey toy technology work. ''Get the Good,
the Bad and the Accessories!'' is the motto of one line of the new warriors.

These two styles of play, and the contrast between the toys we trip over and the
ones our parents tripped over, suggest that childhood in America has changed,
has been wrested from the general culture and delivered to an exclusively pop
kiddie culture. Children still play on the floor, but they have entered a new
phase in the moral and psychological history of childhood.

In the 17th century, a court physician chronicled little Louis XIII playing with
toy soldiers. Uncle Toby made them in Laurence Sterne's ''Tristram Shandy'';
Robert Louis Stevenson arranged them on the coverlet in ''A Child's Garden of
Verses''; Hans Christian Andersen's steadfast tin soldier landed in the fire;
Mark Twain gave one to Tom Sawyer. They have posed for Andrew Wyeth and for
countless sentimental Victorian painters, and danced in ''The Nutcracker.'' H.G.
Wells wrote a pacifist celebration of them called ''Little Wars.'' Toy soldiers
were lined up and knocked down by Abraham Lincoln and the Nicaraguan hero
Augusto Sandino.

BUT IN THE LAST TWENTY YEARS, THE NEW WARRIORS have moved in. They have not
marched in, for most of them cannot even stand up. They have whooshed and
swooshed and vroomed in, carried by an alarming variety of supertechno-magic
vehicles.

Food Fighters, the latest arrivals, are plastic junk food dressed in helmets and
combat boots. Glaring, bug-eyed, dripping condiments, they are cartoon
grotesques, in the tradition of the good-humored, ill-mannered parody that
brought us toys like Rat-finks (hideous plastic figures of the 1960's) and Mad
Balls, a rubber ball sporting maimed facial features.

But unlike toys of the old gross-out genre, which played off a fascination with
ghoulish monsters, Food Fighters are soldiers. They include a ketchup-gurgling
hamburger called ''Burgerdier General'' and a slab of pizza pocked with cheese
bubbles and pepperoni, named ''Private Pizza.''

The toy industry's allegiance to these ''action figures'' is self-conscious and
complete. ''Fun and fantasy'' has become an industry formula, and a clever one,
too: a salve to parental anxiety, a come-on to kids. G.I. Joe is a ''fun,
fantasy-filled adventure,'' says Wayne Charness, a spokesman for Hasbro Inc.
Adrienne T. White, marketing manager of boy's toys for Mattel Toys, calls Food
Fighters ''a zany, humorous fantasy line. They're just a lot of fun.'' Fantasy
is one area on which toy stores as different as New York's exclusive Penny
Whistle Toys and Toys 'R' Us, the nation's largest retail toy chain, can agree.
''It's realism we try to stay away from,'' explained an assistant manager at
Penny Whistle. Toys 'R' Us doesn't stock realistic soldiers at all, although
less for any moral reasons than because ''they're not 'in.' ''

Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, popular toys-cum-cartoon-show, are in. They are
named Leonardo, Donatello, Michaelangelo and Raphael, and they are indeed
teen-age mutant Ninja turtles - pet turtles mutated into bipedal adolescents,
still green and still shelled, who speak in Valley slang and practice the
martial arts. The toy industry has also given us armies of superpowered robots,
apocalyptic armored attack dinosaurs and battle figures hiding inside pieces of
jewelry. What these giddy, weird warriors all have in common - what makes them
''fun'' rather than simply fun - is their complete embrace of fantasy, a fantasy
of the industry's own manufacture.

''The annual 'Fridge Fest' vegetable party was held last night, only to be
invaded by a rebel band of Refrigerator Rejects!'' reads the copy on the Food
Fighters package containing the pimply drumstick named Lieutenant Legg. ''They
were rowdier than ever, teasing vegetables, dancing with the condiments. . . .''

The most popular of all the fantasy warriors at first glance does not seem
fantastic at all. He is human, for one thing. But G.I. Joe is just as alien to
the real world as a combat hamburger. The toy first appeared 25 years ago, one
foot tall, a private dressed in World War II fatigues. Hasbro stopped making him
in 1978, but four years later, after the success of ''Star Wars'' and its
licensed toys, Hasbro brought G.I. Joe back. He returned as a small figure with
flexible arms and legs - a whole line of figures, in fact - the familiar, homely
battle fatigues now supplemented by colorful nondenominational adventure jump
suits. For G.I. Joe, named after the typical American infantryman, was no longer
really a soldier at all.

The G.I. Joe ''modern army action figures'' (as the industry calls them; the
U.S. Customs Service declares them ''dolls'' for the purpose of establishing
import duties) have no common uniform, no regiment. Men, not units, have
''rousing'' nicknames - names like Hot-Shot and Recoil. This bunch has no
obvious geographical headquarters. It says ''a real American hero'' on the box,
otherwise we would have no idea what country these fighting men represent. Their
enemy is not a recognizable national entity, either, but a group of thugs who
speak in various all-purpose Eastern European accents and belong to an
organization of no clear political affiliation (except to evil itself) called
Cobra. The Joes' weapons and vehicles are elaborate techno-fantasies, their
battle gear snazzy rather than practical.

I know the names of the Joes and their backgrounds and the sound of their
enemies' accents because I have watched the G.I. Joe cartoon on TV and read the
copy on their packaging. Many of the modern fun warriors come with dossiers
printed on the packages, often on mock file cards with dotted lines to show the
child where to cut them out. These are whole worlds the toy companies have
created, ahistorical perhaps, but complete with their own bureaucracies.

THE TRADITIONAL TOY SOLDIERS ARE, IN CONTRAST, SU-premely historical beings -
for they were created as tiny monuments to important events. Frederick the
Great's sweeping victories inspired the first mass production of toy soldiers -
flat tin troops, magnificent from the side, almost invisible when viewed
head-on. In the late 18th century, French manufacturers introduced exquisitely
detailed, fully rounded soldiers, of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic armies.
(The French were typically chauvinistic, making foreign troops only after French
boys demanded enemies for their toy troops to fight.) In the 1870's, the German
toy-soldier industry's self-confident expansion reflected Bismarck's great
victory in the Franco-Prussian War. By the end of Victorian era, an Englishman
lucky enough to be named William Britain had developed a new, cheaper method of
casting lead soldiers and achieved toy-soldier hegemony around the world. A
poster has been made of regiments of Britains's soldiers in formation on their
crimson cardboard boxes, and it is a startling sight. West Indian regiments,
Madras Cavalry, Bengal Lancers, Egyptian Camel Corps, Zulus and Boers stand as
bright as jewels, row after row, a miniature record of imperialism.

Malcolm S. Forbes, famous for his publishing millions, his motorcycles and his
hot-air balloons, is also the world's foremost collector of toy soldiers. He has
built two shrines to house his collection, one in a glistening white palace in
Tangiers, the other in New York City. The Forbes Magazine Galleries on lower
Fifth Avenue, surely the perfect realization of modern noblesse oblige, are free
and open to the public, a series of cool, dark rooms filled with toy boats,
Faberge eggs and Presidential papers - and 12,000 toy soldiers. The experience
of walking through these quiet caves of toys at rest is an extraordinary mixture
of reverence for the past and pure, ecstatic, greedy child joy.

It's almost as if these toys were designed to become collectibles. Some of them
are breathtakingly beautiful. They stand as nostalgic artifacts of childhood.
But toy soldiers also serve as mementos, indeed they were created as mementos -
of national(Continued on Page 60) hopes, brave deeds, of the boundaries of human
strength and frailty and folly.

Their popularity, their commercial viability, were directly affected by what
schoolteachers call ''current events.'' ''In the game of little wars, topicality
was all,'' writes Peter Johnson, a curator of Forbes's Tangiers museum, in his
book ''Toy Armies.'' Britains rushed out a line of toy Rough Riders after the
outbreak of the Spanish-American War, so quickly that they were first issued
wearing white helmets, as shown in military handbooks. After pictures of the war
appeared in the British press, however, Britains switched to the now famous
slouch hats.

During World War II, one American company, Comet Metal Products, made
recognition models for the armed services. In Germany, Wehrmacht security people
sometimes stopped toy makers from including certain details. ''And when a name
fell into disrepute,'' Johnson writes, the figure ''was either beheaded and
given another identity or simply recatalogued as an anonymous senior officer.''

The bond between toy soldiers and historical warfare was intimate, unquestioned.
Toy soldiers were idealized models of reality, fragments of cultural aspirations
brightly painted and gracefully posed. And it was the relationship of the toy
warrior to the real warrior that made the toy soldier infinitely interesting,
for there were always questions to be asked about what really happened - how
many, where, when, why? And there were always more places to search for the
answers. For many children in the past, their interest in toy soldiers merged
seamlessly with serious intellectual pursuits, with what was still, even in
America in the 1950's, a classical education. Battles were embedded in
literature; warriors were heroes of poems and novels. Toy soldiers were part of
toy armies, armies part of history.

In ''The Face of Battle,'' the eloquent and insistently humanitarian military
historian John Keegan writes: ''Battles belong to finite moments in history, to
the societies which raise the armies which fight them, to the economies and
technologies which those societies sustain. Battle is a historical subject,
whose nature and trend of development can only be understood down a long
historical perspective.'' This is true also for toy battles. Authenticity,
strategy, reconstruction of battles, an understanding of the social and
political forces that create wars and shape their participants - all of this was
once part of a child's play.

Several people I know turn out, to my surprise, to be former toy generals. One,
a former film critic named James Delson, has started a mail-order business
called the Toy Soldier Company, a remarkable enterprise (its catalogues read
like historical atlases) that supplies collectors not only with lead soldiers
but also with plastic figures, for which the collector's market has virtually
exploded.

''When you play with toy soldiers,'' Delson says, ''you want to have some basis
in fact. You don't want to say, 'Oh, there's a bunch of Greeks!' It's Agamemnon,
Achilles, Hector. Each year at Christmas, my Aunt Dora would take me to F.A.O.
Schwartz and ask me what I wanted and I would point to a box of soldiers. She
would always say the same thing: 'Is it educational?' Everyone in my family is
seriously socialist, pacifist, including me. I would have to convince her that
it was educational. And it was. One thing fed off another. I saw 'Ivanhoe,' I
read 'Ivanhoe,' I played Ivanhoe. By the time I got to my freshman college
classics course, my interest in toy soldiers had already taken me through the
syllabus: Julius Caesar's war commentaries, Thucydides on the Peloponnesian
Wars, Xenophon, Plutarch's Lives, Plato's Republic, the Iliad, the Odyssey. . .
.''

S INCE THE 18TH CEN-tury, European culture, like Aunt Dora, has wanted to know,
''Is it educational?'' Toy soldiers once beautifully fit the moral and
pedagogical bill: they taught the virtues of leadership, discipline, strategy,
bravery and patriotism. They prepared a man for war. They were also a part of
his larger education, little landmarks in the world and the culture he had
inherited.

But the pedagogical demands on toys have changed. Instead of nudging children
toward the realities and responsibilities of civic life as their predecessors
tried to do, today's fantasy warriors have moved on to a more modern
preoccupation: personal growth. ''The Food Fighters encourage a child to use his
imagination in ways far beyond what he can experience in real life,'' says
Adrienne White of Mattel. ''Mattel fosters the idea that toys should encourage
the ability to use the imagination. The Food Fighters line allows kids to act
out a conflict fantasy, which is something boys always seem to want to do. It's
important for character development.''

Certainly the designers of Food Fighters used their own imaginations, more
perhaps than the kid who is handed this prefabricated piece of whimsy does. As
for character development, it seems likely that a child in need of acting out a
conflict could just as easily square off a piece of French toast against a
hard-boiled egg. As one child psychiatrist I spoke to, Dr. Leon Tec, put it,
''The child will use the toy in the way the child's temperament dictates,
regardless of the construction of the toy or the parent's wishes.''

Still, the construction of these warriors is often wonderful. The G.I. Joe
figures with their articulated limbs fit perfectly in the hand. They are made
for twisting and adjusting and just holding - for fidgeting. And the jazzy
vehicles, with their hatches and trap doors, must be fitted together with great
care. They require clever concentration, which is rewarded with a gratifying
click! of success.

In the 18th century, when toy soldiers were first mass-produced, the physical
reality of linear tactics, as well as the social and political realities of
nationalism, revolution and growing militarism in Europe, made the soldiers an
almost inevitable toy. So it's not surprising that modern toy warriors belong to
small specialized forces equipped with the latest space-age supertechnology,
counter-terrorists who strongly resemble the terrorists they fight.

''Look,'' says Malcolm SET FOR ART Forbes, sitting in his cavernous office one
flight above his museum of toy history, ''one always tends to reminisce about
one's own childhood, one's own memories. And you tend to treasure what yours
were. But I don't think it's bad that these new toys are set in space and the
galaxies. It's a new age; the space age. And the world of fantasy for children
today provides exploration into so many more directions - space and high-tech.
It stretches children's minds.''

But at some level, these modern figures, robed in their technological finery,
seem terribly limited. Hasbro changes 50 percent of its G.I. Joe line each year
in its pursuit of novelty. Topicality, the old toy-soldier marketing strategy,
is novelty grounded in something real, and the real is unpredictable and
diverse. The fantasy worlds invented by the toy companies must be constantly
redesigned if they are to compete with the real world. ''Once a child gets bored
with a certain toy, that's it,'' says Hasbro's Wayne Charness. That's true, and
these fantasy soldiers have obsolescence, or boredom, built in. Because finally,
they, like their aerial assault craft and their rotating laser cannons, are
nothing more than gadgets. They don't stretch the mind as much as occupy it.

These modern ''action figures'' are individuals with their own names and
personalities spelled out on their packages. They come with vehicles of
staggering technological confidence. But once the accessories are all in place,
once the vehicles are rolling, children can do very little with the warriors
themselves. They hold the figures and run around with them. Three- and
four-year-olds contentedly skip and holler and smash rubber heads together.
Older children put them in the pilot seat; they take them out. But they quickly
tire of the toys, because this kind of play is so restricted intellectually.
There are no questions: magic provides all the answers. In the ''fun'' soldiers
fantasy world, there's no place else to go.

The stiff, uniform figure of the traditional toy soldier was limited in its
poses, but a child's play could blossom and expand. Toy soldiers, like blocks,
are interchangeable, faceless parts used to build a whole. And the world of a
toy knight, for example, is crisscrossed with paths leading to those places
conscientious parents usually have to drag their children to - operas and
ballets and paintings and poetry. Knights are actually the only traditional toy
soldiers left for kids, though they stand on the shelves of a few toy stores not
because of historical longing but because they seem remote - in a word,
fantastic.

B EYOND TEACHING KIDS TO hate war, there ought to be some way of teaching them
who are the good guys - and how to make that judgment,'' says Paul Berman, a
political writer and critic who is a veteran of toy soldiering and the author of
''Make Believe Empire - A How-To Book,'' a quiet and subversively funny guide
for children. ''Napoleon or Napoleon's enemies? For me, toy soldiers always
constituted a study in who were the good guys.'' But children playing with the
new toy warriors are no longer called upon to make that judgment.

Far more individual than the traditional toy soldiers, the fantasy warriors are
also dehumanized, and quite explicitly: They are Things, concrete jokes; the
enemy just Other Things. In their universe the moral force of battle and its
place in history has become irrelevant. When Hasbro's spokesman says, ''The play
pattern is the triumph of good over evil. With the older type of toy soldier or
with G.I. Joe, it all comes down to the same thing, and the child controls the
scenario,'' he's right. But when a battle is between two nations, the specifics
of the conflict become essential. When the battle is generic, stripped down to
''good against evil,'' then that's really all there is, isn't it? A battle, a
violent conflict, pure, simple and meaningless.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of toys for children. (Chip Simmons) (pages 28 and 31)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

RADICAL TRANSFORMATIONS

SECTION: Section 6; Page 8, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 103 words


One would think their experiences might have humbled them, but David Horowitz
and Peter Collier appear to be as certain as they once were that they possess
the truth. So, though they proudly boast of their capacity for critical
reflection, this seems to extend only to their past politics: now they have got
it right and need not concern themselves with asking hard questions.

Vietnam apparently taught them that if they were wrong, their critics must have
been right. But measuring the consequence of moral and political choices in the
world is by no means so simple.

MARC BELANGER
  Greenfield, Mass.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

RADICAL TRANSFORMATIONS

SECTION: Section 6; Page 8, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 62 words


David Horowitz and Peter Collier are opportunists of the very worst type, and
the attempt to legitimize them as ''born again'' is ludicrous. Particularly
revolting is the mental image of Mr. Horowitz ''squeezing back tears'' at the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial. He, and others of his ilk, shouldn't even be allowed
near the place.

GEORGE K. SARGENT 3d
  Chicago

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Works in Progress;
A Venerable Haunt Returns

BYLINE: By Bruce Weber

SECTION: Section 6; Page 70, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 277 words


''I HAD SEEN ENOUGH OF MY American colleagues of the press,'' says the narrator
of Graham Greene's 1955 novel, ''The Quiet American.''

''Periodically, after an engagement had been tidily finished and the casualties
removed from the scene, they would be summoned to Hanoi . . . addressed by the
commander-in-chief, lodged for one night in a press camp, where they boasted
that the barman was the best in Indochina . . . and then delivered safely and
noisily back, like a school treat, to the Continental Hotel in Saigon.''

Renowned as a haven for journalists - cynical, pampered and otherwise - during
the decades of war in Indochina, the Continental Palace was built by the French
a century ago. Generations later, it became a casualty of neglect following the
fall of Saigon (since renamed Ho Chi Minh City) in 1975. For years, the hotel, a
city landmark, lay vacant, gradually becoming overgrown by moss and weeds.

Its restoration, being carried out by Vietnamese architects working from old
drawings and under the auspices of Saigontourist, a Government agency aiming to
entice Western visitors back, was begun in 1987. Arches and colonnades are being
reconstructed and the facade repaired; Vietnamese artisans are restoring
interior details.

According to a representative of a Manila-based construction company involved in
the project, the hotel will reopen at the end of this year. The ''new''
Continental, he said, will have 71 rooms, two restaurants and a dance hall.

He estimated the total cost at between $4 million and $5 million and said that
upon reopening, the hotel will be Vietnam's most expensive. An overnight stay
will cost $60 to $120.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of the Continental Hotel in Saigon.

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

'DO YOU HAVE THE COURAGE TO CRY?'

BYLINE: By PENELOPE FITZGERALD; Penelope Fitzgerald's novel ''The Beginning of
Spring'' was a finalist for the Booker Prize in 1988.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1006 words



THE PILGRIM'S RULES OF ETIQUETTE
By Taghi Modarressi.
279 pp. New York: Doubleday. $18.95.

The pilgrim in the title of Dr. Taghi Modarressi's second novel lives in a
suburb of Teheran during the war between Iran and Iraq. This suburb is not for
the humble masses, who, as in any other war, escape most of the regulations,
accept most of the hardships and sell on the street corners whatever can't be
got in the shops. Rather, it is for the middle classes, whose men are much under
the domination of their women. They discuss their difficulties, and each other,
but not politics. What would be the use? One of them, a young woman called Heli
Bayat, is blind, her once pretty face burned almost flat; the Revolutionary
Guards have thrown acid over her because she used to go out without a veil.

In this neighborhood, when a young man is sent back from the front in his coffin
a little shrine is built for him at the corner of the street where he lived.
Meanwhile, garbage is not collected, and someone must stand in line for seven or
eight hours for the day's supplies. These people are not heroes. When an Iraqi
air raid is threatened, they prudently organize an expedition to the country.
Some of them have relatives in America. They dream of emigration.

The pilgrim, the spiritual hero of Dr. Modarressi's fine tragicomedy, is Prof.
Hadi Besharat. Professors in fiction are often humorously presented as
absent-minded, and Dr. Modarressi doesn't try to avoid this; indeed, the book
opens with Besharat forgetting to buy airmail envelopes for letters to an
American professor - letters that, in any case, never seem to arrive. His beret,
mustache and defensively rolled umbrella distinguish him from his neighbors.
''Not only in that district but in the world at large,'' we are told, ''Hadi
Besharat was unique. He knew this himself, but he didn't wish to bring it to
anyone else's attention.''

Feeling acutely the difference between what is and what should be, Besharat
creates Dostoyevskian scandals. On a visit of condolence, for example, he
infuriates the assembled mourners by trying to demonstrate the concept of
infinity. On another occasion, hazy with vodka, he drags his old friend Ramezin
the ice merchant out of bed on his wedding night to discuss an idea that has
just struck him. In addition, Besharat's domestic life is a disaster. He has
been suspended from his teaching post, and his endlessly complaining wife has
lost her career as an actress since the Revolution has banned women from the
stage. His son has a carwash business in America, but calls up only to ask for
money.

Despite his seeming obliviousness to the chaos around him, the professor is not
lost but found in the long reaches of his country's archeology, history and
poetry. Early on in his life ''the bird of his imagination grew wings.'' A true
scholar, he is able, like the Islamic Angel of Time, to know the centuries as
seconds, to enter the world of counterparts. He can remember the invading
Allies' warning leaflets fluttering over the potato fields of his family's
village during World War II, and at the same time hear the voice of the prophet
Mani, hanged some 17 centuries ago, wandering the banks of the Euphrates and
repeating the question, ''Do you have the courage to cry?''

In this majestic vision, the professor has company, for he has been lucky enough
to find a private pupil. Mehrdad Razi is one of the district's wild boys, but
with Besharat as a teacher he develops a passion for ancient cultures - such a
passion that he volunteers for the front in the hope of glimpsing the ruins of
Babylon. But Mehrdad is sent back in his coffin. There will be another martyr,
another street-corner shrine.

With a true novelist's instinct, Dr. Modarressi makes Mehrdad's bereaved mother
into a sharp-witted comedy figure. (''What do you mean?'' she snaps at Besharat
when he tells her that death is part of life. ''If that's so, I don't want
either death or life. I'll sell whatever I have left. With the money I'll buy
dollars at 60 tumans per buck and I'll go to Los Angeles.'') In contrast, the
boy's death is crucial to Besharat, turning him into a pilgrim.

At first, it seems to Besharat that he must go back to his past - to the village
of Khezrabad, in the deep country of his boyhood. Memory speaks, and Dr.
Modarressi's description of the family farmstead in the moist air of early
morning is the most beautiful lyrical passage in the book. In the silence,
Besharat can hear the hoofs of his father's horse. There is a smell of fresh
grass and of the fire made of dried dung that warms the bread oven. But now, in
wartime, there is no chance of returning to Khezrabad. Instead, Besharat
resolves to move into the future. At the age of 57, to the inconvenience,
annoyance and distress of the whole district, he presents himself at the
headquarters of the Revolutionary Guards and applies for permission to go to the
front.

It is not a reviewer's business to reveal how a literary journey ends,
particularly in a story as subtle as this one, where seemingly familiar
characters act in quite unexpected ways. Suffice it to say, however, that
Besharat, although shaken, doesn't lose faith in his ideas. Instead, the
conversion takes place in his genial American correspondent, Professor Humphrey,
a friend and former colleague who respects Besharat as a scholar but has always
treated him as something of a joke. At a very late stage, after years of
silence, he finally replies to Besharat's letters, telling him that he has
visited the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington and seen his own son's name,
among 58,000 others, on the wall. Now, for the first time, he understands what
Besharat had tried to explain to him when they talked long ago of ancient
Persian poetry: how a birth can be made out of a death. As he reads this,
Besharat feels first joy, then calm, ''as if a storm were slowly losing its
power and a sea breathed in darkness.'' And so this elegant and beguiling novel
pays tribute to innocence.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Magazine Writer Enters the Ring

BYLINE: By MARIA EFTIMIADES

SECTION: Section 12NJ; Page 8, Column 3; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1296 words


WILLIAM PLUMMER makes a wonderful guest at a dinner party. He can speak
informatively about the breakup of Sean Penn and Madonna. He has walked the Inca
Trail. Interested in the psyche of a Vietnam veteran who hunts panthers in the
Everglades? Ask Mr. Plummer.

As a senior writer for People magazine, Mr. Plummer is seldom at a loss for
stories. His job evokes little sympathy - after all, a writer who gets paid to
follow a baseball scout in the Caribbean has it pretty good.

So why would Mr. Plummer, a 44-year-old Montclair resident and father of two,
spend almost a year going to an East Harlem gymnasium and sparring with muscled
men half his age, often stumbling home sore and bruised?

Granted, his research into amateur boxing led to a book - ''Buttercups and
Strong Boys'' (Viking Press, $17.95) - but surely there must be easier topics to
explore.

To understand Mr. Plummer's fascination with boxing, it is necessary to know
about Kid and Mushy.

Back when he was growing up in Cranford, Mr. Plummer often visited his maternal
grandfather, a lean, silver-haired man who liked beer, deep-sea fishing and the
Friday night fights.

Nicknamed Kid, Mr. Plummer's grandfather was known to crouch on the coffee table
during a particularly lively televised boxing match, belting imaginary opponents
with a punch certain to have knocked out his rival, had he been in the ring. Kid
also took his young grandson to the museum at the Manhattan office of The Ring,
a boxing magazine, pointing out the very gloves Joe Louis used to pummel Billy
Conn.

The Jab and the Prance

And of course there were the stories. Pulling out boxing cards emblazoned with
photographs of Peter Jackson, Jersey Joe Walcott, Jake Kilrain or Joe Gans, Kid
could recall that amazing right jab, that delicate prance, those details that
made fighters almost ethereal to his young grandson.

Years later, in the late 1970's, Mr. Plummer began buying copies of Boxing
Illustrated and The Ring magazines at a West Side newsstand run by a man called
Mushy, a former boxer. It was Mushy who sent Mr. Plummer to his first Golden
Gloves Tournament shortly after the journalist admitted he had never actually
attended a live match.

Although Mr. Plummer tried to downplay the crime - he had watched many a fight
on television - Mushy would not hear of it. Mr. Plummer recalled the harangue:
''Mushy said: 'Television! You can't compare a real fight and TV! You know what
Arthur Donovan said? It's like the difference between watching a dame get kissed
and kissing her yourself.' ''

At the Golden Gloves, Mr. Plummer spotted Micky and Negra Rosario, the feisty
couple who have trained hundreds of young fighters in a cramped gymnasium on
112th Street and First Avenue. The Rosarios, with their love of boxing and
dedication to the young men they trained, became Mr. Plummer's window into the
world of amateur boxing.

In his book Mr. Plummer tells the stories of those young men who train to win.
Ignoring swollen knuckles and enduring endless workouts, they strive to find a
way out, to gain respect and success amid the poverty and despair of the ghetto.

For Mr. Plummer, writing ''Buttercups and Strong Boys'' was an opportunity to
combine his skills as a feature writer with his love for boxing. It was not the
first time. Since he joined People seven years ago, Mr. Plummer has profiled
Mike Tyson, Gerry Cooney and Marvin Hagler.

''I've been able to use People reporting to inform myself on boxing,'' Mr.
Plummer said. ''I can pay my bills and enhance my familiarity of the subject.
When I get an interest in something, I like to try to surround myself with it.''

Like in 1968 when he attended Colgate University on an ice hockey scholarship.
In those days his interest had little to do with books and grades.

''I had a rather unproductive tenure at Colgate,'' Mr. Plummer said.

New Customs on the Ice

But at least his hockey playing improved. Competing against Canadian teams, he
said, was a lot different from the local leagues in New Jersey. At Colgate, Mr.
Plummer picked up new customs about fighting on the ice. Quickly.

''The first time I went by someone and he poked me in the ribs, I threw down my
gloves,'' he said. ''Big mistake. The guy must have thought, 'What a jerk.' He
picked up his stick and - '' Mr. Plummer swatted the air for effect. He narrowly
missed knocking over his drink. ''Sixty stitches,'' he said. ''After that it
became an event - 'Let's go down to the rink and watch Plummer let blood.' It
was fun being a celebrity on campus.''

By sophomore year, though, it was not fun. He left Colgate and traveled in
Spain. A 1.9 grade point average was not exactly an incentive to stay in school.

''I didn't know how to change my life and stay in school at the same time,'' Mr.
Plummer said. ''I was a late bloomer.''

Shortly after he returned from Spain and finished school, majoring in English,
he began writing for The Bergen Record and then The Elizabeth Daily Journal.
From 1973 to 1975, he taught freshman English composition at Rutgers University
and was then accepted on probation by the master's program (''I was ready now,''
he said), eventually earning his degree in 1978.

Book Reviewer Turns Author

In addition to serving as a book review editor for Quest magazine for five
years, Mr. Plummer taught English at a junior high school in Harlem for a year,
was a book reviewer for Newsweek and wrote his first book, ''The Holy Goof: The
Life of Neal Cassady,'' before he joined People in 1982 and began work on
''Buttercups and Strong Boys.''

As a People writer, Mr. Plummer wrote the cover story on Jessica McClure, the
little girl who was rescued from a well, and co-wrote the cover story on the
downing of a Korean airliner by a Soviet fighter plane.

But it is the stories he suggests himself - ones of parachute jumpers, mountain
climbers or panther hunters - that he most enjoys.

''I've always been interested in things I wouldn't do myself,'' he said. ''I try
to write about fear and conquering fear. How can Evel Knievel's son try to outdo
his record when you saw what happened to his father? What compels people to do
these things? I want to know what they have that I don't. It may be because I'm
a fairly moderate person.''

Moderate? Isn't this the man who sparred with a fighter called the Shark during
those months at the Rosarios' gym? Note Mr. Plummer's description of himself in
a passage from ''Buttercups and Strong Boys'': ''Then it happened. I don't know
how exactly, but the next thing I knew I was raging across the ring, swinging my
arms wildly and scattering not just my sparring partner, but those of my gym
mates leaning against the ropes.''

These days Mr. Plummer is working on his first novel, a crime story with, you
guessed it, a boxing twist. His days at People are flexible, enabling him to
work on the book. His job provides other perks as well.

In Las Vegas in 1988 he interviewed several male athletes (''incredible physical
specimens,'' he said) for a People story about the coming Olympics. A group of
would-be starlets gathered at poolside, and Mr. Plummer witnessed the power of
the People name.

''Someone mentioned that these guys are Olympic hopefuls and this guy is a
writer from People magazine, and it was like a wave at a stadium,'' Mr. Plummer
said. ''They all undulated toward me.''

And that is not so bad. Interviewing interesting people, traveling and writing
books are almost as satisfying as that feeling Mr. Plummer gets shortly after he
slams the puck into the goal.

Indeed, he still plays hockey. Although Mr. Plummer says he is no longer a
''goon on the ice,'' he remains one proud member of the Chicken Delight Red team
that barnstorms through New Jersey and points north.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of William Plummer at work (NYT/Marilyn K. Yee)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Memorial Underscores Division Among Firefighters

BYLINE: By TESSA MELVIN

SECTION: Section 12WC; Page 1, Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1375 words


A BITTER dispute has erupted over a memorial to honor Westchester's 47 fallen
firefighters. To resolve the matter, it may be necessary to build two monuments,
separately honoring the county's professional and volunteer firemen who have
died while fighting fires.

''A memorial is a noble cause,'' Duncan MacRae, president of Local 274 of the
Professional Firefighters Association in White Plains, told Andrew P. O'Rourke
at an emergency meeting the County Executive called this month to resolve the
issue. ''But let us honor our dead in our own way.''

''I can do just as good a job as you can,'' Charles N. Faillace, chairman of the
committee to build a joint memorial, responded. ''It only takes one fire to kill
you,'' added Mr. Faillace, who is a member of the Somers Volunteer Fire
Department.

A Plea for Understanding

When the meeting was over, Mr. O'Rourke noted what he called ''a lot of
misunderstanding'' between the county's firefighting professionals and its
volunteers. He asked for ''a low-key committee, so you can understand each other
a little better - if nothing else.''

The dispute over a monument is the latest skirmish in a decades-long feud
between the county's 1,200 professional firefighters and its estimated 10,000
volunteers. Although most of Westchester's fire departments are volunteer units,
18 of the 60 departments are staffed by or include professional firefighters.
Each of the cities in the county depend on professionals.

Both sides agree that the real issue in the disagreement has nothing to do with
the monument. The professionals say the volunteers are poorly trained and
threaten their jobs. The volunteers say they are providing a vital service to
their communities that the county's smaller municipalities otherwise could not
afford.

Mutial-Aid Plan Is Criticized

Professional firefighters say they particularly resent the county's mutual-aid
plan, which controls the manner in which other communities are called upon to
help fight fires. Under the mutual-aid system, the fire chief at the scene of a
severe fire may call for help from volunteers in neighboring communities. The
mutual-aid plan, the professionals say, allows municipalities to reduce overtime
and increase layoffs.

Volunteers say they provide a badly needed service for the majority of
Westchester communities. ''It's a union issue, pure and simple,'' the chief of a
volunteer department said last week. ''More overtime and more people mean more
money in the union coffers,'' said the chief, who asked that his name not be
used.

His volunteers and those from several neighboring towns will no longer respond
to mutual-aid calls from Yonkers, he said, since a strike by the professionals
in that city in l982. When the volunteers attempted to enter the city during the
strike, to fight a fire the chief termed suspicious, they found the roads
barricaded. Volunteers were ''roughed up'' and vowed never to return, the chief
said.

Denying professional firefighters had ever interfered with volunteers on their
way to a fire call, Tony Pagano, president of Local 628 of the Professional
Firefighters Association in Yonkers, said: ''In Yonkers, the most critical point
in fighting fires is the response time. By the time the volunteers arrive, it's
over 20 minutes, and lives can't wait 20 minutes.''

At the meeting, Mr. Pagano said that ''there was no recognition of volunteers
among professional ranks,'' and he added, ''I will not stand next to a monument
that has the name of any other than professionals, and my membership agrees.''

''I'm a trade unionist, and I have a family,'' Walter Ferguson, district
representative of the New York State Professional Firefighters Association,
added. ''If you act in a way that interferes with my ability to earn a living, I
resent that.''

At a meeting earlier this spring, attended by 16 of the 18 Westchester chapters
of his union, Mr. Ferguson said, the group had voted unanimously not to
participate in the proposed memorial. ''The joint names did not sit well with
the brothers, and they told me to get out,'' Mr. Ferguson said.

The Westchester Fallen Firefighters Memorial Monument Committee had
representatives from the area's four leading firefighting organizations - both
volunteer and professional groups. It had been working for three years to build
a joint memorial to the 47 men killed fighting fires in the county since a
record was first kept in l907. Twenty-five of the dead were volunteers, Ray
Rush, the county's Fire Coordinator, said. Twenty-two were professionals.

A Model of the Sculpture

The committee of volunteer and professional firemen had commissioned an
eight-foot bronze sculpture of a fireman helping a comrade. They planned to
display the statue at the Fire Training Center in Valhalla. They had already
received a model of the proposed sculpture from the artist, Julia Balk, who
created Westchester's Vietnam Veterans' Memorial now on view in Lasdon Park in
Somers.

When the professional members on the committee announced they were withdrawing,
Mr. O'Rourke offered to mediate. ''You've been candid and forthright,'' Mr.
O'Rourke told the group gathered at the fire training center near the end of the
meeting, which the County Executive conceded had been ''abrasive.''

''The battle lines have been drawn on the monument,'' Mr. O'Rourke said, ''and
it's clearly not the real issue.''

Last week, a member of the monument committee, Roger Schacklinscky, who is also
president of the Westchester County Volunteer Firemen's Association, said plans
to build a memorial for all of the county's fallen firemen were continuing. He
said committee members had received phone calls from professional firemen urging
them to proceed.

''We are not backing down,'' Mr. Schacklinscky said. ''The monument is going to
include everybody. I have a philosophy: When you are fighting a fire you don't
look at the man next to you to see whether he is paid or volunteer. You just
figure that he's there for the same reason you are - to protect life and
property.''

An Issue Beyond the County

Both the professional and volunteer firefighters represented at the meeting said
last week that they would agree to Mr. O'Rourke's request to form a committee to
discuss their differences. But they expressed doubt that the county could
resolve issues that extend well beyond Westchester's borders.

On both the county and state level, volunteer fire departments are having an
increasingly difficult time replenishing their ranks, while municipalities are
unable to accept the cost of replacing them with professional units. Earle T.
Mousaw is president of the New York State Volunteer Firemen's Association, whose
110,000-member organization experienced a decline of 10,000 in its ranks in the
last five years.

''There's been a heck of a change in society,'' he said, ''and people are
working two jobs. When they have a free moment, they don't necessarily want to
give it to the Fire Department.'' While the organization has stepped up
recruitment efforts and is reaching out to women, Mr. Mousaw said, a growing
number of Federal and state safety and training regulations are making the job
more difficult.

Municipal Budgets a Problem

James McGowan, president of the New York State Profession Firemen's Association,
said his 120 paid departments were well aware of the volunteer department's
problems with recruitment and training. But professional firefighting
departments have not increased around the state, he said. ''Municipal budgets
are our major problem,'' Mr. McGowan said.

Paid departments in the state protect 80 percent of the population, Mr. McGowan
said, adding that only one-third of the $1 billion of taxpayer money spent
statewide each year on fire protection goes to the professionals. ''Suburban
counties, especially Westchester, Nassau and Suffolk, are buying all kinds of
elaborate equipment for their departments, but who's manning these fancy red
trucks?''

Last week, Mr. O'Rourke waited for the two sides to send him suggestions for a
committee to discuss these and other issues. ''Maybe they'll understand each
other better,'' Mr. O'Rourke said of his effort, ''although they may not like
each other better.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of a model of Westchester's firefighter's memorial; Duncan MacRae
with County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke; Charles N. Faillace at a town meeting
(pg. 1); a Buchanan Fire Department Volunteer during a training session in
Valhalla (pg. 10) (NYT/Joyce Dopkeen)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT;
NONFICTION

BYLINE: By DAVID WALTON

SECTION: Section 7; Page 17, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 315 words



IMAGINING THE PAST: East Hampton Histories. By T. H. Breen. (Addison-Wesley,
$19.95.) ''We are what we were even when we most passionately reject our own
history,'' says T. H. Breen. The Long Island seaside community of East Hampton
would seem the last place in America in danger of rejecting its past. ''Share
Our Traditions,'' reads the sign in front of a local real-estate agent, and
everywhere - in the style of its new homes, in the local shops, in the periodic
wars against developers that flare up - can be read the persistence of the past,
or, as Mr. Breen sees it, of an image of the past. Brought in as ''Resident
Humanist'' to work with the East Hampton Historical Society, Mr. Breen, a
professor of American history at Northwestern University, has written less a
history of East Hampton than ''a book about history in East Hampton.'' Contrary
to the pastoral vision of self-sufficient yeomen advanced by town historians,
Mr. Breen traces in the growth and depletion of the local whaling industry a
prosperous and often troubled commercial history. The author's deductions - for
example, his demonstration of how lawsuits work as a means of establishing
social standing in a community - are an interesting behind-the-scenes
construction of how historians work. He is particularly adept at drawing broader
applications from seemingly narrow issues. ''A little village had proven unable
to control the petty animosities among its inhabitants that surely occurred in
other towns,'' Mr. Breen observes, after surveying a 17th-century attempt by the
town to align itself with Connecticut rather than with New York. ''This is a
disturbing thought for anyone who believes that individuals in small groups,
expressing their wills through democratic procedures and having access to
resources sufficient to maintain their families, can coexist in peace and mutual
understanding.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 14, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

An Author and His Protagonist Have Their Roots in the South

BYLINE: By MERVYN ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 11, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1311 words


Nailed to the living-room wall of Allan Gurganus's Upper West Side apartment are
several dozen masks, part of a collection the novelist and short-story writer
began when he was 12 years old. There are Asian masks, African masks, a mask of
Charlie Chaplin and a mask of Howdy Doody.

''They're enormously good company,'' Mr. Gurganus says. ''They don't talk back.
They smile. I read my work aloud repeatedly, and it's always nice to have an
audience to declare to.'' Then he points to one, a mask from the Dan tribe in
Africa. ''This was given to me by a poet,'' he says. ''She told me I was going
to need it. It's of a holy man who can see through other masks but cannot be
seen through himself. She said, 'Now that your novel is coming out, you need
this.' It was a very thoughtful gift.''

Mr. Gurganus's novel, his first, is called ''Oldest Living Confederate Widow
Tells All,'' and Alfred A. Knopf is publishing it to much critical praise. It is
718 pages long; it took the 42-year-old Mr. Gurganus seven years to write, and
it emerges from the lips of 99-year-old Lucy Marsden, who lives in a rest home
in Falls, N.C. Her tale begins before she was born, when her future husband -
they married in 1900, when he was 51 and she 15 - goes off to war, and she
relates, in detail both painful and comic, much of what there is to know about
the two of them, their nine children and life in the South over the last
century.

''I had been a short-story writer,'' says Mr. Gurganus who, like Lucy, hails
from North Carolina - Rocky Mount, in his case - and whose work has been
published in The Atlantic, The Paris Review and The New Yorker. ''It was 1981. I
was working on a novel. And I put that novel aside one day after I read a
newspaper article. The story said there were 19 women still on the pension
payroll who were Confederate war widows. They were women who very early in their
lives had married very old men. The Yankees granted the Southerners pensions in
the 1880's, and suddenly all these guys who had been considered major losers had
money, and families married off their young girls to the gentlemen, who
automatically in their imaginations became elevated from privates to captains.''


'So Evocative for Me'

''In the article,'' he continues, ''was a phrase that stopped my breath: 'oldest
living Confederate widow.' It was so evocative for me. I had just moved from the
South. I had been living in New York for maybe four years, and I found that as
is the case with many exiles, I could only write about my region when I had left
it and felt safe and sure in another place. I was at Yaddo, the writers' colony,
and I was on the way to the swimming pool after having put in a perfectly decent
day's work on the other novel, and I ran upstairs and typed for four hours, and
the result was 30 pages, which are still the first 30 pages of the novel.''

His Southern background, he says, has been crucial both in his decision to
become a writer and to write this novel.

''The luckiest person in the world,'' he says, ''is somebody who is born into a
small, shabby-genteel town on a major railway connection with 24,000 souls and a
bird sanctuary and whose grandfather owns a farm and whose father owns a
business -whose family is mildly prosperous but not rich, which means you can
leave the town. People who were rich never got away because their parents
blackmailed them into staying.

''It was the kind of town where if I was misbehaving on the street, people I had
never met before would come up and say, 'You have the Gurganus nose, and I know
exactly who your grandparents are, and they would be ashamed of your setting off
firecrackers, and put that down this instant.' And we obeyed.

''People have asked me about the 19th century, and how I knew so much about it.
And the fact is I really grew up in the 19th century, because North Carolina in
the 1950's, the early years of my childhood, was exactly synchronous with North
Carolina in the 1850's. And I used every scrap of knowledge that I had.''

A Secret Submission

Another great influence on his life, he says, was the late novelist and
short-story writer John Cheever, who was both his teacher and friend. When Mr.
Gurganus was Mr. Cheever's student at the Iowa Writers' Workshop, Mr. Cheever
secretly submitted one of his student's stories to The New Yorker. The first Mr.
Gurganus heard of it was when Mr. Cheever told him the story had been accepted.
Mr. Gurganus himself has followed in Mr. Cheever's footsteps as a teacher,
having worked at Duke, Stanford, the Iowa Writers' Workshop and Sarah Lawrence
College, from which he is now on leave.

''I think part of John's influence is that he was the best company I've ever
experienced,'' Mr. Gurganus says. ''To walk around in the world with John was to
feel that you've either just been born or just landed from another universe.

''The best example is this: I was 24 years old; we would go into a restaurant;
we would sit down, and the first thing John would say was, 'Left to right or
right to left?' And I would say, 'Left to right,' and we would start, table by
table, the two of us in turn, describing the people at each table in narrative
terms, describing the significance of this meal, placing them in a story, up to
and including our waiter.

''And most of the meal would be spent in a kind of rivalrous and delightful set
of invented narratives, which might then involve moving the story of one table
into the story of another table. And if my stories were more interesting or
inventive than John's, he was absolutely ready and willing to admit it and
delight in it.''

Slavery and Vietnam

Mr. Gurganus says that a major theme of his novel is the moral horror of both
slavery and war. The theme has been on his mind, he says, since he was 18 years
old, when he found out that his ancestors had owned slaves and when he was
drafted and sent to Vietnam.

''Nobody ever talked about having been slave owners,'' he says. ''There were
people in the town with our name who were black people, but I somehow never made
the connection until one day I saw this 18th-century document listing the number
of slaves who had been owned by people with my own name. I made a connection
between the slaves and my own circumstances, because I had been drafted against
my will to fight in Vietnam. And the helplessness of the slaves and the despair
of being corraled and being shipped by boat to a territory I didn't feel I
belonged in to do work for people I had no respect for, made me feel a
tremendous identification with the slaves that my great-grandparents had
owned.''

But the novel, he says, is also ''a celebration of the durability of the self.''

''I'm a great admirer of Primo Levi's work,'' he says of the late Italian writer
who was a survivor of Auschwitz. ''It's always mind-boggling, the idea of how
much pain people can endure and still come back from the edge with a sense of
humor, with this tremendous animal desire we have to get on with life.

''Lucy, through everything, comes through. She's the last voice. She's the last
Confederate widow.''

'Cosmic Vindication'

Speaking of the last Confederate widow, Mr. Gurganus says that he read an
article in The New York Times recently about the real oldest - and last - living
Confederate widow, Daisy Cave of Sumter, S.C., who lives in a rest home and is
believed to be 97 years old.

''I adored it,'' he says. ''I must say I saw it as a cosmic vindication. But on
the other hand, some of the publicity people at Knopf have suggested that I go
to the rest home where she lives and present her with a copy of my book. And I
can only say that if I were Daisy Cave, and some young whippersnapper came down
to deliver a 700-page book telling me what the oldest living Confederate widow
thought and felt, I would use the book as a doorstop. At best.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Allan Gurganus in his apartment on the Upper West Side in Manhattan.
(The New York Times/William E. Sauro)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 14, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Representative Mickey Leland, 44, Dies in Crash

BYLINE: By LISA BELKIN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1170 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, Aug. 13


Representative Mickey Leland, whose burned and crumpled plane was found
scattered on a forested mountainside of Ethiopia today, died as he had lived,
trying to end world hunger.

He was 44 years old and one of the most prominent black legislators in Congress,
where he served for 10 years.

In a statement released by the White House, President Bush said, ''Mickey Leland
and the other members of his traveling party, both Americans and Ethiopians,
were engaged in a noble cause - trying to feed the hungry.''

''His was a mission,'' House Speaker Thomas S. Foley said, ''which, as we all
know all too well now, was fraught with potential danger. None of us will forget
the dedication and commitment that took Mickey and his colleagues on the trip.''


'A Skeleton of a Person'

The Texas Democrat often said his commitment to ending hunger was rooted in a
trip he had made to the Sudan in 1984, where he had watched a young girl die
before his eyes.

The child ''looked to be about 70 or 80 years old,'' he said in a 1985
interview, ''a skeleton of a person with a thin layer of brown skin on her, who
had just a faint breath of life in her.''

Mr. Leland said he turned to ask a relief worker about the girl and, ''While I
was talking to him, she died. I can see her face right now. Every day I see her
face.''

Mr. Leland visited Ethiopia and the Sudan five more times. The trip that ended
with his death was his second there this year. He often met with Lieut. Col.
Menguistu Haile Mariam of Ethiopia, whose Marxist government has generally not
been friendly with the United States.

Visited Cuba and Vietnam

Africa was not the only place he visited. He met with Fidel Castro a dozen
times, saying that although he disagreed with President Castro's ''fundamental
ideology,'' he respected the Cuban leader ''for his intellect.'' On a visit to
Cuba last October, Mr. Leland negotiated the release of three political
prisoners and their families.

Last July, Mr. Leland flew to Vietnam and returned with three children whose
father had fled Vietnam and moved to Houston.

Mr. Leland first ran for public office in 1972, when he was elected to the State
Legislature. With his afro haircut, platform shoes, leather shoulder bag and
vibrantly colored dashiki, he was a jolt to the conservative Texas body.

After the election, Mr. Leland visited Africa for the first time.

''I got lost in Africa,'' he said in a 1972 interview with Seeds magazine,
produced by an anti-hunger organization. He said he had expected to spend three
weeks in Tanzania, but instead spent three months, and became so absorbed in
what he was doing that he failed to call home and tell his family of his change
in plans.

''Nobody knew where I was,'' he said in the Seeds interview. ''My mother thought
I was dead. But the fact is that I got totally absorbed in Africa.''

Penchant for Unusual Causes

He was elected to Congress in 1978 to represent the 18th Congressional District,
filling the seat vacated by Barbara Jordan when she retired. By that time he had
switched to business suits. But he had not abandoned his penchant for unusual
causes.

One of the first programs he founded as a Congressman sent poor, black
teen-agers from Houston to Israel for six weeks to learn about Jewish culture
and heritage, as part of an effort to bridge the gap between blacks and Jews.
Mr. Leland, himself a Roman Catholic, once bicycled through Israel and often
quoted the Talmud, saying, ''If you save one life, you save the whole world.''

It took five years to implement another of his ideas: the creation of the House
Select Committee on World Hunger. He faced opposition from some in the House who
argued that yet another select committee was a waste of money, and by others who
saw it as an infringement on the turf of existing committees.

But in the spring of 1984 the committee was formed, after Mr. Leland rallied
support from hunger groups and celebrities, and the Texas Congressman became its
chairman. It was near the height of the Ethiopian famine, and the United States
$800 million in aid the following fiscal year to Ethiopia.

Chastised TV Networks

Mr. Leland also served twice as chairman of the Congressional Black Caucus. And
as a member of the Energy and Commerce subcommittee on telecommunications, he
chastised television networks for a lack of black representation on and off the
air. He specifically asked the producers of the show ''Dynasty'' why there were
no black actors, and, a year later, Diahann Carroll and Billy Dee Williams
joined the show.

Mr. Leland had his share of critics in Congress and in Houston, most of whom
said he was too liberal and that he should concentrate on the hungry people in
the United States before he tackled the problems of Africa.

In April, after a trip to the Sudan, he responded to such criticism by saying:
''I am as much a citizen of this world as I am of my country. To hell with those
people who are critical of what I am able to do to help save people's lives. I
don't mean to sound hokey but I grew up on a Christian ethic which says we are
supposed to help the least of our brothers.''

Popular at Home

But he remained popular in his home district, where he supported food and
housing programs for the homeless. He won re-election to his Congressional seat
five times, each by overwhelming majorities. In 1988 he received a strong
primary challenge from Elizabeth Spates, a school board member in Houston, who
charged that he had lost touch with his constituents while seeking national
exposure.

For that, he apologized. ''There's people I've not touched for a long time,'' he
said at the time. ''I have been on the road quite a bit.''

Mr. Leland supported Walter Mondale in the 1984 Presidential primary over the
Rev. Jesse Jackson, angering many blacks. But he and Mr. Jackson later made
their political peace. In 1988 Mr. Leland was a top fund-raiser for the Jackson
campaign. On a campaign stop in Houston, Mr. Jackson, praised ''the constant
stream of humanity in Mickey Leland.''

The Congressman was born George Thomas Leland in Lubbock, Tex., on Nov. 27,
1944, but never used his given name. Instead he went by Mickey, a nickname
coined by his grandfather.

His father abandoned the family soon after, and his mother, a short-order cook
who went on to become a teacher, moved the family to Houston. Mr. Leland spent
most of his earlier life living in Houston's impoverished Fifth Ward, which he
eventually came to represent in Congress.

Mr. Leland graduated from Texas Southern University in 1970, with a degree in
pharmacy, a profession he practiced and taught for two years before entering
politics.

He is survived by his wife, the former Alison Walton, an investment banker whom
he married in 1984. Mrs. Leland is two months pregnant. He is also survived by
his mother, Alice Rains, and a 3-year-old son, Jarret David.

Memorial services are being planned at churches throughout Houston, and funeral
arrangements have not yet been made.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Mickey Leland (Agence France-Presse)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 16, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
Arousing the Old Populism For a New Antiwar Protest

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 19, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 572 words


''Rude Awakening,'' opening today at the Embassy 3 and other theaters, is
hapless but endearing, much like its principal characters. They are a small
group of 1960's flower children who come together in the 1980's, determined to
reawaken the old populism that began as protest to the Vietnam War.

Petra (Julie Haggerty), an artist whose method was throwing paint at photographs
two decades ago, has become a successful downtown fashion designer. Sammy
(Robert Carradine), a former writer, now runs a chain of tanning salons. Ronnie
(Louise Lasser) has turned her hippie crash pad into a chic East Village
restaurant.

Acting as the catalysts to these former protesters are Hesus (Cheech Marin) and
Fred (Eric Roberts), who have spent the last 20 years living in a jungle commune
in the Latin American country of Managuador. They have accidently come upon the
plans for a United States invasion and return to alert the world to the danger
of the ''new'' Vietnam.

The idea is a good one, but ''Rude Awakening'' is otherwise short of ideas. It
is a collection of occasionally funny scenes that play as black-out sketches.

In one, Buck Henry and Andrea Martin are mercilessly polite as they interview
Sammy and his wife, who have applied for a co-op. When Mr. Henry brags that the
neighborhood is secure, and tells why, someone says, ''You mean some poor people
lost their low-cost housing just because you called your Congressman?'' Mr.
Henry says: ''Yes. The system works!''

Mr. Marin's Hesus is fascinated by the entire concept of tanning salons. ''How
do you get the sun on just the people who pay?'' However, most of the movie is
devoted to satire so fuzzy that ''Rude Awakening'' cannot support its very
peculiar ending.

The characters are more interesting than their circumstances, particularly Miss
Haggerty's reactivated, on-fire-for-the-cause Petra and Mr. Marin's acid-bent
Hesus, who wanders through contemporary Manhattan as if it were the Emerald
City. The performances by Mr. Roberts and Mr. Carradine reveal comic potential
never seen before.

The film is enormously helped by the brief appearances of Mr. Henry, Ms. Martin
(as his stuffy wife, who becomes enchanted by Hesus), and Cindy Williams (as
Sammy's socially aspiring wife). An inside joke to people who don't remember the
1960's will be the cameos by Dr. Timothy Leary, Jerry Rubin and Bobby Seale, who
are seen as Yuppie diners at Ronnie's restaurant.

''Rude Awakening'' was written by Neil Levy and Richard LaGravenese and directed
by Aaron Russo, who was also the producer, and David Greenwalt. It is not
witless, but it has no clearly defined style. It wanders, more or less
aimlessly, in the way of a well-meaning, naive flower child.

Calling All Hippies! Calling All Hippies!

RUDE AWAKENING, directed by Aaron Russo and David Greenwalt; screenplay by Neil
Levy and Richard LaGravenese; director of photography, Tim Sigel; edited by Paul
Fried; music by Jonathan Elias; production designer, Mel Bourne; produced by Mr.
Russo; released by Aaron Russo Films Inc. At the Guild Embassy 3, Broadway at
47th Street; the Loews New York Twin, Second Avenue at 66th Street; Running
time:100 minutes. This film is rated R.

Hesus...Cheech Marin
Fred ...Eric Roberts
Petra ...Julie Hagerty
Sammy...Robert Carradine
Lloyd...Buck Henry
Ronnie...Louise Lasser
June...Cindy Williams
April...Andrea Martin
Brubaker...Cliff DeYoung

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Ken Howard

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 17, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

WASHINGTON TALK: POLICY;
Vietnam experience has made the Joint Chiefs cautious about using military
force.

BYLINE: By Bernard E. Trainor, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 681 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 16


The Pentagon contends that the primary role of the armed forces is to deter war,
not to fight one. Since Vietnam, a succession of military officers making up the
Joint Chiefs of Staff has elevated that policy to a fine art.

Gen. Colin L. Powell, who has been chosen by President Bush to be the next
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, is another of that generation of officers whose
Vietnam experience has made them cautious about using military force. Like Adm.
William J. Crowe Jr., the man he is to succeed in October, General Powell is
expected to be more a dove than a hawk.

Although the President said at his news conference Tuesday that he would use
military force ''in an instant'' to free the hostages if he could find a way to
do it, the Joint Chiefs may be less inclined to do so. Admiral Crowe was said to
be cool to the idea of military retaliation, because of its unforseeable
consequences and questionable usefulness in freeing the other hostages.

General Powell and the other members of the Joint Chiefs were relatively junior
officers in the Vietnam War, and share bitter memories that have influenced
their thinking. They saw a highly capable American army unaccustomed to defeat
become corrupted by drugs, poor discipline and racial strife in a protracted war
that seemed to have lost its purpose.

In their eyes, the civilian leaders responsible for the war consistently
rejected military advice and walked away when the war proved unwinnable, leaving
the armed forces to pick up the pieces of a demoralized army.

General Powell, in particular, is aware of the corrosive effect on soldiers of
an unpopular war. In 1968, when he was a major, he served in the 11th Infantry
Brigade as the executive officer of an infantry battalion shortly after a
company in the brigade massacred hundreds of Vietnamese civilians in My Lai,
South Vietnam.

Three of the current members of the Joint Chiefs were also majors when they
served in Vietnam. Gen. Larry D. Welch, the Air Force Chief of Staff, was a
fighter pilot; Gen. Carl E. Vouno, the Army Chief of Staff, commanded two
artillery battalions in two tours of combat, and Gen. Alfred M. Gray, the
Commandant of the Marine Corps, returned as a colonel in 1975 after commanding
the marines who helped the last Americans in Saigon to escape by helicopter when
the city fell.

The Chiefs shared the thinking of former Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger,
who in 1984 outlined a policy intended to prevent future Vietnams. General
Powell was Mr. Weinberger's military assistant at the time. Mr. Weinberger
asserted that military force should be used by the United States only when there
was a threat to vital national interests, when the political and military
objectives were clear, when the action had the support of the American people
and when all non-military options had been exhausted.

The Chiefs' thinking has not changed. ''U.S. forces should never be committed to
action for lengthy periods without the consent of Congress and the support of
the American people,'' General Gray said.

His Army counterpart, General Vouno, said: ''Vietnam taught me that our soldiers
can accomplish any military task given them. But it is the responsibility of
political and military leaders to give them the right task, and the nation must
be prepared to pay the costs involved. We needlessly risk lives when our
military objectives aren't clear.''

While they have been marked by their Vietnam experience, the Joint Chiefs do not
shrink from the use of force if it makes military sense. In the Reagan
Administration they supported military action on a number of occasions when the
mission was clearly defined, judged an acceptable risk and could be achieved in
a reasonable time.

They were behind the the invasion of Grenada in 1983, for example, and the 1986
air strikes on Libya. But it is common knowledge that the Chiefs opposed the use
of American troops as part of a multinational peacekeeping force in Lebanon in
1982. It also is no secret in Washington that the Chiefs do not support military
intervention in Nicaragua.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 18, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

The ''Policy'' column on the Washington Talk page yesterday misidentified the
Army Chief of Staff. He is Gen. Carl E. Vuono.

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 17, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnamese Portray Their Enemy

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1310 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Aug. 16


A quarter-century ago, when Doan Chau Mau was one of Vietnam's best-known movie
actors, he played, he said, ''the heavy, the bad guy, the Vietcong's colonels.''
Now, Mr. Doan is again playing a Vietcong officer -on a made-for-television film
- but it is a gentle, humane officer, a sympathetic character. Between the two
roles there lies a vast gulf of time, distance and perception.

Mr. Doan's is appearing in a segment, ''The Last Soldier,'' of ''Vietnam War
Story: The Last Days'' on Home Box Office. It is to be broadcast on Saturday at
9:30 P.M. The portrayal is the first lead role for the actor, now 72 years old
and silver haired, since he escaped from Saigon in 1975, just a day ahead of
advancing Communist troops. He was afraid, he said in an interview here, that
his portrayals of vicious Communist officers, would have made him a natural
target for reprisals.

But for Mr. Doan and several other Vietnamese actors who played in the
television drama, written by a Vietnam veteran, Patrick Duncan, whose feature
film ''84 Charlie Mopic'' received generally favorable reviews earlier this
year, the experience was a mixed one.

They Call It a Breakthrough

All of the actors were clearly happy to be acting on the American screen,
playing the kinds of roles that generally have been given in the past to
non-Vietnamese actors - Filipinos, Chinese and others. Indeed, they described
''The Last Soldier'' as a breakthrough; it is the first time that a drama
involving only Vietnamese actors, played by Vietnamese actors, will have been
done on American television.

And yet, the making of ''The Last Soldier,'' which is part of the HBO series
entitled ''Vietnam War Stories,'' illustrates the author's often different views
of the war held, on the one side, by the bitterly anti-Communist community of
Vietnamese refugees in this country and, on the other, by Americans like Mr.
Duncan who are seeking a more nuanced, less stereotyped view of the former
enemy.

For Mr. Duncan and the director of ''The Last Soldier,'' Sandy Smolan, the task
was to depict the tragedy of war in which ordinary men on both sides are forced
by governments to kill one another. The writer and the director are seeking to
understand the former Vietnamese enemy, not as what Mr. Smolan calls ''the
vicious stereotypes that are always part of the propaganda of war,'' but as
human beings.

Their Roles and Ideas

''This is the first time,'' he said, ''that somebody has shown the other side
sympathetically.''

The Vietnamese actors in ''The Last Soldier,'' however, all fled their country
precisely because they did think, and most of them still think, that the
Communist enemy was an implacable foe whose goals and methods were
irreconcilably different from their own.

''As an actor I can play any role,'' Mr. Doan said. ''But I am very sad.''
''Even in Patrick Duncan's film I have to say one line. I say that the
Vietnamese Army stole our rations and our children are hungry. From the American
point of view the Vietnamese National Army was only thiefs and cowards. I would
like to play in something that praises the Vietnamese soldiers who fought
against the Communists.''

What HBO will show on Saturday is in fact three separate half-hour films. The
first two of the episodes were written by Mr. Duncan and they were directed by
Luis Soto and Mr. Smolan. The two are what the American film makers describe as
a ''Rashomon'' technique showing exactly the same episode taking place in the
final days of the war from two different points of view.

One Side's Viewpoint

In the first program, a group of Vietnamese soldiers and their American military
advisers deal with a pesky sniper who almost daily opens up on their hilltop
redoubt. The American and Vietnamese soldiers are plagued by low morale - one of
them has become a drug addict and dreads the end of the war and his return home
- and drastically inadequate supplies of ammunition.

The second episode shows the situation from the perspective of the snipers
themselves, a small band of South Vietnamese who once were farmers but who took
up arms when the Americans destroyed their village. The group, led by the
character played by Mr. Doan, is exhausted by the war. Its members dream of
peace and home. In the end, both sides suffer casualties as they act out the
roles assigned to them by the irresistible force of the conflict that has made
them enemies.

For Mr. Doan the very notion of a sympathetic Vietcong officer that he plays is
a historical inaccuracy. His character is a gentle, aging, reluctant soldier who
cares for a lost 11-year-old nephew, played by an American-born Vietnamese
actor, California Xuan Tran, and striving to stop the men in his charge from
taking unnecessary risks.

''I am an uncle,'' Mr. Doan said of the character he plays. ''I have a nephew
with me and I take care of him. That's quite different from the VC in Vietnam.
In Vietnam, the VC didn't take care of anybody, no family, no relatives, no
nephews, nobody. They took care only of their party. They obeyed the orders of
the party, that's all.''

'I Played a Real VC'

''In Vietnam,'' he said, speaking of his acting career there in the late 1960's
and early 1970's, ''I played a real VC.''

In some ways, the views of the war among Vietnamese actors and American film
makers mirror the very ''Rashomon'' effect that the latest episodes of ''Vietnam
War Stories'' use as a cinematic technique. Mr. Duncan, who was a forward
observer in Vietnam in 1968 and 1969, said that his observation of the enemy led
him to ''see the humanity of the people you are about to kill.''

''That's always stayed with me,'' he said. ''I've never had a great hatred for
the Vietnamese people, South or North, and I thought it was time to do an
episode that expressed that feeling.'' The Vietnamese actors hired by HBO had
their own experiences of the war. Mr. Doan, for example, who now lives in
Seattle, was twice a refugee. A native of a northern village not far from Hanoi,
he left there in 1950 after the Communists confiscated family land during the
redistribution program. He then left Saigon on April 20, 1975, just ahead of the
advancing North Vietnamese Army, and he is explicit about his political views.
''I hate the Communists,'' he said.

Among the younger Vietnamese actors is Mr. Hoang, whose father left his mother
and several brothers and sisters to join the Communist forces, eventually
becoming the Secretary of Education for South Vietnam in the Communist
Government from 1975 until his death this year. Mr. Hoang did not see his father
after the age of 11.

'I Thought of My Father'

''I cried at the audition,'' Mr. Hoang, who came alone to the United States
shortly before the Communist victory, said. ''I thought of my father. My mother
will never forgive him because he left his family behind.''

Mr. Hoang, while himself fervently anti-Communist, sees his father, a writer, as
a reluctant soldier, driven out of Saigon because of his opposition to the
American-supported Government. He thinks of him, he said, as a person
reminiscent of the fictional guerrilla that he plays in Mr. Duncan's film.

For Joseph Hieu, a Vietnamese actor who came to The United States when he was
17, the difference between Mr. Duncan's script and his own experience is less
bridgable than that of Mr. Hoang.

Mr. Hieu said he came from a commercial family whose property was confiscated by
the Communists. He was forced to spend ''a long 10 days'' in a re-education
center. He and his family left Vietnam as boat people nine months after the fall
of Saigon.

''I understand the point that this is a show about human beings,'' he said of
''The Last Soldier.'' ''But playing the part of the enemy, I am struggling
within myself. I am portraying the enemy as having a heart that I have never
encountered.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Doan Chau Mau, and California Xuan Tran in ''The Last
Soldier'' (Brian D. McLaughlin)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 17, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
A Southern Journalist and Civil Rights

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 477 words


Ralph McGill was a man who gave moderation a good name. As editor and, more
importantly, a front-page columnist for The Atlanta Constitution during the
civil rights upheavals, he spoke for the liberal middle that helped Atlanta to
avoid the racial clashes of other Southern cities and that offered a hope of
reconciliation to the country.

''Dawn's Early Light: Ralph McGill and the Segregated South,'' an affectionate
yet unfawning documentary at 10 tonight on Channel 13, presents a picture of a
bred-in-the-bone Southerner who in the 1940's sought only to ameliorate
segregation, to make it ''more balanced,'' rather than abolish it. He held, like
many other Southerners of his generation, that changes in racial attitudes could
not be legislated. Only after the Supreme Court's 1954 school decision did he
express shame for his earlier attitude. A less puffy title for the hour might
have been ''The Education of a Newspaperman.''

As one of the many admiring journalists interviewed here says, ''You couldn't
start the day without McGill.'' His prose, delivered by Burt Lancaster, runs to
the pseudo-lyricism that seems particularly to afflict former sportswriters
(''The earth continues to turn on the wheel of the sun, and we move toward the
inevitable future''), but his message of racial justice and obedience to law was
a clarion for its time and place. We are reminded by still painful newsreel
clips what Southern officials like Herman Talmadge, Ross Barnett and George
Wallace were saying and doing in those years.

The hour, produced by Kathleen Dowdey and Jed Dannenbaum, places McGill, who
died in 1969, among Atlanta's movers and shakers. He was an insider, in a strong
position to persuade the city's businessmen that racial quiet was in their best
interests. For this, he won the title of ''architect of peaceful integration in
Atlanta,'' and, naturally, was repaid by abuse and threats from white diehards.

But he was also criticized by those to his left for being a representative of
the establishment. Myles Horton, a founder of the controversial Highlander
School, calls McGill a ''red baiter'' for his anti-Communist columns of the
1950's. Vernon Jordan, whom McGill visited frequently, says that his white
friend never could understand the black power movement - which, in light of its
record, may be taken as good sense. Many liberals also parted from McGill over
his defense of the Vietnam War. No one, however, criticizes him for want of
amiability or a willingness to listen.

The portrait that comes through in this diligently researched and intelligently
balanced documentary is of a man of conservative temperament, wedded to Southern
pleasures -about which he wrote with affection - yet imbued with a sense of
fairness and respect for law that went beyond regional values. He was a good old
boy, but a lot better than many.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Ralph McGill

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 18, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 22 words


The ''Policy'' column on the Washington Talk page yesterday misidentified the
Army Chief of Staff. He is Gen. Carl E. Vuono.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 18, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Award in Case of Killer Hired by Ad Is Overturned

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 401 words

DATELINE: NEW ORLEANS, Aug. 17


A Federal appeals court today overturned a jury's $9.4 million award that
Soldier of Fortune magazine had been ordered to pay to the relatives of a
murdered woman. She was killed by a man hired through an advertisement in the
magazine.

The United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit said that holding the
magazine responsible for the 1985 slaying of the woman, Sandra Black would
impose too great a burden on publishers to screen ambiguously worded
advertisements.

Although the magazine had argued that the judgment against it violated its First
Amendment right to freedom of the press, the court did not address First
Amendment arguments, basing its ruling instead on Texas liability law.

Soldier of Fortune ''owed no duty to refrain from publishing a facially
innocuous classified advertisement when the ad's context - at most - made its
message ambiguous,'' Judge W. Eugene Davis wrote for the unanimous three-judge
panel. He was joined by Judges Will Garwood and Grady Jolly.

Publisher Expresses Joy

E. Barrett Prettyman Jr., the lawyer for Soldier of Fortune, said the publisher,
Robert Brown, was ecstatic. ''The kind of duty the plaintiffs were attempting to
impose here would not only have put this magazine out of business but would have
had an extraordinarily harmful effect on magazines and publishers of all
kinds,'' Mr. Prettyman said.

Mrs. Black was slain in Bryan, Tex. In 1988, a Federal jury in Houston awarded
her son and mother $9.4 million over the ad that John Wayne Hearn placed in a
1984 issue of the magazine, which is aimed at adventurers and military
enthusiasts.

Mrs. Black's husband, Robert, was convicted of hiring Mr. Hearn to kill her. Mr.
Black is on death row in Texas and Mr. Hearn is in a Florida prison serving
three life sentences for the Black killing and two other murders.

Lawyers for Soldier of Fortune magazine had argued that there was no way its
publishers could have known that Mr. Hearn's ad offering an ex-marine and
Vietnam veteran's services for ''high-risk assignments'' was a solicitation for
murder.

John Roberson, a lawyer for Mrs. Black's son Gary, 19 years old, and her mother,
Marjorie Eimann, 65, had argued that ''high-risk assignment'' clearly meant
''gun for hire'' in the language of the magazine.

Lawyers representing the plaintiffs did not return telephone calls today seeking
comment on the appeals court decision.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 18, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Alabama Man Is Executed for Killing of Girl

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 295 words

DATELINE: ATMORE, Ala., Aug. 18


Herbert Lee Richardson, 43 years old, was electrocuted early today for the 1977
pipe-bomb killing of an 11-year-old girl.

A flurry of late appeals ended Thursday when the Supreme Court refused to
intervene. The High Court appeal followed a decision by the United States Court
of Appeals for the 11th Circuit, in Atlanta, upholding District Judge Robert
Varner's rejection earlier in the day of a motion for a stay of execution.

Mr. Richardson was excecuted at Holman Prison here. He was pronounced dead at
12:14 A.M., central daylight time.

He was convicted of murdering Rena Mae Collins, who was blown apart on the porch
of her house when she picked up a pipe bomb. Mr. Richardson argued that the
device was not meant to explode, but only to frighten the girl's family because
her aunt had broken off a romance with him.

Margie Collins, the girl's mother, had said, ''I can't rest until he gets the
chair.''

In Montgomery, Lucia Penland of the Alabama Prison Project said Mr. Richardson
''was what most of us would call an all-around American boy with a bright fugure
before he went to Vietnam.''

The round of appeals Thursday climaxed weeks of maneuvers in which courts
rejected claims that Mr. Richardson had been unfairly denied a psychologist to
determine whether he was suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder as a
result of his service in Vietnam.

In addition to court appeals, Mr. Richardson had sought clemency from Gov. Guy
Hunt. In his clemency plea, Mr. Richardson told how he had written to a church
after listening to broadcasts of its services.

As a result of the letter, he met Debbie Herbert and on Aug. 9, the two were
married in a prison ceremony, a spokeswoman for the prison system said.

The Governor rejected the clemency plea.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 18, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

On Stage

BYLINE: Enid Nemy

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 2; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1026 words



A Tycoon as Angel

Abe Hirschfeld, the real-estate mogul, has never been involved in a Broadway
production, but he's now 75 percent of the money behind ''The Prince of Central
Park,'' slated to open at the Belasco Theater on Oct. 30.

How much does he expect that 75 percent to come to? ''I never work with a
budget,'' he said in a telephone conversation from Florida. ''All my life I have
loved the theater, and I like this play so much the sky is the limit.''

Why does he like it so much? ''It describes 100 percent of my 40 years in New
York City living across from the park; it shows the exact life,'' he said.

The show, about a young runaway who becomes involved with a woman in her 60's,
began as a book and was turned into a musical by Evan Rhodes (book), Don Sebesky
(music) and Gloria Nissenson (lyrics). It will star Gloria De Haven in the role
Ruth Gordon created on television, and Richard H. Blake in the title role he
played last fall at the Jan McArt Cabaret Theater in Key West and early this
year at the Al Hirschfeld Theater in Miami. (Incidentally, Abe Hirschfeld and Al
Hirschfeld are not related.) Ms. McArt is co-producing with Abe Hirschfeld, and
Tony Tanner will choreograph and direct.

Back to that opening night. Mr. Hirschfeld said the plan is for a return to
elegance - a 6 or 6:30 P.M. curtain, a black-tie audience and an after-theater
dinner dance at the New York Penta Hotel. The combination would, he said, be
considerably less expensive than an ordinary evening of theater, dinner and
dancing.

''I own the hotel: I'd also like people to get acquainted with it,'' he said.

Student Prices for 'Orpheus'

Sometimes it pays to spend August in New York. As of Monday, students with valid
identification will be able to buy $15 tickets for the Peter Hall Company
production of Tennessee Williams's ''Orpheus Descending.'' The special price
came about at the behest of Vanessa Redgrave, who is starring in the play, and
it will be available for up to 200 tickets for each of the Tuesday through
Thursday performances. The limited 12-week engagement begins Sept. 13 at the
Neil Simon Theater.

A Thriller by Holmes

''Accomplice'' by Rupert Holmes, who won two Tony Awards for ''The Mystery of
Edwin Drood,'' is set to open in March at the 46th Street Theater, Alexander H.
Cohen, one of the producers, said. The comedy-thriller, described by the author
as an intellectual Ping-Pong game between the actors and the audience, will
follow the limited engagement of ''The Merchant of Venice,'' starring Dustin
Hoffman, which begins Nov. 23.

New From Fugard

There's a new drama by Athol Fugard, the South African playwright, coming up
later this year. The American premiere of ''My Children! My Africa!'' will be
presented by the New York Theater Workshop, and will co-star Lisa Fugard, the
writer's daughter, and, it's hoped, Courtney B. Vance. A December opening is
planned at the 95-seat Perry Street Theater.

Audience Give-and-Take

Like it or not (and apparently they do like it), there's no way that the four
performers in ''Showing Off'' can leave the building after their show without
walking through the audience. The members of that audience who greet Douglas
Bernstein are apt to get a surprise. ''I very often ask, 'What was your least
favorite thing?' '' Mr. Bernstein said. ''And they can't believe that anyone,
especially an actor, would want to know anything negative about something
they're involved in.''

What often is not immediately realized by the men and women seated at Steve
McGraw's is that Mr. Bernstein is not only a performer, but also co-author of
the revue.

''There's a certain thrill being the writer and being there every night and
hearing the audience respond to the words as well as the performance,'' he said.

Mr. Bernstein said that he enjoyed both aspects of his career, but that he
especially liked the writing because ''there's a bit of history attached to
creating a revue.''

''There was a time when musical revue was the training ground for writers of the
great Broadway musicals,'' he said, mentioning such revue graduates as Martin
Charnin (''Annie'') and Sheldon Harnick (''Fiddler on the Roof'').

And who is to say that that time is past? Mr. Bernstein and his co-writer, Denis
Markell, are busy with a number of projects, but a major one is a Broadway
musical. #3 Plays by Vietnam Vets The Vietnam Veterans Ensemble Theater Company
is branching out as it enters it 10th season with productions ranging beyond
Vietnam. The season will open Oct. 4 with the American premiere of ''The
Ambassador,'' a comedy-drama by Slawomir Mrozek, a Polish playwright. Jan. 10
will see a production of ''The Strike,'' by Rod Serling, the creator of ''The
Twilight Zone.'' The final play will be ''Dougherty's Cause'' by Donald
Donellan, about a Vietnam demolition expert who becomes involved in guerrilla
fighting in Ireland.

Eliot's 'Cathedral'

The rarely performed ''Murder in the Cathedral,'' the verse play by T. S. Eliot,
will be presented by the Royston Company next month in seven performances at
three churches. The classic about Thomas a Becket will be at St. Paul's Chapel
at Columbia University on Sept. 7, 8 and 9; at the Church of the Holy Trinity,
316 East 88th Street, Sept. 15 and 16, and at St. Malachy's, 239 West 49th
Street, Sept. 22 and 23. Information: (718) 499-4368.

In the Wings

Priscilla Lopez will play three women in ''The Emperor's New Dress,'' a new play
by David Risk, which the playwright will also direct. It will be at the
McGinn/Cazale Theater, above the Promenade (Broadway and 76th Street), beginning
Sept. 7 (518-3131). . . . A sure-fire way to at least rub shoulders with
celebrities - Mary Tyler Moore, John Rubinstein, Cy Coleman, Jerry Zaks and
Wendy Wasserstein should be among them - is to write a $125 check for the
Friends of the American Theater Wing lunch Sept. 28. The benefit is to take
place at the Plaza Hotel, and not only will there be food and a brush with fame,
but Jan Chipman and Jean Stralem, the chairmen, have also arranged for a show to
be produced by Anna Sosenko. Information: 765-0609.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 18, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

REVIEW/FILM;
IN 'CASUALTIES OF WAR,' GROUP LOYALTY VS. INDIVIDUAL CONSCIENCE

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1057 words


''We're going to requisition a girl for a little portable R. & R.,'' Sergeant
Meserve tells the four members of his squad at the end of a briefing.

Three of the men laugh. It sounds like a joke. One man, Private Eriksson, who
has been in Vietnam a month, is bewildered. The men are leaving the next morning
on a five-day reconnaissance patrol in search of Vietcong bunkers, trenches,
caves and arms caches. The mission is dangerous but it's also a chance to get
away from authority. In the field the men are free as long as they live.

The sergeant was not joking. Before dawn, under Meserve's instructions, they
kidnap a young Vietnamese woman from a nearby village, gag her, bind her hands
and take her with them into the highlands. In the course of the first two days,
they rape her. When threatened with exposure, they murder her.

Only Eriksson refuses to participate. When he gets back to base, for reasons he
cannot easily articulate, against the advice of commissioned officers, Eriksson
turns in his comrades.

This is the bleeding heart of Brian De Palma's earnest, troubling ''Casualties
of War,'' which opens today at the Baronet and other theaters.

Taking the true story of Private Eriksson (the name is fictitious), as reported
by Daniel Lang in The New Yorker in 1969, just three years after the events
occurred, Mr. De Palma, the director, and David Rabe, the writer, have made a
film to stand alongside and complement Oliver Stone's ''Platoon'' and Stanley
Kubrick's ''Full Metal Jacket.''

''Casualties of War'' is more lean of line than the two earlier films. It is
more like ''Paths of Glory,'' Mr. Kubrick's spare, black-and-white classic about
World War I. It is less about the random physical horrors of war, less about the
system that makes men able to fight wars, than about individual responsibility.
This is cinema of conscience about a man, still seen by many as a stool pigeon,
who tries to buck the chain of command that effectively neutralizes all guilt.

Mr. Rabe has disassociated himself from the film, charging that Mr. De Palma has
not been faithful to his work, but his screenplay is one of the best things
about the movie. He is correct in saying that the finished film simplifies
complex relationships. It also ends with a coda so stupid that one might be
advised to leave the film early. Yet the movie manages to deal in ideas without,
apparently, ever talking about them.

''Casualties of War'' moves toward its climax so inevitably and surely that the
courts-martial, which are the film's penultimate sequence, are no less riveting
for the theatrical way in which they have been compressed.

Very questionable is Mr. De Palma's decision (which I take it to be) to withhold
from the audience information about the ultimate disposition of the cases. By
suppressing this, the film undercuts its own stark pessimism.

''Casualties of War'' has one splendid performance and another one worthy of
special note.

Sean Penn is extremely fine as Meserve, a natural leader with no great amount of
book-learning. He's a comradely, foul-mouthed naif who finds war exhilarating,
at least up to a point. Among other things, this is the first time in his life
that Meserve has been able to excel.

It is one of the more sorrowful aspects of ''Casualties of War'' that Meserve's
brutality toward the Vietnamese is seen by his buddies and the officers as being
understandably aberrant. Anything can be tolerated in a world devoid of moral
values. There are no fixed norms by which behavior can be judged.

Mr. Penn plays Meserve with terrific elan. There is plausibility in every
movement and gesture, and especially in his crafty handsomeness. His Meserve is
the sort of man one credits with thoughts when the mind may, in fact, be
completely blank.

Michael J. Fox plays the conscience-striken Eriksson as best he can, considering
his perennial-juvenile features and our long association with him as the young
man with the snappy retorts on television's ''Family Ties.''

The role is a difficult one and, to his credit, Mr. Fox remains firmly in
character, even when the steadfastness of the character must be taken at face
value. It's not easy dramatizing this degree of moral righteousness.

Movies are ruthless when it comes to a performer's looks. They say more about a
character than most actors have the ability to modify or deny. In ''Casualties
of War,'' Mr. Fox has the terrible disadvantage of appearing to be lightweight.

The two stars receive excellent support from Don Harvey and John C. Reilly, as
the two members of the squad who follow Meserve with unquestioning enthusiasm,
and John Leguizamo, as a young man who at first holds back but is intimidated
into joining the group-action.

This fellow's capitulation, which he rationalizes by putting intrasquad loyalty
above all else, does as much to define the film's moral center as anything Mr.
Fox's Eriksson says or does.

The production, shot in Thailand, is rich and authentic in its physical details,
which never overwhelm the movie's concerns. Mr. De Palma's love of the baroque,
evident for better and worse in such films as ''The Fury,'' ''Body Double'' and
''Scarface,'' seems out of place here in the old-fashioned, fulsome soundtrack
score by Ennio Morricone. It won't quit.

Equally beside the point is one spectacular camera movement, something Hitchcock
might have admired under other circumstances. In the second half of the film,
the camera makes a long, unbroken sweep through an Army camp to find, at the end
of its journey, Mr. Fox standing in mortal peril. The shot is sort of fun in
itself, but it doesn't have much to do with what is supposed to be on the mind
of the movie.

In a Moral Void, Anything Goes

CASUALTIES OF WAR, directed by Brian De Palma; screenplay by David Rabe, based
on an article by Daniel Lang in the New Yorker; director of photography, Stephen
H. Burum, edited by Bill Pankow; music by Ennio Morricone; production designer,
Wolf Kroeger; produced by Art Linson; released by Columbia Pictures. At the
Baronet, Third Avenue and 59th Street, and other theaters. Running time: 120
minutes. This film is rated R.

Eriksson........Michael J. Fox

Meserve.........Sean Penn

Clark...........Don Harvey

Hatcher.........John C. Reilly

Diaz............John Leguizamo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Sean Penn

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 18, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

At the Movies

BYLINE: Lawrence Van Gelder

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 983 words


'Sex, Lies' and Spader ''It's all come as a great surprise.''

In Los Angeles, where he was preparing for night shooting on his newest film, a
thriller titled ''Bad Influence,'' James Spader was talking about the laurels
and excitement wreathing ''Sex, Lies and Videotape.''

Not only has the prize-winning (Cannes; United States Film Festival) movie about
Louisiana love lives made its writer and director, Steven Soderbergh, a marquee
name, but it has also put heightened loft on the career of Mr. Spader, who won
the best-actor award at Cannes for his portrayal of Graham, the somewhat
impotent video voyeur whose return to Baton Rouge after a long absence sets the
plot in motion.

Mr. Spader said that when he first read the script during the winter of 1987-88,
''I wanted to meet the man who had written it.''

''I was very interested in the material,'' he said. ''It was quite unlike
anything I'd seen recently.'' About a week later, Mr. Spader, who can list among
his credits such films as ''Pretty in Pink,'' ''Baby Boom,'' ''Less Than Zero''
and ''Wall Street,'' got together with Mr. Soderbergh. ''I wanted to work with
him,'' Mr. Spader said. ''I find Steve to be a very serious, humorous,
interesting man.''

But he said he had no anticipation during the filming, which began last August
in Baton Rouge, of the accolades the movie would attract. ''When I'm working, I
really don't concern myself with that,'' Mr. Spader said. With regard to the
impact on his career of the praise for the film, he said: ''Well, to put this in
perspective, I should say that at the time it started to acquire a great deal of
attention, I was entering rehearsals on 'Bad Influence,' and my wife was
entering the last term of her pregnancy. My life was extremely chaotic anyway.
Basically, the way it's affected my life is that different people have started
to take notice of my work who took no notice of it before - at least in my
perception.'' So the scripts are flowing in. But for the next month, Mr. Spader
expects to be immersed in his portrayal of Michael Boll in Curtis Hanson's ''Bad
Influence,'' which also stars Rob Lowe and Lisa Zane. Mr. Spader describes ''Bad
Influence'' as ''an extremely strange, peculiar thriller, and where you end up
is extremely surprising.''

''You really think you know where you're going all the way along,'' he said,
''and boy, you're surprised just how lost you are.''

Boll, he says, is a financial research analyst - ''an extremely scheduled,
methodical, dissatisfied man'' - who meets someone who opens up a whole
different side of his life.

When filming ends, Mr. Spader expects to take some time off to spend with his
wife, Victoria, who works on the art-department side of film making, and their
son, Sebastian, who was born in late July. ''At this stage of the game,'' he
said, ''I have the choice of being either up and working or up and burping. I
have two extremely important things going on in my life that I love, and
although I'm having a wonderful time on this film, I'm looking forward to the
wrap so I can get on with the burping and the bouncing.''

And there will be those scripts to think about.

''I'm hoping 'Sex, Lies and Videotape' will give me the freedom to be a little
more self-indulgent in my choices,'' Mr. Spader said.

Jewison, on the Farm

A Canadian farmer named Norman Jewison, who sometimes produces, sometimes
directs and sometimes does both, checked in the other day to discuss the future.

Some of his thoughts were on his 85 head of Hereford breeding cattle and the
syrup from the maple trees on his 340 acres about an hour from Toronto, but
mostly Mr. Jewison - whose credits include ''The Cincinnati Kid,'' ''The
Russians Are Coming! The Russians Are Coming!'' ''In the Heat of the Night'' and
''The Thomas Crown Affair,'' to name only a few - was thinking about finishing
dubbing on his latest film, ''In Country,'' scheduled to open next month, and
about the movie to follow.

''In Country,'' of course, stars Bruce Willis, Emily Lloyd, Kevin Anderson and
Joan Allen, and is the movie Mr. Jewison directed from the Frank Pierson
screenplay of the Bobbie Ann Mason novel about a family's struggle to heal the
wounds caused by the Vietnam War. It will be the opening attraction of the
Toronto Film Festival, on Sept. 7, and will have its commercial opening Sept.
15.

Mr. Jewison was understandably excited about the prospects for ''In Country,''
but he was also enthused by what lies ahead. ''I've just purchased the rights to
'Other People's Money,' '' he said, referring to the Off Broadway play by Jerry
Sterner about a corporate raider.

''I was in New York and I went down to the Minetta Lane Theater in the Village
about six weeks ago and saw the play because everybody was talking about it,''
Mr. Jewison said. ''It's about America today, in the 80's, about this obsession
with money and corporate takeovers, and, I guess, it's about greed. To me, it
was right on the money.

''It's funny and it's powerful. It's touching.''

And Mr. Jewison's affection for the play wasn't hurt by the fact, as he put it,
that ''it's got the greatest villain since Richard III.''

Mr. Jewison's next step will be meeting with various writers interested in
adapting the play for the screen. ''I've adapted a few plays lately,'' he noted,
mentioning, ''A Soldier's Story,'' ''Agnes of God'' and the musicals ''Fiddler
on the Roof'' and ''Jesus Christ Superstar.'' ''I find the playwrights today are
writing, probably, about a little more significant subjects than the film
writers.''

Mr. Jewison said he hoped to have ''Other People's Money'' in production
sometime next year.

Meantime, there were the cattle and the syrup to think about.

Mr. Jewison noted that he is descended from a long line of farmers. ''I'm back
doing what I'm supposed to be doing,'' he said, ''and I try to squeeze the odd
movie in between.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 18, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

REVIEW/FILM;
'LA BOCA DEL LOBO' FROM PERU

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 477 words


''La Boca del Lobo'' (''The Mouth of the Wolf''), Francisco J. Lombardi's
Peruvian film opening today at the Public, dramatizes the no-win situation of
the Peruvian Indian caught in a war in which he has no part to play except as
the victim.

On one side is the Maoist rebel group Shining Path (Sendero Luminoso), which has
control over what the Government calls the Emergency Zone in the Andean
highlands. On the other side is the Peruvian Army, which has been unsuccessfully
pursuing Shining Path for some years.

Shining Path attempts to coerce peasant support through brutality and terrorism.
The army uses the same tactics against the Indians who they think may be
supporting the rebels.

''La Boca del Lobo'' is fiction inspired by the army's November 1983 massacre of
47 men, women and children suspected of terrorism. When the news of the massacre
came out, the army blamed Shining Path for the atrocities, but one eyewitness
testified to the contrary.

The movie makes no attempt to describe the conditions in which the Andean
Indians live, nor do any rebels appear. They remain a sinister off-screen
presence, their political goals undefined.

''La Boca del Lobo'' seems to have been conceived in the same spirit as Brian De
Palma's ''Casualties of War.''

It chooses to dramatize the moral and emotional disintegration of the members of
a small army detachment, sent away from any world they know to root out Shining
Path in a remote mountain village. The focus of the story is a young recruit who
has volunteered for the assignment in hopes of winning an appointment to
officers' training school. His adversary is the detachment's leader, an urbane
career officer who goes to pieces fighting an unseen enemy.

''La Boca del Lobo'' is technically accomplished but not very sophisticated. The
Andean scenery is magnificent, the drama primitive. The director's humanism is
apparent, but when the story boils down to a game of Russian roulette played by
the officer and the recruit, melodrama upstages humanism. There is also the
suspicion that someone connected with the movie was somewhat too impressed by
''The Deer Hunter.''

Peru's Vietnam

LA BOCA DEL LOBO, directed by Francisco J. Lombardi; written (in Spanish with
English subtitles) by Augusto Cabada, Giovanna Pollarolo and Gerardo Herrero;
director of photography, Jose Luis Lopez Linares; edited by Juan San Mateo;
music by Bernardo Bonezzi; art director, Marta Mendez; produced by Mr. Herrero
and Mr. Lombardi; released by Cinevista Inc. At the Public Theater, 425
Lafayette Street. Running time: 122 minutes. This film has no rating.

Teniente Roca......Miguel Angel Bueno Wunder

Vitin Luna.........Antonio Vega Espejo

Quispe.............Lucio C. Yabar Masias

Sargento Moncada...Gilberto Efrain Torres

Teniente Basulto...Antero Sanchez Merino

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 19, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

In Cambodia, a Deepening Fear Of a New Khmer Rouge Regime

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2139 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Aug. 14


It is a measure of the uncertainty about the future here that officials in the
Government and ruling party have drawn up contingency plans for underground
resistance should the Khmer Rouge succeed in returning to power in Cambodia,
senior diplomats say.

The diplomats, who are from the Eastern bloc, say a perimeter defense with
secret stockpiles is being prepared about 25 miles around the capital, Phnom
Penh. They also say secret funds amounting to about $30 million have been set
aside under the control of the Prime Minister, Hun Sen. And the diplomats add
that relatives of Government officials and senior members of the ruling People's
Revolutionary Party have been purchasing real estate and factories, a percentage
of whose profits will go to the party for use, if necessary, in an underground
war.

The aim is to continue the activities of the party in clandestine circumstances
if the opposition coalition, led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk but dominated by the
Khmer Rouge, should come to power, the diplomats said.

Heightened Concern

The nervousness has been heightened by Vietnam's pledge of a complete troop
withdrawal from Cambodia at the end of September. As an international conference
in Paris works on a political solution for the country after the withdrawal,
Vietnam and the United States, among other countries, are opposing a Khmer Rouge
role in any future government. But Prince Sihanouk and China, the Khmer Rouge's
principal backer, insist on the guerrilla organization's participation.

Vietnamese troops invaded Cambodia in December 1978 and ousted the the Khmer
Rouge, which ruled the country for more than three years and presided over a
brutal remaking of Cambodian society in which more than a million people died.

The contingency preparations to resist the Khmer Rouge are concentrated in three
provinces to the east of the capital and bordering Vietnam: Kompong Cham, where
Mr. Hun Sen's older brother, Hun Neng, is the party chief; Svay Rieng, where
another family member plays an important role, and Prey Veng, where the brother
of a powerful Politburo member, Say Phouthang, an ethnic Thai, is a major
figure.

''When top leaders here say they are confident they can hold off the Khmer
Rouge, they are serious,'' a diplomat said. ''But they themselves must worry
about whether they are making an assessment based on accurate information, and
they know very well the weakness of the army and its morale.''

Sense of Uncertainty

This sense of uncertainty runs through society, and especially among people in
the cities. Cambodians who work for charitable and international aid agencies
ask their employers about plans to escape Phnom Penh ''just in case.'' Rich
Cambodians are reliably said to have arranged exit routes for their money and
themselves through Koh Kong, an island off the port of Kompong Som, with Thai
businessmen who are flocking into the city.

It is too much to say that a sort of war psychosis has taken root in Phnom Penh,
which has been almost entirely free of guerrilla attacks. But after so many
years of tragedy, abuse and near annihilation by external powers and internal
factions, many Cambodians are fatalistic and seem to expect the worst.

While the Vietnamese were not often liked here, there is gratitude toward them
for driving out Pol Pot and the Khmer Rouge, and they are considered reliable.
With Vietnamese forces leaving, there is relief and growing nationalism, as well
as fear about how the army will fare against the Khmer Rouge.

Another measure of uncertainty is the exchange rate of the Cambodian riel
against the dollar. Last December, the rate was 135 to the riel. Two weeks ago,
it was 195. Today, it is 217. Similarly, the price of a gold ring, a standard
currency here, was 8,000 riels six months ago. A month ago it was 8,200. Today
it is 9,200. The price of rice, the national staple, is also increasing, while
much land remains fallow - up to half of it in the agriculturally vital
Battambang Province - because the paddy fields are often mined.

''We need the dollars for Thai and Singapore trading,'' said an entrepreneur in
the now private and bustling Central Market, where imported watches, stereos,
clothes and sunglasses are on sale next to gold and jewelry shops. ''But people
remember that in the Pol Pot time, having even a quarter of a gold ring hidden
away could save your life.''

The Economy
A Freer Market, With Corruption

A great deal of money has been made after measures to liberalize the economy
were introduced in late spring. Constitutional amendments have allowed private
enterprise and allocated land rights to farmers and apartments to their
residents. Traders and businessmen have been lured here from Thailand, Hong Kong
and Singapore.

Private citizens and Government officials uncertain about what the future holds
- a larger war, stagnancy or a coalition Government under which they may lose
their jobs - are making money while the going is good.

Corruption among Government officials has accelerated enormously, everyone
agrees, to levels that approach those of the late 1960's under Prince Sihanouk,
though not yet to the levels of the 1970's under the American-backed Government
of Lon Nol.

Luxuries on Paltry Salaries

While some officials have always been engaged in petty corruption to make ends
meet, high-level officials dealing with foreign business executives are reliably
said to be requiring large bribes and are buying up property and luxuries, and
sending money abroad. Some Government officials are seen in Phnom Penh in new
Mercedes sedans that would cost them 250 years' worth of salary, which is
admittedly paltry -less than $10 a month.

At the same time, middle-level officials who don't have access to such funds are
growing resentful while the work efficiency of lower-level officials, never
high, has been slacking off, aid officials say.

Khieu Kanharith, editor of the semi-official weekly Kampuchea and a member of
the National Assembly, said in an interview that corruption is a significant
problem now, and it was discussed at length in the last session of the assembly
in July.

''We have corruption and it is a big problem,'' Mr. Khieu Kanharith said. ''But
I can assure you that this corruption is only at the middle, not at the top. I
know all the people in the Politburo, and I know they live simply.

''The main fault of this Government and this party, and for me, I blame also Hun
Sen, is that they're too tolerant, too laissez-faire, and not sufficiently
decisive,'' he added.

Mr. Khieu Kanharith said he had clashed with Mr. Hun Sen on this issue.

''I've said to him, 'You must watch your colleagues,' '' he said.

The Ruling Party
Living Royally, Losing Credibility

There are many stories making the rounds, difficult to confirm, of the growing
wealth of Mr. Hun Sen and his wife and their contacts with foreign businessmen.
They are said to own five houses, renting one to the Australian office for aid
agencies, and numerous foreign cars. In February, the wedding of Mr. Hun Sen's
niece, Neth Savoeun, to the police colonel responsible for intelligence in Phnom
Penh caused much talk. Cambodian weddings are characteristically lavish, but
this affair took place here at a Government hotel and was repeated in the
family's home province of Kompong Cham.

Since then, officials say, there has been more discretion shown. ''Some part of
the stories are without question true,'' said a senior diplomat. ''But it is
difficult to know exactly how big a part.''

While most Cambodians expect such behavior of their leaders in what remains a
hierarchical society, and may even admire it - ''It's not so different from some
Mayors in Boston,'' the diplomat said - it has caused problems inside the party
and with the peasantry, he said.

It is one reason for the popularity of Chea Sim, the leader of the National
Assembly and No. 2 in the party (Mr. Hun Sen is No. 3; Heng Samrin is the
Secretary General). A simple man who had been trained as a Buddhist monk, Mr.
Chea Sim is regarded as a comforting but more rigorous figure who can serve as a
brake to Mr. Hun Sen's accelerator.

Discos Shut Down

An indication of the Government's new sensitivity to the image of wealth came in
late July, when discos and dancing restaurants were ordered to close; they had
opened in May, when the Constitution was liberalized and the 10 P.M. curfew here
was lifted. (In the countryside, there is normally a curfew of 9 P.M.)

With the huge influx of imported and smuggled luxury items like liquor,
champagne, beer and cigarettes, the display at such clubs, and the noise and
drunkenness they engendered, led to many complaints. Diplomats say prostitution
was prevalent, and many Government officials and army officers could be seen
attending the clubs.

A few dancing spots will be reopened soon, but regulated by the Government. Even
so, at the many private restaurants in Phnom Penh, the newly wealthy create
piles of imported beer cans and bottles so intricate that they seem a modern
version of Angkor, the series of temples representing the Buddhist universe that
marked the height of the Khmer civilization.

The Peasants
New Flow of Cash, Old Health Ills

Diplomats and aid workers say that a risk greater than conspicuous wealth in the
city is growing resentment among the poor in the countryside. While the
Government has been praised for allowing farmers to keep their land and sell it
or pass it on to their children, there are criticisms that party cadres take the
best land.

The cash economy is beginning to spread to the countryside, and Mr. Khieu
Kanharith agrees with aid workers that usury is becoming a significant and
troubling rural problem. The rates are at least 20 percent a month.

While the Government has made some haphazard efforts to improve health care and
welfare in rural areas where malaria, tuberculosis, dysentery and worms are
rampant, there have been more important priorities, like national defense and
survival.

14-Year-Olds in Army

There is also resentment of the forced impressment of 14- and 15-year-olds into
the army, especially in the countryside where abuses can go unnoticed. Very
young soldiers met on the road from Phnom Penh to the Thai frontier town of
Poipet say they have volunteered, and many have indeed, but doctors in Kompong
Cham and Kompong Speu report knee wounds to young men who say they were shot by
soldiers when trying to escape.

The Defense Minister, Gen. Tie Banh, said in an interview that there have been a
few cases of young men shirking their duty, but not many. He denied that
soldiers shot young men trying to escape. Mr. Khieu Kanharith said soldiers were
not forcing young men into trucks, but organized criminals dressed as soldiers
were abducting young men to seek ransoms from their families.

''Forced impressment is going on,'' said a diplomat. ''It's no way to build
morale in the army or support in the countryside.''

Human Rights
In the Provinces, No Rein on Abuses

There is also continuing resentment of the use of young men and women to build
the border defenses near Thailand known as the ''Bamboo Wall.'' Diplomats here
say many have died from mines and malaria in numbers ranging from ''a couple of
thousand to a couple of dozen thousand.''

The labor is not forced, Cambodian officials say, but is ''a voluntary
contribution to the defense of the motherland.''

Ith Loeur, the Governor of Bantheay Meanchey province on the Thai border, said
in Sisophon that the Bamboo Wall is ''not sufficiently effective'' and did
little to stop armed incursions.

''In the dry season, fires burn the bamboo,'' he said, ''while in the wet
season, the mines are light and they float away.''

Diplomats say human rights violations are likely to get worse in this period of
war-consciousness and concern over survival. Amnesty International says that
there are ''thousands'' of political prisoners, but that it has not been allowed
to visit Cambodia for an examination. Mr. Khieu Kanharith and others in the
National Assembly have raised the issue of a more regulated system of laws and
courts, but this is a matter for the future, diplomats agree, and the Government
in Phnom Penh has little control over abuses in the provinces.

Echoing a common theme, a diplomat said the Government, starting with nothing
and internationally isolated, had impressive accomplishments.

''They have done very well, with a lot of mistakes,'' he said. ''But there are a
lot of nails in the golden bed.''

The most serious problem, he continued, is that the Khmer Rouge are already
pointing to the lavishness of city life, the consorting with foreigners and the
destitution of the countryside and saying: ''It's the same as before. What was
the revolution for?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 23, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

A front-page article on Saturday about the war in Cambodia misstated several
black-market exchange rates. They were in riels to the dollar.

GRAPHIC: The Government in Phnom Penh and ordinary Cambodians are making
contingency plans in the event of a return to power by the Khmer Rouge. In the
Cambodian capital's Central Market, people waited at a stall that deals in gold
and precious stones. An entrepreneur said, ''People remember that in the Pol Pot
time, having even a quarter of a gold ring hidden away could save your life.''
(Agence France-Presse) (pg. 5); maps of Cambodia highlighting Phnom Penh area
(pg. 5)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 19, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Alabama Man, 43, Is Executed For Killing Girl With Pipe Bomb

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 462 words

DATELINE: ATMORE, Ala., Aug. 18


A murderer who was married in a prison ceremony last week was executed in
Alabama's electric chair early today for the slaying of an 11-year-old girl.

The 43-year-old convict, Herbert Lee Richardson, was pronounced dead at 12:14
A.M., said a spokeswoman for the State Department of Corrections.

Mr. Richardson was executed for the 1977 killing of Rena Mae Callins, whose aunt
had broken off a close relationship with Mr. Richardson. The girl was killed by
a pipe bomb left on the porch of her home. The bomb detonated when the girl
picked it up.

The execution was carried out after the Supreme Court refused Mr. Richardson's
request for a stay on Thursday, as had the United States Court of Appeals for
the 11th Circuit in Atlanta and Federal District Judge Robert Varner in
Montgomery. Gov. Guy Hunt had refused to grant clemency.

Mr. Richardson was the sixth person executed in Alabama and the 116th in the
nation since the Supreme Court allowed states to restore the death penalty in
1976.

Mr. Richardson, blindfolded, was strapped in the electric chair at Holman Prison
as Warden Charlie Jones read the death warrant.

'I Have No Ill Feeling'

In a final statement, Mr. Richardson said, ''I have no ill feeling and hold
nothing against anyone.'' Soon afterward, he received a surge of 1,800 volts of
electricity.

In a news conference after the execution, the Alabama Prison Commissioner,
Morris Thigpen, said Mr. Richardson had requested that he be blindfolded from
the time he left the holding cell adjacent to the execution room at 11:57 P.M.
''He never saw the execution chamber,'' Mr. Thigpen said.

Mr. Richardson's wife, Katie, along with some of her family and a minister
visited the condemned man Thursday until about 10:30 P.M. The Richardsons were
married in the prison's visiting room Aug. 9. Mr. Richardson met his wife, a
member of the El Bethel Primitive Baptist Church, three years ago after he wrote
the church saying that he listened to its radio broadcasts, Mr. Richardson was
described by Lucia Penland, director of a group opposed to the death penalty, as
an ''all-around American boy'' who was left emotionally disturbed by his Vietnam
War experience. His lawyer, Bryan Stevenson, said Mr. Richardson served three
years in Vietnam as a technican ''in a forward area.''

Mr. Richardson said the pipe bomb was not meant to explode, only to scare the
girl's family.

Judge Varner, in rejecting a stay of the execution, said Thursday that it is
''beyond the bounds of reason to believe that a device which maimed and killed
an 11-year-old child by exploding in her hands could be thought of as not
presenting a serious risk of harm.''

Margie Callins, the mother of the victim, had said she could not rest ''until he
gets the chair.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 19, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

OBSERVER;
Chops and Bacon Away!

BYLINE: By Russell Baker

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 747 words


In World War II an American hymn to bombing ended exultantly with the words,
''Nothing can stop the Army Air Corps!''

Not even the end of the war, as it turned out. War over, the Army Air Corps shed
its old Army skin and turned into the United States Air Force.

Along came rockets carrying atom bombs. Here was a devastating new form of
artillery that could deliver doomsday swift as lightning. It made the Air
Force's lumbering old bombers as obsolete as the battering ram.

Control of the new super-weapons (and their sweet billion-dollar budgets) might
logically have gone to Army artillery. To avert this catastrophe, which would
have reduced it to a minor power, the Air Force invented aerospace.

What it did was simply invent this brand new word: ''aerospace.'' The word was
silly, but silliness often works wonders on Congress. ''Aerospace'' embodies the
idea that air and space, the airless void beyond earth and air, were one and the
same.

Since air was the Air Force's domain, did it not follow that space was, too? Of
course not, unless you could say ''aerospace'' without laughing.

Senators and Representatives could say it with straight faces because experience
with the Air Force had shown that when it came to delivering Pentagon gravy to
folks back home and precious campaign contributors, nothing could top the U.S.
Air Force. Certainly not the Army.

Why should these magnificently costly, glamorously deadly and disgustingly
wealth-enhancing new weapons be entrusted to an antique outfit wth a dull name
like ''artillery'' when modern aerospace yearned to take it under command?

This long history of Air Force unstoppability marches on with the Stealth
bomber, which again flew a little the other day.

Barring an unlikely outbreak of good sense at the White House or Capitol, the
Air Force will eventually buy a whole fleet of these things at a price of about
$550 million per plane, and it will be a Pentagon miracle if the eventual price
doesn't far exceed this immodest figure.

The absurdities of the Stealth have been thoroughly denounced in Congress,
which, as always, then proceeded to approve squandering more money on it on the
usual theory that once you have thrown away several billions it can't hurt to
throw away several more.

At $500 million, or $550 million, or whatever the ultimate retail price may be,
the Stealth will be the most expensive plane ever produced. The obvious question
is, what target can possibly be worth attacking with such an expensive plane?

Sending a $550 million plane against any target much less imposing than an
entire city would be economically unsound. Why risk all that money to knock out
a $10 million bridge or a $200 million oil refinery?

It was low-cost targets like these on which the Air Force used its B-52's in
Vietnam, and sometimes targets of even less monetary value. In ''A Bright
Shining Lie,'' Neil Sheehan describes B-52's conducting carpet-bomb raids of
undeveloped land, attacks aimed solely at destroying humans, animals and plants.

Those B-52's suffered surprising losses from surface-to-air missile attacks.
Surely the Air Force would not have risked a $550 million Stealth on such
missions.

Only attacks on entire cities in total war can justify risking the loss of such
valuable machinery. But for attacking cities we already have all that aerospace
artillery capable of eliminating entire cities long before the Stealth can
possibly get there.

The reason we are paying for this stupefyingly expensive plane has to do with
the romantic psychology of the Air Force and the evolution of the defense budget
into a Congressional pork bill.

The military has done such a good job of distributing its billions among states
and Congressional districts that Congress now simply will not let the military
cancel projects that even the Pentagon would like to be rid of. The Pentagon
budget has replaced the old rivers-and-harbors bill as Congress's main pork
course.

The Air Force is uniquely able to gratify Congress's pork hunger because of its
sentimental attachment to the past romance of manned flight. Its public
relations offices can give you a hundred unpersuasive reasons why the
thermonuclear-tipped ICBM can never make the manned bomber obsolete.

Congress listens happily because, as the Stealth illustrates, there is nothing
like a new manned bomber for dumping gravy on the folks back home. Ergo,
Stealth. Nothing can stop the U.S. Air Force when there's pork on the table.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 19, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Le Thanh Nghi, Vietnamese Official, 78

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 103 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 18


Le Thanh Nghi, former Vice President of Vietnam, died on Wednesday of old age
and illness, the Hanoi radio reported today. He was 78 years old.

Mr. Nghi, a former coal worker and power-plant employee in northern Vietnam,
joined the Vietnam Young Revolutionary Comrades in 1929. He was seized three
times by the French colonial administration for Communist activities and served
two jail terms, from 1930 to 1936 and 1940 to 1945.

He rose to become Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party, and
served as a Politburo member, as Deputy Prime Minister and as Vice President of
the State Council.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 20, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Loss of Border Battle to Khmer Rouge Signals Trouble for Cambodian Army

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1072 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Aug. 14


In three weeks of heavy fighting recently between the Khmer Rouge guerrillas and
the troops of the Phnom Penh Government, the Government soldiers did not perform
well, fleeing their positions under heavy artillery barrages from the guerrillas
and retreating up to six miles, diplomats and Government officials say.

The fighting in the Cambodian-Thai border area from Poipet to Pailin was
regarded as a test of Cambodian Army's morale at a time of heightened concern
over its capability to defeat the Khmer Rouge, the dominant group in a
three-faction coalition fighting the Vietnamese-backed Phnom Penh Government.
Vietnam, which invaded Cambodia in December 1978 to drive out Pol Pot and the
Khmer Rouge, is preparing to withdraw all its troops by Sept. 27, leaving the
Cambodian Army to bear the full brunt of the guerrilla war.

An Unusual Battle

The border territory was almost entirely recaptured by Government forces after a
weeklong counteroffensive toward the end of July, just before an international
conference on Cambodia opened in Paris.

The fighting was unusual for the amount of artillery the Khmer Rouge used, for
the incursion by Cambodian soldiers into Thai territory and for the Cambodian
shelling of the Site 8 civilian camp of the Khmer Rouge in Thailand. Perhaps
most important, the fighting appeared to give concrete indications of a change
in Thailand's previous policy of support for Khmer Rouge along the border.

Cambodia's Defense Minister, Gen. Tie Banh, said the Khmer Rouge fired about
20,000 artillery shells, most of them 120-millimeter rounds, in three weeks to
support the attack. The fighting was concentrated around Pailin, an important
gemstone mining area profitable to both the guerrillas and the Government. Khieu
Kanharith, editor of the semi-official weekly Kampuchea and a member of the
National Assembly, said ''thousands'' of Khmer Rouge fighters took part, marking
a change from the usual pattern of roving bands that range from 10 to 100
guerrillas.

''This is the first time that the Khmer Rouge launched this kind of offensive,
with thousands of troops and so much artillery,'' Mr. Khieu Kanharith said.
''Our strategy requires that we avoid human losses, so we withdrew.''

Diplomats Express Criticism

Eastern bloc diplomats, however, characterized the withdrawal as a panicked
retreat, and said the army's morale was generally very low. A senior diplomat
said he thought the Khmer Rouge could take Sisophon, near the Thai border, and
even Battambang, the country's second-largest city, if the situation did not
change. ''Up to now, the Cambodian soldiers are not so patriotic that they want
to die for this Government,'' he said. ''They don't want it changed, but to die
is different.''

After Vietnamese forces go, there will be ''some turning point,'' he said. ''For
if they won't die for him, Hun Sen will be toppled. Will their fear be so strong
that they fight, or so strong that they surrender?''

Another diplomat from the Eastern bloc suggested that when the dry season comes
in late November, the Khmer Rouge are likely to try to demoralize the army with
a ''Tet offensive,'' concentrating uprisings in various parts of the country.
''If they take Sisophon and Battambang for even 10 hours,'' he said, ''morale
here will collapse like a souffle.''

Defending the Troops

General Tie Banh said that his troops were prepared, and that a major attack on
Battambang, in northwestern Cambodia, would be ''suicidal.'' A senior Vietnamese
diplomat, acknowledging the flight of Cambodian troops, said that soldiers who
flee once but manage to regroup are less likely to run a second time, and that
no one in Cambodia was in any doubt about what a Khmer Rouge victory would mean.

In the recent fighting, Mr. Khieu Kanharith said, casualties were ''in the
hundreds,'' but General Tie Banh said his casualties were ''few'' because the
Khmer Rouge artillery was not well-aimed.

General Tie Banh said troops loyal to Prince Norodom Sihanouk and Mr. Son Sann
attacked Government forces from the rear. This account was supported by Ith
Loeur, the Governor of Bantheay Meanchey province, interviewed in Sisophon.
Prince Sihanouk, the titular leader of the three factions fighting the Phnom
Penh Government, said earlier this year that the three groups would coordinate
their military strategies. On Aug. 7, Mr. Ith Loeur said, showing a dated video
to support his assertion, 79 fighters from Mr. Son Sann's faction were captured
as they tried to make their way back to bases in Thailand.

During the counterattack, General Tie Banh said with some pride, Cambodian
troops pursued the Khmer Rouge back to their bases in Thailand, and in points
entered Thailand about five miles, in particular near the border of the Thai
provinces of Trat and Chanthaburi in the southeast and Prachinburi province near
Poipet. He said that the shelling in July of Site 8, a mostly civilian Khmer
Rouge camp just inside Thailand, was carried out by Cambodian gunners, who also
shelled other Khmer Rouge military camps along the border.

Thailand's Role in Fighting

Diplomats said that coordinates for the shelling were provided by Thai forces.
General Tie Banh denied that, but Mr. Ith Loeur said that it was true, and that
he has regular meetings with Thai commanders. He commands provincial forces in
this key border area and speaks Thai.

He also said that the Thais had stopped using their artillery in support of the
Khmer Rouge since about the first of this year, an assertion supported by
General Tie Banh, a Cambodian of Thai ancestry who has close ties to Thai
generals and business leaders, who are particularly interested in the gemstones
of Pailin, Cambodian teak and fish and a reopening of the border at Poipet for
trade.

While the Thais are diplomatic supporters of Prince Sihanouk's coalition and
play a crucial role in providing sanctuary to Khmer Rouge guerrillas and as
conduits for Chinese military supplies to the Khmer Rouge, the Thais have helped
the Phnom Penh Government break its diplomatic isolation by inviting the Prime
Minister, Hun Sen, to Bangkok twice.

Thai officials say the army is preparing for a shift in policy on the Khmer
Rouge. Diplomats in Bangkok and Phnom Penh say that with Thai border commanders
now finding more profit in trade with Cambodia than with the Khmer Rouge, this
Thai shift in policy will become easier to carry out.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Cambodian soldiers on the road from Sisophon to Poipe
(NYT/Steven Erlanger); Gen. Tie Banh, the Cambodian Defense Minister (NYT/Steven
Erlanger); map of Cambodia indicating the border between Poipet and Pailin (NYT)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 20, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Americanization of Emily

BYLINE: By BENEDICT NIGHTINGALE

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 3; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2227 words

DATELINE: LONDON


Two years ago, Emily Lloyd might have been dismissed as one of those minor storm
systems that rattle the showbiz barometers, stir the moviegoing public and
evaporate as suddenly and inexplicably as they arrived. After all, she was only
16 and had appeared in a single low-budget film. She'd played the brazen
adolescent who scandalizes a sedate British seaside town with her sexual bravado
in ''Wish You Were Here,'' and she'd done nothing else whatsoever. Yet here she
is still, 18 years old and altogether unabated.

She takes the title role in the new movie ''Cookie,'' opening Wednesday. Next
month comes the opening of ''In Country,'' Norman Jewison's screen version of
Bobbie Ann Mason's best-selling novel, with Miss Lloyd playing the daughter of a
Kentucky boy long ago killed in Vietnam. Then she'll be seen as what she calls a
''Lady Macbeth figure'' in ''Chicago Joe and the Showgirl,'' a film currently
being shot near her native London. Meanwhile, offers of yet more work aren't
exactly lacking. It's beginning to look as if Hurricane Emily might be a
permanent feature in the international weather.

She's recognizably the same Emily Lloyd who captivated the English and American
press in 1987, bubbling guilelessly away about her pet enthusiasms, jumping from
subject to subject and peppering her conversation with words like ''great'' and
''brilliant''; yet the last two years have not, she admits, been altogether easy
for her. She's come to love America, where both ''Cookie'' and ''In Country''
were shot, but she misses the days when she could simply be the teen-age tomboy
in England.

She'd far rather be playing basketball or romping with her friends in the park
than going to important receptions, smiling her way through parties and allowing
herself to be groomed for the role of an international celebrity. A story she
likes to tell involves a Frenchman who came up to her while she was shopping on
the street in New York. ''You look like a movie star,'' he said. ''You look like
Emily Lloyd.'' ''I am Emily Lloyd,'' she admitted. ''No, you're not Emily
Lloyd,'' he replied. ''You look like her, but you're much more common than
her.''

If being common means being down to earth and unaffected, then it's a
description Emily Lloyd is only too relieved to accept. If it also means being
open and spirited, it helps explain why she, an English girl with a distinct
London accent, was cast as someone so quintessentially American as Cookie. The
character is a defiant young New Yorker of Italian descent. More specifically,
she's the daughter of a mobster who is released from a long jail term, only to
find his onetime associates reneging on their debts to him. The movie involves
Cookie's awkward, resentful reconciliation with Peter Falk's weary mafioso,
their growing rapprochement and their eventual alliance against the local
godfather.

''I was amazingly impressed by 'Wish You Were Here,' '' says Susan Seidelman,
the director of ''Cookie.'' ''In fact, from the first we agreed we were looking
for an American Emily Lloyd, someone with that amazing energy and that alive,
unpredictable face.'' Open auditions produced almost 1,000 contenders for the
part, but no outstanding candidate. Then came the inevitable thought. Why not
Emily Lloyd herself, provided she could be taught to pass as native born and
bred?

Dialect lessons left her, in Miss Seidelman's words, ''50 per cent there, but
still clearly a British girl trying to do a New York accent.'' The next move was
an unusual one. Miss Lloyd was sent to live for two weeks with an
Italian-American family in deepest Brooklyn.

As she herself remembers it, gleefully indulging her considerable flair for
mimicry, it was like being in an scene from ''Moonstruck.'' The mother kept
telling her she was too thin, shutting her in the kitchen and pressing food on
her. Her husband sat watching television and saying nothing at all. The son of
the house seemed mainly interested in re-running tapes of ''The Godfather.''

His wife lives there, too, trying but failing to suppress her antagonism to her
mother-in-law. And not far away was a dance club - ''you know, like 'Saturday
Night Fever,' with the guys wearing medallions and the girls with long nails and
hairspray, chewing gum. I do think it all helped. I got a sense of what Cookie's
upbringing would have been like.'' She also got the accent - and the role.

Actually, she didn't need any stint in Brooklyn to understand the character's
emotions and sympathize with them. ''Cookie's been her mum's walking stick;
she's been the man of the house,'' she says, ''so it's quite hard for her when
her dad comes out of prison, and she realizes her home is really his place.''

Moreover, Cookie is instinctively very much the rebel, and actually begins the
movie by being arrested, if only for failing to pay her subway fare. In that,
she's a bit like Lynda, the balky heroine of ''Wish You Were Here.'' She's a bit
like young people Miss Lloyd knows back home in north London, some of whom, she
says, have turned to theft and burglary in despair of ever landing a decent job.
Indeed, there are ways in which she's a bit like Miss Lloyd herself.

By the time she was 16, she'd been to no less than seven London schools and
wasn't always liked by her teachers. Her one and only year at drama academy was,
she says, mainly spent in the corridor, banished from the classroom by angry
instructors for arguing too much. At another school, she outwitted a hostile
teacher by getting top marks for an essay submitted under the name of the class
favorite, while the favorite herself, posing as Emily Lloyd, was excoriated for
incompetence. That's the sort of anti-authoritarian gesture Cookie, too, would
have enjoyed.

Miss Lloyd candidly declares that she hates talking about acting. For her, it's
mainly a matter of familiarizing herself with a character's background, working
herself into the right mood for a particular take and then reacting as
spontaneously as she can to whatever emotions the other actors throw at her.
''With Cookie, I sometimes thought of times I'd been away with my mum,'' she
says. ''You know, arguments about tidying my room or leaving the toaster on and
nearly setting the house on fire. On the day, I'd try to channel those feelings
into what Cookie was doing. With films, you do all the mental preparation you
can, but when the cameras roll, then you're not conscious any more; it's much
more instinctive.''

That was the serious, professional part of making ''Cookie.'' But mainly Miss
Lloyd remembers horsing around with the crew. ''It was a real breath of fresh
air just to be on the set in the morning,'' she says. ''You might have had
dinner with people in the film business. You know, talking shop about who
directed this film and who starred in that film. But here was this load of guys
drinking beer and playing knuckles and shouting at each other: 'Bring dat over
here, you stoopid idiot.' It was great, really brilliant.'' There were practical
jokes galore. The technicians smuggled her into the gambling halls of Atlantic
City, where some of the film's scenes were shot and helped her escape from the
security guards, who could see she was under 21. In turn, she celebrated the end
of the shoot by presenting them all with squirt guns, and they reciprocated by
staging a water battle, at which more or less everyone got soaked. ''The crew
really loved her,'' recalls Miss Seidelman, one of those caught in the
crossfire.

''Ugh,'' says Miss Lloyd, as she contemplates the prospect of turning 19 this
coming month. ''Ugh. But it doesn't really make any difference, because mentally
I'm only 8.'' For her, staying young is all-important. It means being unafraid
to say what you feel, taking risks and having fun. It also means America. ''Over
there even the 28-year-olds act like they're 17 or 18,'' she says. ''They're not
as frightened to show their emotions as the English, are they? They've got more
passion for life, more capacity to enjoy themselves, more optimism. I mean,
saying, 'Have a nice day' is better than 'What's your problem, mate?,' which is
the sort of reaction you get in Britain.''

Even New York - indeed, especially New York - strikes her as a friendly,
outgoing place. When she was shooting ''Cookie,'' she'd sometimes go down into
the subway at 42d Street and join anyone dancing to the music of the little
bands that had ensconced themselves there. She chatted with shop assistants and
cabdrivers, particularly cabdrivers.

''One time, I was talking to this driver, and he was telling me about having
worked on a plantation, and then I found I hadn't any money, which is typical of
me; I'm very scatty and forgetful. And he said, that's all right, the
conversation was worth more than the fare. That couldn't happen in England,
could it? I know there's poverty and crime in New York, but it's so alive; there
are adventures wherever you go, and I really believe people are happier there
than in London.''

It was both a pretty busy and a pretty American 1988 for Miss Lloyd. Hardly had
she finished work on ''Cookie'' in New York than she was in Paducah, Ky.,
staying with a local lawyer and his family by way of preparing for ''In
Country'' and a very different role.

The subject is still partly a daughter's reconciliation with a father, but this
time it's one that can happen only posthumously. Only by relentlessly quizzing
her uncle and other Vietnam vets can Samantha, or Sam, discover who he was and
how he died. Unsurprisingly, it wasn't the odd, trivial argument with her mother
that Miss Lloyd remembered when she was readying herself for shots. More often
it was the death of her paternal grandfather, Charles Lloyd Pack, a British
actor to whom she was very close.

''Sam's totally opposite to Cookie,'' says Miss Lloyd. ''She's naive and
vulnerable and quite depressed and confused, very confused.'' But here, too, the
actress feels some personal empathy with the character. After all, she is only
18, for all the fuss that's been made about her. In her more anxious moments
these days, she seems variously to feel she's failing to please people, being
too eager to please them, becoming a bit phony, trying too hard not to be phony,
getting too self-absorbed, being overapologetic and somehow losing touch with
herself. ''I'm confused, I'm so confused,'' wails Miss Lloyd in one of the funny
voices she likes to put on. But in a way she seems to mean it.

As it happens, all the characters she's played so far have been battlers,
survivors. And all have been fundamentally sympathetic, despite their surlier
and more wayward moments. But that's about to change with ''Chicago Joe and the
Showgirl,'' which is based on a real-life crime in the early 1940's. In the
film, Miss Lloyd plays a Welsh girl who encourages her boyfriend, an American
serviceman, to do violent and finally murderous things and herself comes to a
less than happy end. ''It's very raw, and I imagine some people will be a bit
repulsed by some of what happens,'' she says. ''And that's good, because I don't
want to get typecast. I don't just want to be likable or Hollywoodish or
glamorous.''

Her aim in her work, as in her life, is still to do as many and various things
as time and circumstances permit. Perhaps she's a little less eager to become a
stuntwoman, an idea that greatly appealed to her two years ago. But she wants to
tackle screen comedy and do a film musical and follow her father Roger Lloyd
Pack, who has played several leading roles in London, onto the legitimate stage.
But she'd rather launch her theatrical career in New York than in England.

''I went to see Kevin Kline and Blythe Danner in 'Much Ado' in the park, and it
was brilliant, really wonderful. There were young people and ethnics and
working-class people in the audience, and they were really enjoying it. Theater
can get so reverential and constipated over here. You know, yawn, yawn.''

Another reason for preferring New York is that the English seem more inclined
than Americans to resent her success. Some have contrived to be slightly
belligerent about it. ''Ah, you're a film actress, so probably not a good enough
actress'' is, she says, the impression that more than one London thespian has
managed to transmit to her. Even one or two of her old friends have become a
bit, well, strange. ''A couple of them are actresses, and it's got really
delicate. You can't get excited and say, oh, I worked with this director or I
got offered that script, because they think you're showing off. And you can't be
blase, or they think you're snobby. You do find out who your real friends are.''

Luckily, most of her London friends have indeed turned out to be real. She can
still go out dancing with them ''and not feel I have to justify myself every
five minutes.'' Alternatively, she can put on her Batman baseball cap and go out
to the park for a kick-around with a soccer ball. But how long can all that
continue, given shooting schedules, professional visits to America and all the
other pressures of the film business, not to mention her own advancing age?

''I sometimes wish I didn't have to spend so much time with people so much older
than myself,'' she says. ''I really do miss being a kid and just being able to
be stupid and not have responsibility. I don't really want it to end.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Emily Lloyd portraying a gangster's daughter in Susan
Seidelman's new film, ''Cookie'' (pg. 1); Emily Lloyd with Bruce Willis in a
scene from the forthcoming ''In Country'' (pg. 22)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 20, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Why the Contras Failed

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 605 words


Did the American people somehow let down, even betray, the contra rebels in
Nicaragua?

Adolfo Calero, a leader of the insurgency, suggested as much the other day in an
Op-Ed article. He likened the plight of rebels now in Honduran camps to that of
the people of Czechoslovakia, who were onlookers as they were sold out before
World War II at Munich. He complained that Secretary of State James Baker made
jokes about relocating contras when he should have been leaning hard on Central
Americans to support them.

Mr. Calero also accused the region's presidents of self-serving blindness for
insisting that the contras be disbanded by a December deadline. And he attacked
the opposition parties inside Nicaragua for signing an eleventh-hour pact with
''insubstantial promises'' from Sandinistas to conduct free elections in
February.

Mr. Calero's frustrations may be understandable, but these contentions are
better excuses than arguments.

In truth, what has done in the contras is lack of support in Nicaragua, not in
Washington. What explains their isolation in Central America is not Mr. Baker's
failure to twist arms but the widespread belief that the contras remain a
hit-and-run army encamped in Honduras and led from Miami.

For eight years, the contras got extensive U.S. aid - clandestinely from the
conservative Reagan Administration and openly from Congress. In addition to $350
million in direct aid, Congress also voted $1.6 billion to Honduras, a
significant share of which benefited contras. Once, in 1984, Congress refused to
vote funds, but as everyone knows, President Reagan evaded even that restriction
with missile sales to Iran and backdoor funding.

Granted, U.S. aid was meager compared with the billions pumped into Nicaragua by
the Soviet Union. But besieged governments need billions; guerrillas don't. In
El Salvador, for example, a few thousand insurgents rule much of the countryside
despite unstinting U.S. aid to the Salvadoran Army. Yet in eight years, contras
have been unable to take and hold a single Nicaraguan town.

Washington is not to blame for the inability of contra leaders to forge a common
front with aggrieved Miskito Indians on the Atlantic Coast or leaders of the
more liberal ''southern front,'' based in Costa Rica. Nor is Congress
responsible for the human rights abuses by contras that mocked Mr. Reagan's
boast that they were the moral equivalent of America's Founding Fathers.

What in fact seriously weakened the rebel cause was excessive dependence on U.S.
aid. Some contra leaders seemed to act as if Sandinista propaganda were true -
that an imperial Washington would never allow the insurgents to fail. Contra
leaders seemed to spend more time in Washington lobbying Congress than in the
jungle sharing danger with peasant recruits.

Not all contra leaders agree with Mr. Calero. Alfredo Cesar has returned to
Nicaragua to help challenge the Sandinistas in free elections. Arturo Cruz, who
was once called the indispensable contra by Reagan officials, sees real promise
in the new opening, brought about by regional pressure - and, yes, by the
contras. How sad that Mr. Calero would rather sulk in Miami than join in the
election process for which contras have clamored.

All this could come to echo the glib masochism that blamed defeat in Vietnam on
America's withdrawal. America spent its blood and treasure to help the South
Vietnamese; their war was not lost in Washington. America gave the contras
nearly a decade to show what they could do, even over impassioned dissent. That
seems all but forgotten as they now blame everybody else for their failures.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 20, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ABROAD AT HOME;
Kissinger and China

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section 4; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 767 words


Anyone still interested in the views of Henry Kissinger, who once exercised much
power in this country, should look at a recent article of his in The Los Angeles
Times. The subject was China, but the more interesting subtext was the mind of
the author: his attitude on issues of authority and freedom.

Mr. Kissinger bitterly denounced the U.S. House and Senate for voting to impose
economic sanctions on China after the massacre in Tiananmen Square. ''China
remains too important for America's national security,'' he wrote, ''to risk the
relationship on the emotions of the moment.''

The massacre was entirely a domestic matter, Mr. Kissinger said. ''Its brutality
was shocking.'' But ''no government in the world would have tolerated having the
main square of its capital occupied for eight weeks by tens of thousands of
demonstrators.'' Moreover, a ''demonstration of impotence'' in Beijing would
have encouraged regionalism in China. So ''a crackdown was inevitable.''

Americans who observed the events in Beijing - reporters, China scholars -
agreed that a crackdown was precisely not inevitable. The protest could have
been settled early on by modest official concessions. At the end, the
demonstrators were so exhausted and reduced in rank that they could easily have
been dispersed without the use of guns and tanks.

Chinese leaders, Mr. Kissinger said, if left to themselves, will learn someday
that ''economic reform is impossible without the educated groups'' that
demonstrated for democracy in Beijing, and the workers who supported them. ''As
so often in Chinese history, the rhythm of Chinese life and of Chinese common
sense is likely to produce some practical solution.''

But the whole thrust of recent Chinese history is to the contrary, tragically
so. Generation after generation of the scientists and teachers and writers so
desperately needed to bring that huge country into the stream of modern life has
been slaughtered.

Does the United States help China if it sees that pattern of repression and
terror repeated, and does no more than murmur tut-tut? The Chinese who are the
hope of their country, the brave campaigners for democracy, do not think so. The
very foundations of their thinking are the ideals of American freedom, and they
want the United States Government to speak out for those ideals.

In the world we have, it is necessary to deal with governments that we do not
like. The United States only injured itself - and helped to involve itself in
terrible wars - by pretending for decades that the People's Republic of China
was not there.

But it does not follow that the United States must close its eyes to horrors
going on in countries with which it maintains relations. That view runs counter
to the movement of history that has made human rights an important force in
American diplomacy - and a concern for people and governments around the world.

In office, Mr. Kissinger never was an enthusiast for public American expressions
on human rights. He resented and resisted Congressional action on the subject.
He liked to deal with the holders of power - with Leonid Brezhnev, say - and not
risk ruffling them by calling attention to their brutalities.

Deng Xiaoping similarly now. In his China article, Mr. Kissinger said ''the
caricature of Deng . . . as a tyrant despoiling Chinese youth is unfair.'' It
will take some explaining to the families of those killed in Tiananmen Square,
or those executed since, as to why that is unfair. It will take even more
explaining if Deng's performance leads, as seems increasingly likely, to
military rule in China.

Mr. Kissinger objected to U.S. sanctions against any ''major country'' for
''events entirely within its domestic jurisdiction.'' This terrible century has
shown us the price that ''domestic'' savagery may exact, and not just from the
offending government's own citizens. That is one reason why the human rights
movement has gained such strength.

When America speaks for human rights, it matters. President Carter helped Andrei
Sakharov, and the consequences are still being felt in the Soviet Union. The
Jackson-Vanik Amendment had its problems, but American concern for Soviet Jews
was effective in the long run.

Henry Kissinger has never understood the power of American ideas. At the end in
Vietnam he bewailed the loss of American influence, but that influence has in
fact grown since we gave up a wrongful use of force. He has always worried about
loss of authority. That is why he could write with such misplaced sympathy that
the Chinese Government had to act or display ''impotence.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 20, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

About Men;
Giving Up Guns

BYLINE: BY DENNIS GRAHAM; Dennis Graham, a registered nurse at a hospital in New
York, served in Vietnam from September 1969 to October 1970.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 34, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1165 words


I VIVIDLY RECALL THE first time I held a gun. My father was a New York City cop.
One day when I was 10, he returned from his annual trip to the firing range and
let me and my brother watch him clean his .38 caliber Smith & Wesson revolver.
Dad sat on the kitchen table as the biting odor of gunpowder and gun oil filled
the room.

While cleaning his gun, Dad explained that it was not a toy but a weapon to be
used for defense - to save a life. After cleaning his revolver, he allowed my
12-year-old brother and me to feel the firing pin strike the soft skin of our
index fingers. He told us never to touch his gun, not for any reason, without
his permission.

Helping Dad clean his gun after firing-range practice became an annual rite. But
as I grew older, I became aware of a gun's great burden. I once asked my father
why he always carried his gun. He explained that a police officer is always on
duty and required by law to have a gun in case someone commits a crime. On the
hottest day of the year, when other fathers went bare-chested, my dad had to
wear a shirt to hide his gun. During family outings to the beach, he kept his
gun in a beach bag, and either he or my mother stood guard while the rest of the
family frolicked in the waves. During the blackout of 1965, my father was called
to duty. As I watched him load his gun, I realized for the first time that he
might not come back.

My next experience with guns was as a 20-year-old draftee during the Vietnam
war. People who have never been in the military don't understand why new
recruits are forced to chant constantly about killing: to remind them that being
a soldier in a time of war is not a game or a bad dream but deadly serious
reality.

I remember the first time I was handed an M-16 assault rifle. It was matte black
and seemed to be made of plastic. It rattled when I shook it, unlike my father's
pistol, which was firm. During weapons instruction I imagined I was at my
family's kitchen table and that the drill instructor was my father. At the range
I reflected upon my father's burden with his gun and treated my weapon with
great respect.

Somehow I had the highest target score of the 150 men in my company. I thought
this truly odd. I had never fired a weapon before, only touched one during our
family's annual rite. Many of the other men in my company were country boys who
had been firing rifles and pistols all their lives. Yet, I was a better
marksman.

When I was assigned to infantry training, I finally realized what we were
preparing for. I believed that the better (Continued on Page 36) I used these
weapons, the better my chances were of staying alive. We learned how to operate
the M-60 machine gun, the M-79 grenade launcher, the .50 caliber machine gun and
the .45 caliber pistol. Sometimes, I would think of all these weapons and wonder
what would become of me after my graduate education in guns.

Arriving in Vietnam, I was assigned to an infantry company and issued an M-16.
During my first firefight I heard an AK-47 assault rifle being fired in my
direction. As the bullets whizzed over me, there was a ''crack'' that for the
rest of my year in the jungle would represent the sound of death. As I lay in
the mud firing back, hot cartridges from my M-16 spilled down my shirt. The M-16
is designed to eject empty cartridges to the right, and if you are left-handed,
as I am, the cartridges fly down your open shirt onto your exposed chest. Every
time I fired there would be this burn. There was no way to avoid this burn and
stay alive.

Two weeks later, while sleeping in a bunker in a blackness only an infantry
soldier could know, I was awakened by a flash of light. I felt the searing pain
of hot metal entering my back. The light was intensely white. Then, as if by
magic, I was transported back to blackness. As I scurried to my weapon, I heard
men screaming and machine guns firing. The assistant gunner was wounded almost
immediately, so I fed the belt of 7.62 ammo into this blasting gun. Once again I
felt the searing pain caused by hot metal, this time in my left arm. The
shrapnel knocked me to the ground. As I lay there trying to figure out if I was
about to die, I heard the machine gunner call for a medic. The battalion
surgeon, who was struggling with 50 wounded men, said I would be all right. I
immediately returned to my squad and fired my rifle all night. The sky was
filled with jets dropping bombs and napalm. Some helicopters carried away the
wounded and the dead as others strafed the perimeter of this firebase located at
the gates of hell. With every round I fired, I prayed to stay alive until dawn.

When the sun finally rose, I looked at the results of our night's work. I became
sickened at the sight, which is still a vivid memory. I counted seven enemy
bodies strewn on the concertina wire surrounding our base. One of these men was
not dead, but wounded. His left leg was blown off above the knee. He seemed
awake, but he did not cry, did not utter a sound. Probably, like me, he was glad
to be alive. All of this occurred within my first 40 days in Vietnam, and I
wondered if I would survive.

I spent an additional 11 months in Vietnam, frequently as a point man for my
unit. I was wounded one more time. I saw death again and again. And then,
somehow, I was finally going home. I took a captured Soviet-made SKS rifle,
covered it with brown wrapping paper, and carried it to Oakland, Calif., where I
was discharged from the army. I went to the San Francisco airport with my
souvenir rifle in hand and sat in the terminal in a state of shock. I looked at
this rifle and reflected on my experiences of war and death and how it feels to
be on the firing and receiving end of a gun. I decided to give up guns. I walked
into the men's room just before my plane arrived to take me home and stuffed the
rifle into a trash can.

The shock from my war experiences lasted for nearly a year, until I woke up one
morning in a hospital after a near-fatal car accident, receiving last rites from
a priest. I then decided to try to recover from those dark war days. My brother
and many of my childhood friends had become cops, but I had given up guns. Now,
20 years after my nights and days with guns, I am thinking about the recent rush
to buy assault rifles before they were banned. I hear there have been more than
250 murders in Washington, and there are still four months until the end of the
year. I think of the wounded children of Stockton, Calif., and am reminded of
the dead I saw on the wire of the firebase at the gates of hell. And I wonder.

I wonder how the man who killed those children in Stockton felt after he saw and
heard the results of his insanity. He responded, like many of his predecessors,
by taking his own life, the only logical way to deal with his deed.

I live in a city of guns. My house has been broken into twice, once while I
slept. But I have never had the urge to protect myself with a gun. You see, I
have given up guns.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 20, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FIGHTING HIS WAY TO THE TOP

BYLINE: By Richard B. Woodward; Richard B. Woodward, who lives in New York City,
writes frequently about the arts.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 50, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4164 words


I ALWAYS LIKEN MY CAREER TO THAT SCENE IN 'ON the Waterfront,' '' says James
Woods, an actor who doesn't sound or look anything like a young Marlon Brando.
Gaunt, tense, chain-smoking Marlboros and peering at his food through heavy
black-framed glasses, he could be Sean Penn's smarter, older brother. ''You know
the scene,'' he says. ''Terry Malloy has testified against the longshore Mafia,
and the pressure is on to put on a good face and make sure everybody has a job.
The guy walks out of the ship and says, 'Everybody works today.' And everybody
walks into the ship except Malloy. They even try to give his job to a bum -
anyone but him.''

Woods looks away, pausing before he completes his sour, rapid-fire parable.
''I've always thought,'' he says, ''if I were on a plane and there were an
earthquake and all of California fell into the sea and there were no movie
actors left, if I landed and called up the studios and said, 'Hey, fellas, I'm
still here, there's one left,' some executive would say, 'Well, yeah, but I'm
sure there's a football player in Kansas who would be better for the part. Just
stay at the airport. We'll get back to you.' ''

Sitting in the Polo Lounge at the Beverly Hills Hotel - his suggested place for
an interview - I'm not sure how to interpret this story. Like many of the things
James Woods says, it contains sarcasm, hyperbole, a touch of self-pity, a core
of hard truth and an unknown quantity of fog. His verbal dexterity, apparent in
all his films, and especially in person, allows him to argue both sides of any
issue without a flicker of irony. He has the aggressive wit and insecurity of a
stand-up comic; and he gives the impression that he would tell you anything if
he thought it might give him the edge.

Dressed in loafers, chinos and pink polo jersey, Woods doesn't look like an
outsider. The previous evening, he and his fiancee, Sarah Owen, had gone to the
movies with Dawn Steel, head of Columbia Pictures. ''She's been a friend for
years,'' says Woods, who used to be famous for his scabrous opinions of the
Hollywood system. ''I never realized I was such a feminist,'' he says with a
straight face. He talks in admiration about what Steel is up against as a
powerful female in a male-dominated industry.

His high opinion of women's liberation may have something to do with Dawn
Steel's sponsorship of the film ''True Believer,'' in which he starred earlier
this year for Columbia; or with her pairing him with Glenn Close in ''Immediate
Family,'' a dramatic comedy scheduled for release in late October, and a new
kind of role for Woods.

It certainly hasn't been easy for Woods, with his less than glamorous face, love
of risky, eccentric films and reputation as an egomaniac, to win the plummy
roles that allow actors to become household names. As he says: ''No one has gone
out of their way and said, 'Let's make Jimmy Woods a star.' ''

Despite a long list of critically renowned performances, including an Academy
Award nomination in 1987 for best actor in Oliver Stone's ''Salvador,'' he has
never had the starring (Continued on Page 89) role in a box-office hit. He owes
his success to the video-cassette and cable revolution, which has given people a
chance to see movies that played in theaters for only a couple of weeks.

Although he can now command $1 million a picture, Woods may be best known for
his role as James Garner's schizophrenic brother in ''Promise,'' a television
movie that won him an Emmy.

Now, at the age of 42, Woods says he is slowing and settling down. Last spring
he took off more time from work than he had in more than 10 years, not for lack
of offers but to ''set some priorities in my life.'' The man the New Yorker
critic Pauline Kael has called ''perhaps the most hostile of all American
actors'' is talking about golf, horseback riding, children, and his marriage to
Sarah Owen, with whom he is building a new house. James Woods looks and sounds
like someone who, after a struggle, has come to believe that he may end up both
happy and rich.

Only in his comments about Sean Young does the old, fire-breathing James Woods
re-emerge. His wrath is scary, unprintable and mostly off the record. His
celebrated $2 million lawsuit against the actress, who was his co-star in the
1988 film ''The Boost,'' charges her with ''intentional infliction of emotional
distress'' toward himself and Owen, to whom he was engaged at the time. (They
were married July 2.) ''A sequel to 'Fatal Attraction?' asked People magazine,
which reported that Woods and Young had an affair during the filming of the
movie. The suit involves allegations that Young later sent Woods and Owen
''photographs and graphic representations of violent acts, deceased persons,
dead animals, gore, mutilation, and other images specifically designed to cause
them great emotional distress.'' Both Woods and Young deny having had an affair,
and Young has denied all charges.

A condition of our meeting, relayed through Woods's public-relations people, was
that I ask no questions about Sean Young. However, the lawsuit was an
undercurrent throughout the five hours we talked. ''This is the end to a long
but ultimately fulfilling week,'' he said, stretching out against the banquette.
The interview followed a week spent giving and hearing depositions in the case.
''Our lawyers kicked their butt,'' he said proudly.

Spending time with Woods is confounding. By all reports, he is intensely loyal
to family and friends, a battler on the set but a thorough professional. He can
be overbearing, then quickly catch himself and assume the deferential manner of
a former altar boy, which he is. His energy is tiring and funny. ''From the
moment he wakes up until he goes to bed, Jimmy is fully engaged in the world,''
says the playwright Percy Granger, one of his best friends. For 15 years, Woods
has been a fascinating presence in almost every movie in which he has had even a
minor part. But almost without exception he has played con men, murderers,
degenerates and loud-mouthed mavericks. He claims his new film, ''Immediate
Family,'' will showcase his other side, the one that's ''funny and soft and
warm, that loves pets and children.'' His friends say this James Woods
definitely exists.

But whether audiences will accept the mellow, California family man, and how
much the lawsuit will put his personal transformation to the test, remain to be
seen. The dissembler has not disappeared, but the bankable leading man has not
yet shown himself. ''You become a star first and then they have to deal with you
on your own terms,'' is how he sees it; and no one wants to be a star more than
James Woods.

H E MAY BE THE ONLY actor in America who tells interviewers his S.A.T. scores
(779 math; a perfect 800 verbal, he says). ''I was obviously - I won't even try
to be modest about it - I was an incredibly brilliant kid academically,'' he
says. A straight-A student at Pilgrim High School in Rhode Island, Woods earned
a scholarship to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Having discovered in high school that he liked - and was liked for -acting, he
joined the M.I.T. Drama Workshop, which was run by a director who trained his
students in the formal English manner, rather than the method technique.

In various productions around Boston from the mid-to-late 1960's, he says he saw
the early stage work of Dustin Hoffman, Jon Voight, Al Pacino and Robert De
Niro. ''I wanted to be one of those kinds of actors,'' he says. ''But I didn't
quite get it, because of my training.'' Woods isn't really, even now, like those
famous method actors, who prepare elaborately for a role, distorting face, body
and voice. He maintains a consistent look from film to film, commanding the
screen with his intensity, and prides himself on his memory, claiming that he
needs only to read or hear something once to call it back up.

By his senior year, having appeared in some 36 plays, Woods was commuting to New
York. ''I would fly in for my midterms and then get a call from my agent to go
up for a commercial,'' he says. But a few months shy of graduation, Woods, an
honor student, dropped out. One explanation, offered several years ago to
Playboy magazine, is that he left to protest M.I.T.'s role in weapons research
for the Vietnam War. ''Don't pay attention to what I say in interviews,'' he
says with a smile. When pressed on the point, he grows wary. ''I'm always afraid
there's going to be another witch hunt,'' he says. ''You get hung 30 years later
for something you believed when you were younger. I'm saying that, if you were
awake in the 60's, you could only have one point of view.''

These words could have been spoken by the burnt-out lawyer he played in ''True
Believer'' - a left-wing crusader in the 60's reduced to defending the civil
rights of drug dealers; a ponytail and a bad pot habit the only vestiges of his
youthful self. They offer the confusing mixture of alarmist rhetoric and blunt
realism that colors Woods's speech. His choice of roles in films would indicate
a tough, cynical attitude toward power in America. But his natural suspicion
won't allow him to voice this opinion outside the movies, even if he very much
enjoys the badge of ''M.I.T. dropout.''

In 1968, he moved to New York, and three years later won an Obie for his
performance in Edward Bond's ''Saved'' at the Brooklyn Academy of Music. The
play's director, the late Alan Schneider, also picked Woods for Michael Weller's
''Moonchildren,'' which opened in 1971 at the Arena Stage in Washington, and ran
briefly on Broadway. Stephen Collins, a member of the cast and one of Woods's
best friends, remembers the battles between Woods and Schneider. ''I had never
seen an actor my age give so much grief to a director,'' he says. ''Alan clearly
adored him, but I had never seen anything so uncivilized in rehearsal.''

Woods is famous for challenging his directors on everything from line readings
to camera setups. He and Oliver Stone had screaming matches throughout the
filming of ''Salvador,'' incidents that apparently didn't diminish their
admiration for each other. ''He's a lunatic. . . .'' Stone told GQ magazine.
''But if he's right for the role and you want to make the best film possible,
you've got to go with him.''

Woods has never been hindered by a lack of confidence. ''The business has been
hard for me,'' he says. ''But the actual work has been effortless, because I
love it. I have never, even for a second, doubted that I could act.'' Stephen
Collins thinks that his friend has seen himself as someone on a mission. ''I was
with Jimmy when the Tony nomination came out after 'Moonchildren,' '' he says.
''When he saw in the newspaper he hadn't been nominated, he was really angry and
depressed. He said, 'I had promised myself I would win a Tony before I was 25.'
We teased him about it, but he was serious.''

In two of his early bit parts, Woods was cast as the unattractive boyfriend: as
a young radical opposite Barbra Streisand in Sydney Pollack's ''The Way We
Were,'' in 1973, and as trouble for a teen-age Melanie Griffith in Arthur Penn's
''Night Moves,'' two years later. An unknown in Hollywood, Woods contends he was
never intimidated by bigger stars, not even Streisand.

''I'm 25 years old, this dork,'' he says. ''I was standing on the set and she
turns to me and asks, 'Are you afraid of me?' I really didn't understand what
she meant. I told her, 'The only one around here who should be afraid is you,
because I'm really good at this.' I was smiling, kidding,'' he emphasizes. ''And
she laughed. Then after the take, she turned to me and said, 'Hmmm, you might be
right.' ''

Despite such bravado, Woods didn't win the attention of critics until 1979, for
his role as the psychotic cop killer, Gregory Powell, in ''The Onion Field,''
based on the Joseph Wambaugh novel. He had already worked on another Wambaugh
book-turned-film, ''The Choirboys,'' in 1977, but was initially considered ''not
right for the part'' of Powell. ''Not right for the part,'' he says, hammering
each word. ''If I hear that one more time. . . .'' His agent, Todd Smith, at
Creative Artists Agency, paid for a screen test. Woods did one reading and got
the part.

This performance contains many elements popularly associated with Woods: grim
humor, intelligence, fierce energy and a streak of unpredictable anger. Powell
is a strutting, gold-toothed yokel with an unplaceable accent and a fondness for
string neckties. Woods was so strong he was quickly typecast.

Similar kinds of roles followed: William Hurt's disturbed friend in
''Eyewitness''; a sleazy cable-television programmer in David Cronenberg's cult
classic ''Videodrome''; the manipulative and dangerous nightclub operator in
Taylor Hackford's ''Against All Odds''; the childhood friend and fellow gangster
of Robert De Niro in Sergio Leone's ''Once Upon a Time in America.''

The affection for Woods felt by many critics and viewers comes from his
willingness to play the outcast and to risk alienating everyone. He's not afraid
to be scummy. Moreover, he is able to find glimmers of moral dignity and pathos
in the most loathsome, desperate characters. Richard Boyle, the cynical
journalist he plays in ''Salvador,'' is dangerously irresponsible, a liar and a
bigamist, but his duplicity and self-interest seem less hypocritical than that
of the American officials who deny the killing of peasants and prop up a corrupt
regime. Woods is the perfect vehicle for Oliver Stone's jaundiced view of
American foreign policy.

His television roles opposite James Garner, in ''Promise,'' in 1986, and this
year's ''My Name is Bill W.,'' allowed him to portray less-hardbitten types. But
only once on film has he played a doting husband, in Ted Kotcheff's
disappointing ''Joshua Then and Now,'' in 1985.

''Immediate Family'' will give Woods a chance to prove what he has always
maintained, that he can be warm, quiet, romantic as well as a hyperkinetic
wacko, that his name above the marquee can mean box-office as well as critical
success. With a screenplay by Barbara Benedek, who co-wrote ''The Big Chill,''
the film casts Woods as a veterinarian, a lover of animals and children. ''It's
a character so close to me, believe it or not, that I did no preparation.
Zero,'' he says.

He and Glenn Close are an unlikely duo to portray a blissfully married couple
who undergo the agony of infertility, surrogate parenting and adoption. Woods
calls it ''a four-handkerchief picture that's also a comedy. People won't know
whether to laugh or cry.'' The director, Jonathan Kaplan, chose Woods because
''I wanted to show facets of Jimmy that I know are there but aren't often seen
in his films.''

That he will appear with an ''A-list'' actress like Close, who has Academy Award
nominations and box-office recognition, is one sign that studios have confidence
in Woods. The experience of working with him was something of a trial for her.
''Jimmy is an original,'' she says, as though discussing a gifted and difficult
child. ''He comes on like a steamroller, and you have to give it back.''

They helped each other, says Woods. ''Her rhythm is completely different from
mine. She is very good at being silent and I'm good at being volatile. I think I
gave her a sense of seeming more vivacious; and she was very good at getting me
to do less.''

''Sometimes you just want to kill him,'' says Close. ''But underneath, he has a
terrific heart. He means well. And a couple of times in this film, when he looks
at me in close-up, he made my heart leap.''

To hear James Woods tell it, there aren't many parts for which he wouldn't be
right. One of the most coveted roles in Hollywood at the moment is the lead in
Tom Wolfe's ''Bonfire of the Vanities,'' which Brian De Palma will direct for
Warner Brothers.

''You can count on one hand the guys who will be up for playing Sherman McCoy,''
he says. ''There's not a deep talent pool.'' He slows down, giving the question
some thought. ''Bill Hurt would be great,'' he says. ''I would be . . . well, I
don't want to say great. That sounds obnoxious. If I were to make up a list:
Bill Hurt, Jimmy Woods. . . .'' He pauses, looking off. What about John
Malkovich? ''Malkovich?'' He looks startled. ''No, he's too . . . he's not . . .
I'm saying from the point of view of studio people . . . he's too offbeat and
not well enough known.'' Couldn't they say the same about James Woods?

''No, not anymore,'' he says dismissively. He is still ruminating. ''Sherman
McCoy should be in midlife crisis, so you can't use Sean Penn or Tom Cruise,''
he says. ''Hoffman, Beatty, Nicholson are just a little too old. The character
is someone who pumps himself up and then deflates when things go wrong.'' What
about Kevin Costner?

''He's too assured.'' But shouldn't the actor look like an overbred WASP? ''In
New York, the WASP is not as traditional as we would like to think,'' he says,
as though he has written the definitive paper on the subject. He emphasizes that
he isn't knocking any of these actors; he just wants a chance to astonish those
who would doubt him because he doesn't ''look the part.'' Woods would be perfect
as the novel's street-smart lawyer, Tommy Killian, who guides Sherman through
the intestines of New York's legal system. But it seems fruitless to mention
this. His determination to parry any alternative provides a glimpse into what it
must be like to try to deny Jimmy Woods anything on which he has fixed his tough
and agile mind.

T WO DAYS LATER, despite hints that we might continue the interview at his home,
we are back at the Polo Lounge. ''I have this problem with people knowing where
I live,'' he says, a reference to the hate mail he and Sarah Owen say they have
received from Sean Young. He says that someone or something has poisoned their
dogs.

At our breakfast meeting, he introduces Owen, a striking 26-year-old blonde he
met in a gas station in Los Angeles. She is an exercise rider for a horse
trainer. After brief hellos, she is gone.

Many of Woods's closest friends credit Owen with having changed his life.
''Sarah is terrific for him,'' says Stephen Collins. ''She knows when he's
running his numbers. And like a lot of people who run numbers on people, Jimmy
loves to get busted. He loves it that she's on to him, that she won't let him
get away with anything.''

His reluctance to let reporters near his home stems in part from a desire to
shield Owen from the publicity surrounding the lawsuit, although it is their
lawsuit. His motives for pressing charges against Young, he says, are simple:
''honor and justice.'' He has never sued or been sued before, he says. He has
waged courtroom battles only in movies.

''Every step of the way we tried to be cordial and direct about our desire to be
left alone through the proper channels,'' he says. ''But we are completely
convinced that a) we will win; and b) the revelations will be rather shocking.''

It has been painful for Woods, a natural talker and fighter, to avoid the
subject when Sean Young has talked to the press. ''If you quote me on any of
this,'' he says, ''I want it on the record that I did not want to comment. Not
that my lawyer told me not to, which he did. I didn't want to. I'm not happy
about having to do this, but I'm proud to do it as a matter of honor.''

The case seems reminiscent of a seedy film noir plot that could appeal to some
part of the old James Woods. ''Jimmy needs to be involved,'' says his friend
Percy Granger. ''I listen to him deal with his lawyers and agents and movie
people, and he gets into their lingo and world instantly. He loves the deal
makers and hustlers and fast talkers.''

He has thoroughly locked his brain into his role as protector and detective. ''I
knew fatherhood at an early age,'' says Woods, who helped to raise a younger
brother. His father, who died when James was 12, was a war hero whose memory is
invoked often. ''I'm going to tell you a story I've never told anybody,'' he
says. ''When I was 17 I had a National Science Foundation grant to study linear
algebra between my junior and senior years at U.C.L.A. It was a very prestigious
thing. One day, oddly enough here in Los Angeles, I ran through a glass door and
severed everything in my right arm.'' He rolls up his shirtsleeve to show scars
that run from wrist to elbow. ''I was in a cast for a year and a half, and I've
lost some use of my right arm, although nobody knows that. They will now, I
guess.''

Woods pauses to light another cigarette. ''I was in the class called the
'academically talented,' and some of the kids were sort of wonks, but a couple
of us were pretty hip. There was this kid in the class who was an interesting
guy, a bright kid. But in the eyes of the tough kids in school, he was
considered a sissy. So a bunch of these tough kids began picking on him one day
in the cafeteria line. I have my arm in a cast, right? All my tendons are sewn
together. If you even touched me, I'm back in the hospital. So I went up to the
tough kids and I said: 'Come on, there's eight of you and one of him, and this
guy's not a hitter. Why don't you pick on someone else?'

''They said: 'Good idea. We're going to pick on you. In fact, after school we're
going to beat the crap out of you.' What chance do I have? It's hopeless, right?
But one thing my father always taught me was to take out the toughest guy first;
then the others will fold. I knew I was brighter than they were.''

Woods pauses again and starts laughing. ''Because I was in the A.T. class, I had
a key to the closet in the chemistry department,'' he says. ''I went in and
looked around, and I thought: hydrochloric acid looks like water. But sulfuric
acid looks really mean, all that smoke and stuff. I met these kids after school,
and I had this beaker of sulfuric acid behind my back. And I walked up to the
leader and I got about three feet from him and I said: 'You know what this is?
This is sulfuric acid. If anyone moves, your face is going to look like an enoki
mushroom. Make your move now or never.' And he kind of smiled at me and said: 'I
think we'll be friends.' ''

As it turns out, he has told this story to several other reporters. How much of
it is true and how much pure embellishment, it's not necessary to know. The
element of danger that Woods brings to his roles is balanced by exquisite
control. Entertaining and angry though he may become, he doesn't allow a
listener to forget that he is also a trained actor.

I WANT TO SEND A clear and unequivocal message to people,'' he says at one
point. ''I can be an asset in anyone's life, should they choose to have me be
so. But if you're going to mess with someone, find someone else to mess with
because if you mess with me you'll be doing it for the rest of your life. I
don't ever try to hurt anybody. But if anybody tries to hurt me, they better be
willing to do it until the day they die, because I will never forget.''

This speech, which he delivers as his answer to an innocuous question about why
he fought his high school board to have a grade changed from a C to an A, has
clear enough implications in the Sean Young case. It doesn't seem the best time
to ask him about a published report that he once threatened Sarah Owen with a
gun. (This item, an aside in a cover story on Sean Young in Premiere, stated
that Owen went to the Los Angeles police with the charge, then dropped it.)
Asked about the incident, Woods turns off the tape recorder. He talks angrily
about the irresponsibility of the press. Neither confirming nor denying the
report, he says he hasn't read the articles, and he talks about libel suits.
Then he recovers his poise and turns the machine back on. ''I don't want this to
be a circus,'' he says. ''I just want this person to leave us alone. Stay on
your side of the planet and make up for the year-and-a-half of misery we went
through in some appropriate way, and that's that.''

It's difficult to assess the extent to which Woods is a victim of circumstance,
choice or mistake, yet the trial can't help but distract attention from his
upswinging career and his marriage, taking time away from both. His
righteousness is sincere, but revenge can inflict unforeseen damage. Last month,
''The Boost,'' with its love scenes between Woods and Young, appeared in video
stores across the country. Almost no one saw it in theaters; the lawsuit will
attract a curious, unwanted audience. As one who owes his popularity to the new
technology, he may now suffer because of it.

James Woods is again gracious, helpful, funny, as we get up from the table and
walk to our cars. As he strolls through the lobby, he is greeted as a regular by
the management. He is happy to be a celebrity here, and low-key about his
stardom. But as his black Porsche speeds down the driveway toward Sunset
Boulevard, it seems better to wait until he's out of sight before starting the
car, in case he might think that someone is following him.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: ''Immediate Family'' with James Woods and Glenn Close, scheduled for
release October 27.(Rob McEwan/Columbia) (pg. 51); James Woods does a pushup on
the grounds of the MountainGate Country Club in Bel Air.(Catherine Leroy)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 20, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

UNCLE SAM IS THE HEAVY

BYLINE: By MORTON KONDRACKE; Morton Kondracke is a senior editor of The New
Republic.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 25, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 921 words



THE CONFESSION OF JOE CULLEN
By Howard Fast.
282 pp. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Company.
$18.95.

At age 74, Howard Fast has written more than 60 books, most of them popular
historical novels such as ''Citizen Tom Paine'' (1943), ''Spartacus'' (1952) and
a quartet about an American family that led off with ''The Immigrants'' (1977)
and finished with ''The Legacy'' (1981). He has also made a long ideological
passage. He associated with Communists in the 1930's, but broke with them over
the 1939 Hitler-Stalin Pact. An ardent anti-Fascist, he joined the party in
1943, believing, as he once wrote, Communists to be ''the bravest and most
skillful fighters for man's freedom.''

In 1950, he refused to answer questions before the House Un-American Activities
Committee and was jailed and blacklisted. In 1953, he was awarded the Stalin
International Peace Prize. He left the Communist Party in 1956 after learning of
Nikita Khrushchev's secret speech denouncing the crimes of Stalin, and in 1957
wrote ''The Naked God,'' in which he declared that, as Communists, ''we took the
noblest dreams and hopes of mankind as our credo; the evil we did was to accept
the degradation of our own souls . . . because we did this, we betrayed mankind,
and the Communist Party became a thing of destruction.'' In a 1987 interview
with The New York Times on the occasion of the publication of a novel about
power in Washington and the Central America sanctuary movement, he said he was
''very lucky, very fortunate. . . . I was born and grew up in the greatest, the
noblest achievement of the human race on this planet - which was called the
United States of America.''

In ''The Confession of Joe Cullen,'' however, the United States Government is
unremittingly portrayed as the scourge of the earth. Joe Cullen is a former Air
Force pilot mentally tortured by having killed every man, woman and child in a
Vietnam village. Nevertheless he becomes a contract pilot for the Central
Intelligence Agency, running guns to Nicaraguan contra bases in Honduras - and
ferrying huge quantities of cocaine back to the United States. His confession to
a New York City police lieutenant that he murdered a Roman Catholic priest (an
American adherent of liberation theology working with Honduran guerrillas) sets
the action in motion.

As a cops-and-spies thriller, Mr. Fast's book will hold your attention at the
beach. It is the latest entrant in the ever-growing genre of novels and movies
that pits honest local officials (police and prosecutors) against a malevolent
Federal Government (the F.B.I., the C.I.A., the Pentagon and perhaps even the
White House) that can employ all its dastardly powers, including that of
assassination, to carry out its evil purposes. Mr. Fast's plots always move
quickly through short chapters built like movie scenes, and so does this one.
His characters are all stock good and bad guys. The novel's denouement is a
little unsatisfying - the good guys make only a dent in the grand conspiracy
-but perhaps Mr. Fast plans a sequel.

What is disturbing is the political propaganda that readers may absorb along
with their suntan oil. The book is virtually a novelization of the
much-investigated, never-verified and often-disputed conspiracy theory of a
Washington-based group called the Christic Institute. The theory is that ever
since Vietnam, a ''secret team'' of high-level politicians, right-wing fat cats
and C.I.A.-connected generals and colonels has been engaged in drug trafficking
and arms trading, and that this same group was responsible for the Iran-contra
affair, which involved drug-peddling and attempted assassinations, as well as
weapons transfers and diversion of Federal funds. Congressional committees and a
Federal court in Florida have looked into various conspiracy charges emanating
from that theory, and none have been found to have merit (the court case
continues on appeal).

Yet, in Mr. Fast's book sympathetic characters repeatedly allege - as in one
exchange between two prosecutors - that ''the CIA has long fingers. They fight
wars and they move drugs. They did it in the Golden Triangle and they did it in
Afghanistan, and you don't think they could have set up this neat little war of
theirs in Honduras and Nicaragua and put together a parcel of bums like the
contras without a payoff in drugs.'' Along the way, the United States is accused
of having financed the murder of Archbishop Oscar Romero of El Salvador and of
sponsoring death-squad massacres all over Central America - even in Honduras,
where violence actually has been minimal.

There's obviously no requirement that a novel tell the truth, but someone with
Mr. Fast's experience should admit that there are Communists in Latin America -
Fidel Castro's regime in Cuba, the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front in
El Salvador and the Sandinistas in Nicaragua - who commit atrocities, enslave
people and may also sponsor drug trafficking, and that the United States has
tried, however fitfully, to promote democracy and respect for human rights in
the region. Yet, his novel contains only one exchange about Communist
philosophy. ''What the hell is a Marxist, Lieutenant?'' one cop asks of another.
''A Russian, I suppose,'' his colleague replies. ''A communist - people in
Africa. . . . The state owns everything or something like that - how the hell do
I know?'' Before he writes another novel like this one, Mr. Fast should refresh
his memory by rereading ''The Naked God,'' his own autobiography.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 21, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

IN THE NATION;
Longstreet, Hitler and Chiang

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 772 words


In the South during World War II, a wistful Confederate joke went like this:
''If Longstreet had come up in time at Gettysburg, there wouldn't have been no
Hitler.'' In a letter to The Times published Aug. 13, Nicholas C. Cummins of
West Chester, Pa., similarly invoked the distant past to damn the inconvenient
present.

Leftists of the 1940's, he wrote, in contributing to a State Department white
paper on China after World War II, ''swayed the United States against Chiang
Kai-shek and toward the false belief, instead, that the Red Chinese 'agrarian
reformers' were idealists. We thereupon stopped aid to Nationalist China, the
Reds won, and Chiang embarked for Taiwan.''

Mr. Cummins asserted that had the U.S. continued to support Chiang, ''there
would have been (1) no Korean War, (2) no Vietnam War . . . and (3) a
countervailing commercial force these last decades to Japan.'' A host of other
developments, including ''the divided Koreas,'' also would have been
''avoided.''

This would be worth only a chuckle except that Mr. Cummins's version of events
may be shared by all too many Americans, in their innocence of history. So let's
look at the record:

That white paper was published Aug. 5, 1949, just two months before Mao Zedong
proclaimed the People's Republic of China on Oct. 1. The publication was an
attempt by the Truman Administration to explain its China policy to people who
refused to believe the truth: that Chiang and the Nationalists had lost the
Chinese civil war because their regime, as Robert Donovan observed in his
biography of Truman, was ''cruel, corrupt, reactionary, inept, undemocratic and
unpopular.''

The Administration was not under the illusion that Mao's forces were mere
''agrarian reformers.'' Secretary of State Dean Acheson considered the
Communists to be subservient, at the time, to Moscow; he was looking for some
political possibility of recognizing them, not because he liked them, but
because he hoped to help divide China and the Soviet Union - a desire finally
realized by Richard Nixon more than 20 years later.

Mr. Cummins's basic point was that because the U.S. stopped aid to Chiang, ''the
Reds won.'' Innumerable Republicans and not a few Democrats, sublimely
indifferent to the facts, tried to make that case at the time. But Harry Truman
inherited from Franklin Roosevelt the policy of backing the Nationalists. After
World War II, U.S Marines seized key ports and positions and turned them over to
the Nationalists; U.S. shipping carried Chiang's troops to areas that had been
Japanese-controlled; the U.S. insisted that Japanese units surrender to the
Nationalists, not the ''Reds.'' Nine Nationalist armies were ferried by the U.S.
into north China to fight Mao's forces, which were dominant there.

From the end of World War II to August 1949, the U.S. sent $2 billion down the
drain to Chiang. Many weapons thus provided ended up in Communist hands, owing
to Nationalist ineptitude and defeatism; substantial amounts ended up in
Nationalist pockets; most of the rest was simply wasted. When Chiang fled to
Taiwan in December 1949, he had thoughtfully sent ahead an ample gold supply, as
well as 300,000 troops.

Truman, in his own words, had ''bet on a bad horse.'' Chiang and the
Nationalists were too inept, corrupt and defeatist to win, even with so much
help; by the end of 1947, they had all but lost their own war. The Truman
Administration even sought vainly to work out some sort of coalition government
- an inherently unworkable policy neither Chiang nor Mao supported.

It's nonsense, moreover, that any of this caused the division of Korea, or the
Korean War. Korea was divided at the 38th parallel by the U.S. and the Soviet
Union (at the suggestion of Washington) at the end of World War II; and the
Korean War began in the brain of Kim Il Sung, the North Korean Communist
dictator, who sought to reunify the peninsula, with the tacit consent (but not
at the instigation) of Stalin.

The war in Vietnam has numerous fathers, Harry Truman among them - but not for
''losing'' China. At the end of World War II, for European policy reasons, he
allowed the return of the French to Indochina. That fatal decision later was
matched by Dwight Eisenhower, when he backed South Vietnam's refusal to enter
into elections for reunification of Indochina; and by Lyndon Johnson, when he
accepted the idea of a U.S. commitment to South Vietnamese independence, at
whatever cost.

If Chiang Kai-shek had remained in power, could he have prevented the resulting
war? If you believe that, you'll believe a Confederate general could have headed
off Hitler.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 22, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Kompong Speu Journal;
The Princess and 'the Peacock': A Cambodia Tale

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1000 words

DATELINE: KOMPONG SPEU, Cambodia


''I'm a museum piece in this country,'' said Lyda Sisowath, doing a sort of
pirouette as she ministered to a war widow, offering mosquito netting and
incense for the Buddha.

''I'm a Princess, an heirloom, and I know it,'' she went on. ''But that makes me
very precious here.'' She trills a bit, a high-pitched laugh like that of her
cousin, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the exiled sovereign. ''So they take care of
me,'' she said. Well they might. The Sisowaths had as much right to the
Cambodian throne as the Norodoms; the French played each family against the
other. In 1941, the French saw in the young Prince, then a secondary-school
student of 18, a pliant instrument of rule, and made him King. He turned out to
be shrewd, but some of his best-intended efforts to preserve Cambodia's
independence ran aground before he was overthrown while abroad in 1970.

Husband Lost to Pol Pot

He allied himself with the Khmer Rouge, the Cambodian Communists who tore the
country apart after the Vietnam War. And whether he is using them as a lever
against the Vietnamese-installed Government, or being used himself by crafty
forces, he remains allied with them still.

Lyda Sisowath, on the other hand, hid herself in Battambang Province. She worked
in the fields under Pol Pot and the Khmer Rouge, who killed her husband. ''He
died on Aug. 8, 1976, at 1:30 P.M.,'' she said. ''I remember it very well.
That's why I cannot allow these barbarous people to come back, and why I cannot
understand that the world insists on it.''

Unlike her cousin, she has thrown in her lot with the Government, originally
installed by the Vietnamese, who deposed the Khmer Rouge after an invasion in
December 1978.

A Family Squabble

The Vietnamese are scheduled to leave at the end of September. With an
international conference on Cambodia going on in Paris, and a continuing subplot
about whether Prince Sihanouk will ever jettison the Khmer Rouge and make common
cause with Prime Minister Hun Sen, there is some drama in this family squabble.

Lyda Sisowath says that she speaks to her cousin, but that he has forgotten how
to listen to anything but his fears. He regards her as a puppet of the
Vietnamese; she says he is surrounded by ''false and deceitful people who will
abandon him.''

She has contempt for his second wife, Monique. Prince Sihanouk's son, Prince
Norodom Ranariddh, calls her ''the peasant princess,'' she said in her rapid
French, and then burst out again with the trademark family laugh. ''I call him
'the peacock.' ''

A member of the National Assembly from Takeo, she serves as vice chairwoman of
the National Front for the Salvation and Defense of the Cambodian Fatherland. It
is in this capacity that she has come here, an hour southwest of Phnom Penh, to
give succor to those whose husbands or fathers have died in the Cambodian war.

'Spiritual Damage'

She is wearing a blouse with a Peugeot label and a silk scarf; the silver
bangles on her wrists chime with her dramatic gestures. Almost inconceivably,
her conversation in Khmer is more rapid than her French. Those around her, from
her secretary to the gathered poor, seem to regard her with awe and
astonishment.

''The physical malady is easy to cure,'' she said, describing the victims. ''The
spiritual damage is harder. Their youth is finished. Their attractiveness is
finished. They feel death would be better, and sometimes they kill themselves. I
am here because of their suffering. They are the ones who suffer.''

The war is not far from here. At the Kompong Speu Hospital, rebuilt for 200
patients in 1988 by the Australian Red Cross, 170 beds are full. Malaria and
tuberculosis fill most of the beds, but there are about 30 war wounds a month,
either from gunshots, shrapnel or mines.

Dr. Heng Seng Hong, the director, said the Khmer Rouge carry 500 small plastic
mines at a time to seed the paddy fields and roadways. Magnetic, the mines blow
up in proximity to metal, be it plow or watch. By the time victims arrive from
the more distant parts of this poor and mountainous province, he said, ''They
are in bad shape.''

A Well-Armed Enemy

The Government's writ runs only so far. In more remote districts, the peasants
accommodate themselves equally to the Khmer Rouge or to the Government,
depending on whose forces are present. ''They are afraid of the Khmer Rouge,''
Dr. Heng Seng Hong said, ''but they accept the inevitable.'' People rarely
travel after 4 P.M. Mao Thalin, a social worker, said the Khmer Rouge attack
during the day now, not just at night.

Samreth Sakhan dit Sophat is the Governor of the province, which has 420,000
people. He said two Khmer Rouge divisions operate here, with 1,000 fighters,
sabotaging economic life and education, killing village chiefs and local
officials. In the first six months of the year, there were 460 clashes.
Recently, he said, the Khmer Rouge infiltrated 300 to 400 troops, but they have
not begun operations.

For himself, the Governor said, there are five battalions of provincial troops,
1,700 soldiers, with a mobile company of 125 in each district to help the
militia troops, about two-thirds of whom have decent weapons.

'Never Again'

''The people know the Khmer Rouge and oppose them,'' he said, but he admitted
that many live with what is around them. ''These are ordinary people. They do
not object to those who guarantee their security. But in their spirits and
minds, they work with us.''

''Anyway,'' he said, ''everything will depend on us. We lived 3 years, 8 months
and 20 days under Pol Pot, who destroyed everything. It will not happen again.
Because if Kompong Speu cannot defend itself, the enemy will enter Phnom Penh.''

The Princess, meanwhile, travels in an old red Soviet Lada, without guard. ''The
people in the city get much more nervous than those in the countryside,'' she
said. ''People say to me, 'You go to Kompong Speu without the army?' But I fear
nothing anymore. I am a Princess, despite everything.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Lyda Sisowath (NYT/Steven Erlanger)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 22, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnamese Author Who Advocated Ties With Hanoi Is Shot

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 469 words

DATELINE: FRESNO, Calif., Aug. 21


A Vietnamese author who told interviewers three years ago about threats on his
life was wounded seriously over the weekend by two men who opened fire on him as
he walked near his home.

The writer, Doan Van Toai, 42 years old, was shot four times in the head and
upper body Saturday, Sgt. Oliver Moon of the Sheriff's Department said. Mr. Toai
was moved to an undisclosed location where Mr. Moon said his condition was
serious.

Mr. Toai is a co-author of ''The Vietnamese Gulag'' and ''Portrait of the
Enemy'' with David Chanoff. He is also executive director of the Institute for
Democracy in Vietnam.

Latest of Several Attacks

The shooting was the latest attack in California in recent years against
Vietnamese refugees who advocate that the United States establish diplomatic
relations with Vietnam.

Mr. Toai said in a 1986 interview with The Los Angeles Times that an article he
wrote exposing alleged fraud by an anti-Communist group provoked death threats.

''I wrote an article in The Los Angeles Times saying these people who want to
fight the Communist Government are collecting money for that cause but are
actually using the money for themselves,'' Mr. Toai said in the interview.

Orange County Shootings

''The group threatened to kill my whole family after the story ran,'' he said.

In 1986, a former Saigon housing official, Tran Khanh Van, was shot in
Westminster in Orange County after he said he supported relations with Vietnam.
His assailant pleaded guilty and was convicted. The Vietnamese author Long Vu
suffered partial paralysis after a severe beating, also in Westminster, on April
30, 1988.

Last January, an arson fire destroyed a Garden Grove travel agency specializing
in Vietnam tours. No suspects have been arrested in that incident or in the
beating of Long Vu.

Some Vietnamese speculate that Mr. Toai was shot by anti-Communists who wanted
to kill him because he proposed diplomatic relations between the United States
and Vietnam, said Dam Phuong Tran, president of the Vietnamese Committee for
Human Rights in Washington.

He said, however, the writer had enemies on the other end of the political
spectrum, and conceded it was possible he was shot by Communist agents.

Mr. Toai was shot by two men described as Asian and driving a dirty brown
Pontiac station wagon, Mr. Moon said.

Mr. Toai came to the United States as a refugee in 1978. ''He didn't try to
escape from Vietnam,'' Mr. Tran said. ''As a student, he was a sympathizer of
the National Liberation Front.''

''A lot of Vietnamese accuse him of being a Communist agent,'' Mr. Tran said.
''I think of him as a Vietnamese who tried to do something good for the people
of Vietnam and for the good of the country itself. That doesn't mean he agreed
with the present political situation in Vietnam.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 22, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Our Towns;
Vietnam Veteran Moves the Wall Across the Land

BYLINE: By WAYNE KING

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 768 words

DATELINE: ONEONTA, N.Y.


When John Devitt first saw the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington in 1982,
he expected to hate it, or worse, to feel nothing. ''I'd read about it,'' he
said. ''It's a gravestone. That's the way I felt about it before I walked up to
it. It was black, it was in the ground, it wasn't designed by a Vietnam vet.
Symbolically, I didn't like it.

''But when I walked up to it, all that disappeared; it seemed irrelevant. The
impact was incredible. I thought I knew how many 58,000 was, but when I saw how
many 58,000 was, 58,000 names, I couldn't believe it. I was shocked.''

It was at that moment that Mr. Devitt, broke, out of work and at loose ends,
decided that everyone, particularly veterans like himself who had had neither
pride nor promise of it, should see the wall. If they couldn't come to the wall,
he would take the wall to them.

Last Thursday, at the request of the Mayor and the local chapter of the Vietnam
Veterans of America, he brought the wall to Oneonta, a town of 10,000 nestled in
the rolling hills between the Catskills and the Adirondacks.

What happened at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington was that Mr.
Devitt, who had operated an M-60 machine gun in a Huey helicopter when he was 19
years old and was shot down three times in Vietnam, felt a feeling of pride for
the first time since he came home in 1969.

''It's not a statement about war,'' he realized. ''It's a statement about
sacrifice and service.''

With two friends back in San Jose, also Vietnam veterans, Mr. Devitt built what
came to be known as ''the Moving Wall,'' a half-scale replica of the Washington
memorial. For the last six years, Mr. Devitt, now 40 years old, has taken it to
towns around the country, 172 so far, and it has been seen by four million to
five million people, many of whom have never seen the original.

Virtually everyone who has seen the Vietnam Veterans Memorial testifies that the
emotional power of the stark black wall bearing 58,156 names is enormous. That
is no less so in a bustling city park within earshot of a spirited soccer match
and a home game of the Oneonta Tigers baseball team than in the austere grove on
the Mall in the nation's capital under the somber eyes of Abraham Lincoln.

As in Washington, people come, alone and in couples, whole families, and search
through the books of names, in alphabetical order, of those who died. They find
the number of the panel and the line where that name appears and they go to the
wall and look at it, touch it usually, and often they leave a flower. Under the
name of Robert J. Crandall, there were a pair of roses and a framed photograph
of him in uniform.

''He was a classmate,'' said Mary Schmidt, 43, who came with a nephew to the
wall to find his name. ''I heard that he was killed, and two days later I got a
letter from him that he had mailed. We were just friends; I just wanted to see
his name.''

As at the Washington wall, the mementos, the photographs, the handwritten notes
and scraps of verse are gathered up, labeled and boxed, and someday will go in a
Moving Wall museum in Santa Fe, N.M.

Further down, a blond man in a motorcycle jacket knelt at the wall, both hands
spread on it, quietly sobbing. ''He was a medic,'' said a companion, Carter
Morris, 47, a former Marine who came down from Cooperstown to help with the
wall.

Still further, 11-year-old Brian Arenella, his lips tight in concentration, did
a rubbing of the name of John M. Rizzo. ''I didn't know him,'' said the boy. ''I
wasn't born. My mom knew him, and she asked me to come and make a rubbing of his
name.''

Each of the 58,156 names on the wall is raised by a silk-screen process on
aluminum panels coated with black enamel to simulate the original.

''It was important that the letters be raised,'' said Mr. Devitt. ''It gives
people the opportunity to touch the names, to feel the names.''

Mr. Devitt started work on the 253-foot Moving Wall in January 1983 as ''a
weekend project'' with two other Vietnam veterans, with $2,500 out of their own
pockets. They finished it 21 months later after going $18,000 in debt, bailed
out by donations and a $16,000 contribution from the San Jose City Council.

Mr. Devitt and another veteran applied the names one-by-one, at times working
upside down or in reverse so as not to read the names, an experience that at
times proved too emotionally intense.

The first appearance of the Moving Wall was in Tyler, Tex., in October 1984, and
since then Mr. Devitt has been in constant motion, driving the truck and doing
the three-hour setup himself. It is booked through 1991 and into 1992.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 22, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

JOHN D. SIMPSON, A FORMER LEADER IN TRANSIT AGENCIES, IS DEAD AT 52

BYLINE: By ALFONSO A. NARVAEZ

SECTION: Section D; Page 23, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 310 words


John Duncan Simpson, former executive director of the Metropolitan
Transportation Authority and former president of the New York City Transit
Authority, died of cancer yesterday at Hoag Hospital in Newport Beach, Calif. He
was 52 years old and lived in Laguna Hills, Calif.

Mr. Simpson, a 1959 graduate of the United States Military Academy at West
Point, was president of the Fluor Daniel Venture Group in Irvine, Calif., at his
death.

Mr. Simpson became executive director of the M.T.A. in August 1979, taking over
the nation's largest public transportation system at a time when efforts to
overhaul it were beginning. He had successfully built a bus system for the
Regional Transportation District in the Denver, Colo., area.

In January 1981 he was named president of the Transit Authority. In that post he
oversaw the city's subways and buses and helped develop a five-year plan to
revitalize subway, bus and commuter rail lines. When he left in 1983, the first
new subway cars were being introduced.

Korea, Berlin and Vietnam

After graduating from West Point, Mr. Simpson served in the Army in South Korea
building roads and airfields. In later years he served in Berlin and Vietnam. He
received a master's degree in engineering from Princeton in 1962 and a master's
in public affairs from Princeton in 1969.

He later taught economics and public policy at West Point.

Mr. Simpson also worked for the Nixon Administration on its national security
staff in the early 1970's. He later resigned from the military with the rank of
lieutenant colonel and joined the administration of Mayor John V. Lindsay of New
York as a deputy environmental commissioner.

He is survived by his wife, the former Elli Hatcher; a daughter, Heather, of
Manhattan; a son, Sean, a cadet at West Point; his mother, Josephine, and a
sister, Joann, both of Chicago.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of John D. Simpson (NYT)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 22, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
Utility Executive Ready To Roll Up His Sleeves

BYLINE: By Harriet King

SECTION: Section D; Page 4, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 304 words


On election night in November, a power failure blacked out The Idaho Statesman
newspaper office in Boise, which had been serving as the headquarters for
reporting the state's computerized election returns. Joseph W. Marshall, then
the Idaho Power Company's executive vice president, went to the scene to help
workers restore electricity.

Mr. Marshall, 51, last week was named chairman and chief executive of Idaho
Power, replacing Robert J. O'Conner, who resigned for health reasons. Mr.
Marshall said in a telephone interview from his Boise office that he would still
put on a hard hat if he were needed in an emergency.

''Customers need to know senior management will be involved when they have a
problem,'' he said.

Being on the front line is not new to Mr. Marshall, who was born and raised in
Twin Falls, Idaho. As a 1961 graduate of the Naval Acadamy with a degree in
electrical engineering, he spent eight years in the Marine Corps.

On his first of two tours of duty in Vietnam, he was commander of an engineering
battalion that built bridges, roads and airfields. ''But when trouble arose, we
dropped our picks and shovels and became infantrymen,'' he said. ''That same
team concept carries over to Idaho Power. We're all in this together.'' In 1969,
he returned to Idaho with his wife, Patty, and their two sons and went to work
as a distribution engineer for the utility, which supplies electricity and gas
to 626,000 customers in southern Idaho. In the 1970's, he became the force
behind the utility's current proposal to build a $200 million transmission line
that will allow it to buy and sell power in the Southwest.

Mr. Marshall's biggest concern is coming up with new power sources. ''We've now
got to figure out where future resources will come from,'' he said. ''We've got
a lot of challenges.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

WASHINGTON TALK;
Counseling Center Seeks To Bridge Cultural Gulfs

BYLINE: By BARBARA GAMAREKIAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 688 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 22


Since the 1970's waves of exiles and refugees from Afghanistan, Central America,
Vietnam, Ethopia and other war-torn places have arrived in this once largely
monolithic city. And while they have brought various cultural traditions, many
have also brought an array of emotional or mental problems.

Adaptation to American culture can prove difficult, not only for uprooted
emigres but also for families of diplomats and other foreign nationals posted
here. Because of cultural differences, many of them are reluctant to seek
psychological help.

Working around the cultural boundaries is the International Counseling Center, a
referral service that provides foreigners with clinicians who speak their
language and offers cultural training programs to social workers and other
people who come into contact with foreigners.

A Network of Professionals

''We have a network of mental health professionals and clinical psychologists
who speak 25 different languages - from Farsi and Urdu to Hindi and Arabic,''
said Elizabeth P. Salett, the center's president who is a clinical social worker
herself. ''We get calls from embassies, international organizations, from
schools and from social service agencies looking for a clinician who would be
appropriate to work with a family or parent or child.''

In addition to helping the more than 300,000 refugees who live in the Washington
metropolitan area, the center works with international organizations like the
World Bank and the Organization of American States, and with about 130
diplomatic missions.

''A diplomat's wife might come here not speaking English,'' Mrs. Salett said.
''Her husband may be traveling a good deal, perhaps he is doing too much
drinking, the children are acting up and becoming more Americanized and she is
isolated and doesn't have friends or a support network. We try to find an
appropriate person who can work with the wife and family.''

'Cultural Awareness' Training

In addition, the center offers ''cultural awareness'' training programs to
social service workers and school guidance counselors, as well as to mid-level
managers at the JW Marriott Hotel here and to members of the Montgomery County
fire department.

''Their fire and rescue squads are called upon to supply services to a
culturally diverse population,'' Linda A. Camino, an anthropologist who runs the
center with Mrs. Salett, said of the fire department. ''Cultural misconceptions
can be insidious and can lead to unwanted outcomes.''

Mrs. Salett established the center in 1983. Her recognition of the need for
cultural mediators in the mental health field grew out of her own experience:
She grew up in Egypt, the daughter of a Hungarian diplomat, and worked abroad
for the Peace Corps.

''I was 13 when I moved here to stay, and I'm aware of the issues of identity
that someone coming from another culture has to deal with,'' Mrs. Salett said.
''Language was never a problem for me, but communicating with people - Americans
of my own age - was very difficult at first. The frame of reference is so
different - the whole way in which friendships are made, the things that one
might say and do that are misinterpreted.'' $130,000 Annual Budget The center,
which does not charge for its referral service, works on a shoestring. In
addition to Mrs. Salett and Dr. Camino, there is one part-time employee.

The center's $130,000 annual budget is underwritten through foundation grants
and fees from the center's training programs, workshops and lectures. Last May,
for example, some 300 mental health workers from 25 states attended the center's
two-day conference on cross-cultural transitions.

The concept of psychotherapy is foreign to most people from non-Western
cultures, Mrs. Salett said.

''It is important we maintain confidentiality about our work,'' she added. ''One
reason people don't ask for help is they fear that if it becomes known they will
be stigmatized. In most cultures you don't go to an outside person, you go to
the people closest to you. And one of the problems of coming to a new culture is
not having anyone around whom you can trust.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Elizabeth P. Salett and Linda Camino (NYT/George Tames)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Sex Abuse Is Alleged at West Point

BYLINE: By JAMES FERON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 710 words

DATELINE: WEST POINT, N.Y., Aug. 22


The authorities at the United States Military Academy are conducting hearings
over charges by three women that they were subjected to sexual abuse by a West
Point gynecologist while under his care earlier this year.

The women submitted their allegations to Army investigators in detailed
statements accusing the doctor, Maj. Ernest Flores, of sexual improprieties
ranging from hugging, kissing and fondling to sexual intercourse. They insisted
that the hearings be public.

Major Flores has declined to comment on the accusations. Today he received some
support from nurses and patients outside the stone building where the hearings
are being held. Megan Flanagan, a nurse, said ''he has never treated anyone with
anything but decency and respect.''

''He's a very outgoing, loving man and he does give you a hug and a kiss after
he delivers your baby,'' Ms. Flanagan said, ''but it's nothing more than that.''
Wilma Cross, holding her seven-month-old son, Lon Jr., who was delivered by
Major Flores, said ''he's very caring, very loving. I believe it's all a
misinterpretation.''

A Bottle of Champagne

Today Kathi Baker, a 29-year-old mother of three, testified that Dr. Flores, 44,
had sex with her twice in his apartment one evening last March after she offered
him a bottle of champagne at the hospital to celebrate ''his saving my life.''
She said Major Flores suggested going to his apartment to drink the champagne.

Mrs. Baker, the first to testify, said the incident occurred two months after
she underwent a hysterectomy and emergency surgery that was a ''near-death
experience.'' She said she ''couldn't believe what he was doing,'' but ''didn't
have the strength mentally, emotionally, physically to resist his advances.''

The testimony against Major Flores is being heard by Col. Stephen J. Harper,
assistant director of the law department at West Point. He will make a
recommendation, which could prompt another hearing that would be more like a
grand jury proceeding, where the decision is made whether or not to go to trial.

Major Flores, an 18-year veteran who won a Silver Star and two Purple Hearts in
Vietnam, had submitted his application for retirement this year, staff officers
say, but stayed on at Keller Army Community Hospital at West Point because of
staff shortages.

Afraid to Come Forward

Mrs. Baker and the other complainants, Susan O'Brian Parks and Melinda Wright,
said the administrative hearing was formed only after they obtained outside
legal help from Harry H. Lipsig and Bonita E. Zelman, partners in a Manhattan
law firm, and demanded action from the Superintendent, Lieut. Gen. Dave R.
Palmer.

The women said that other patients of Major Flores had voiced similar complaints
but were afraid to come forward because they believed they would damage their
husbands' careers. Mrs. Wright's husband is a captain and the other women's
husbands are noncommissioned officers.

Mrs. Baker, in three hours of testimony that was often interrupted to enable her
to regain her composure, said she gave Major Flores the champagne because ''I
felt I owed my life to him.''

Leading Her to the Bedroom

They decided it would not be appropriate to drink it in the hospital, and he
suggested they go to his apartment. After two hours, she started to leave but
the doctor ''hugged me tight and kissed me'' at the door, leading her to the
bedroom.

''I was shocked but I kept thinking he saved my life and he's so glad he saved
my life.'' Then, she said, ''he realized what he was doing and said 'I can't be
doing this. It will be my career.' '' He went into the bathroom, Mrs. Baker
said, and she put on her coat.

''But he started kissing me again,'' she testified. With Major Flores and his
lawyer, Capt. Lawrence Kerr, looking on, the judge, Colonel Harper, asked Mrs.
Baker if there had been time for her to leave the apartment. She said, ''I was
in a terrible mental and emotional state. I was confused.''

Major Flores is no longer involved in providing direct patient care, pending the
outcome of the hearings. No female cadets are involved in the proceedings. The
women's lawyers have asked West Point to send questionnaires to all patients of
Major Flores ''to ascertain the magnitude of the problem.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Huey Newton Symbolized the Rising Black Anger of a Generation

BYLINE: By DENNIS HEVESI

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1437 words


With the most vivid image of him a poster - the Black Panther defense minister
poised on a throne-like rattan chair, a spear in one hand, a rifle in the other
- it would be easy to see Huey Newton living and dying by the gun. A fuller
picture is more complex. Huey Newton, the son of a Louisiana sharecropper who
had also been a rebel, was, in his own words, ''a street kid with an
education.'' And as hard-won as his street wisdom had been, so too had come his
book learning.

Streetwise to Book Smart

Illiterate when he graduated from high school, Dr. Newton taught himself to
read, went to college and attended law school. Nine years ago, after a decade as
one of the nation's most charismatic symbols of black anger, he earned a Ph.D.
degree in social philosophy from the University of California at Santa Cruz. His
dissertation was titled: ''War Against the Panthers: a Study of Repression in
America.''

But somehow Dr. Newton never escaped the streets. And after years in which he
battled drug and alcohol abuse, after many encounters with the law, he was shot
to death early yesterday at the age of 47 on a street in Oakland, Calif.

In a telephone interview from Philadelphia yesterday, Bobby Seale, who in 1966
helped Dr. Newton found the Black Panther Party, said: ''I'm rather shocked at
him dying this way. It's a profound piece of history he and I represent. He and
I should have lived to be old militant senior citizens.''

''We've never advocated violence, violence is inflicted upon us,'' Dr. Newton
had told a New York Times reporter in June 1970, a month after a California
court overturned his conviction for killing an Oakland police officer. ''But we
do believe in self-defense for ourselves and for black people.''

At the time, that stance, the raised fists and the guns were more than enough to
unnerve an establishment still shaky from Vietnam war protests, civil rights
marches and inflamed ghettos. In California, the State Senate subcommittee on
un-American activities said the Black Panthers were controlled by the Communist
Party of the United States to ''serve as shock troops on the front line of the
revolution.''

Called Hoodlums by Hoover

J. Edgar Hoover, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, described
the Panthers as a ''black extremist organization'' consisting mostly of
''hoodlum-type revolutionaries.''

And in 1974, Thomas Orloff, the deputy district attorney for Alameda County who
prosecuted Dr. Newton on numerous charges, called him ''a man who lived by
violence'' and ''nothing but a gangster.''

Huey Percy Newton, who was named after the populist governor of Louisiana, Huey
Long, was born in New Orleans on Feb. 17, 1942, the son of Armelia and Walter
Newton. His father was a sharecropper and Baptist minister who once was almost
lynched for talking back to white bosses. The youngest of seven children - four
boys and three girls - he once described the family as ''very together.''

When he was 1 year old, the family moved to Oakland, an industrial city whose
population is now about half black. ''I was lucky,'' he once said. ''I knew the
block and I knew the book.''

In a 1973 interview with Playboy magazine, Dr. Newton said he spent his
childhood in a state of war with his teachers, being suspended from school about
30 times, breaking open parking meters and being arrested at 14 years old for
gun possession.

It was only after his graduation from Oakland Techinical High School that Dr.
Newton learned to read. ''I read Plato's 'Republic,' '' he told an interviewer.
''I read it through about five times until I could actually understand it.''

'Trigger Point in My Life'

''This was a trigger point in my life,'' he added, ''because after I finally
succeeded in reading this book, I sort of gobbled up everything I could.''

Inspired by his brother, Melvin, who earned a master's degree in social work,
Dr. Newton graduated from Merritt College, a two-year institution in Oakland,
and later, for eight months, took courses at San Francisco Law School. He once
successfully defended himself in court against a charge of stealing from a
bookstore.

At Merritt College Dr. Newton met Mr. Seale, and also was introduced to the
Black Muslims. ''Malcolm X was the first political person in this country that I
really identified with,'' Dr. Newton said. ''If he had lived and not been
purged, I probably would have joined the Muslims.

''As it is,'' Dr. Newton continued, ''his insistence that blacks ought to defend
themselves with arms when attacked by police became one of the original points
in the program of the Black Panthers.''

Little was heard from the Black Panthers until May 2, 1967, when about 30
members armed with rifles and shotguns marched into the California State
Assembly at Sacramento to protest a proposed arms control law. Dr. Newton was
not there, but from then on the Black Panthers were the stuff of headlines.

In the weeks after, Oakland police stepped up their surveillance of the
Panthers. About 5 A.M. on Oct. 28, 1967, Dr. Newton and a friend, Gene McKinney,
were returning from a party when their car was stopped for a traffic check by
Officer John Frey. Soon another police officer arrived.

Officer Dead, Newton Charged

A scuffle ensued, and moments later Officer Frey was dead of bullets fired from
his own gun. Dr. Newton had a bullet wound in the stomach. After his indictment
for first-degree murder, Dr. Newton's case became a national cause celebre.
''Free Huey,'' became a standard cry of students on the nation's seething
campuses.

In his defense, Dr. Newton claimed he had been shot in the stomach by Officer
Frey and was unconscious when the officer was killed. But he was convicted of
voluntary manslaughter in September 1968 and sentenced to 2 to 15 years in
prison.

In May 1970, however, the California Court of Appeals overturned the conviction,
citing ''omitted instructions'' to the jury and other prejudicial errors as the
basis for its decision. Two years later, after Dr. Newton's second and third
trials both ended in hung juries, the charges were dismissed.

Shortly before his release from the California Men's Colony in San Luis Obispo,
Dr. Newton told a New York Times reporter that the goal of the party to create a
''Democratic socialist society free of racism.'' He said he envisioned a society
where the people controlled the institutions and government was a cooperative
responding to collectivism.

But Dr. Newton returned from prison to find that party membership in 45 cities
had dropped below 1,000, depleted by arrests, killings and defections. And even
that slim base was split later by a schism between Dr. Newton and Eldridge
Cleaver, the party's minister of information.

For a time the Panthers ran free health clinics, an accredited elementary
school, a children's breakfast program, a bus service for relatives visiting
prison inmates and a clothing outlet.

Continual Scrapes With Law

Through the years, Dr. Newton continued to become entangled with the law. In
1974, charged with pistol-whipping his tailor, possession of a hand gun and of
murdering a 17-year-old prostitute, he fled to Cuba. Dr. Newton eventually
returned to face the charges in 1977.

He was tried twice on the murder charge, and both trials ending in mistrials
with the juries deadlocked in favor of acquittal. The charges where dismissed in
1979.

He was convicted in 1978 for possession of a handgun, but was acquitted on the
charge of assaulting his tailor after the victim refused to testify against him.
He served nine months in San Quentin Prison on the gun charge in 1987.

In March, Dr. Newton was sentenced to 6 months in jail after pleading no contest
to charges of misappropriating $15,000 in public money earmarked for a school
that the Black Panther Party had operated in the early 1980's.

In interviews in recent years, Dr. Newton had acknowledged drinking two quarts
of cognac a day and abusing cocaine, heroin and Valium. He had attended a drug
abuse program in 1984, which he said was paid for by the comedian Richard Pryor.

Since being granted parole on the weapons conviction, Dr. Newton had twice been
returned to prison for violation of parole after arrests for possession of
narcotics paraphernalia and failure to submit to required drug testing.

Dr. Newton is survived by his wife, Fredrika Slaughter-Newton of Berkeley; a
son, Ronnie; two daughters, Jessica and Kieron; his brothers Melvin, Edward and
Walter, all of Oakland, and three sisters, Leola Johnson and Doris Godfrey, both
of Oakland, and Myrtle Seymour of Berkeley, Calif.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Dr. Newton in a photograph taken last March. (The Oakland Tribune/ Mike
Macor)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

EDUCATION;
Michigan Curtails New Rights Policy

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 190 words

DATELINE: ANN ARBOR, Mich., Aug. 22


The University of Michigan has suspended part of a new antidiscrimination policy
that the American Civil Liberties Union says violates rights to free speech.

The policy prohibits harassment or discrimination based on race, ethnicity,
religion, sex, sexual orientation, creed, national origin, ancestry, age,
marital status, handicap or Vietnam-veteran status. The policy, which applies to
all students enrolled on the Ann Arbor campus, was adopted last year.

The A.C.L.U. of Michigan filed suit in May on behalf of a graduate student,
saying the policy violated constitutional guarantees of freedom of speech. A
hearing on the case is scheduled for Friday.

The suspended provision prohibits behavior in academic settings that creates an
intimidating, hostile or demeaning environment for educational pursuits,
employment or participation in university sponsored extracurricular activities.

''The policy has been under continuous review since its introduction and we have
determined that one section is not as clear as it ought to be,'' said Elsa
Kircher Cole, the university's general counsel, in announcing the decision on
Monday.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

'Uncle Buck' Is No. 1 At the Movie Box Office

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 130 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Aug. 22


''Uncle Buck,'' starring John Candy, earned $8.8 million in its opening weekend
that ended Sunday to take over the No. 1 spot at the box office from
''Parenthood.''

Directed by Ron Howard and starring Steve Martin, ''Parenthood'' earned $7.6
million for second place, and ''The Abyss,'' an underwater spectacular, was in
third place, with $7.2 million in ticket sales.

''Casualties of War,'' the Vietnam War movie starring Michael J. Fox and Sean
Penn, earned $5.2 million in its opening week to claim fourth place.

''When Harry Met Sally . . .,'' a romantic comedy starring Billy Crystal and Meg
Ryan, finished in fifth place with $4.9 million, and ''Lethal Weapon 2,'' the
action-adventure sequel with Mel Gibson and Danny Glover, took in $4.5 million
for sixth place.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Intensive Effort By Thornburgh On Press 'Leak'

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 878 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 23


In an unusual and intense attempt to stop unapproved disclosures of Justice
Department investigations, Attorney General Dick Thornburgh has stepped up
efforts to find and prosecute Government officials who told a reporter about a
Federal inquiry involving a Pennsylvania Congressman.

The disclosure, made last May to a CBS News reporter, is being investigated as a
crime under a Federal law barring the theft of Government property, a use of the
statute endorsed by the department only this month.

While the Bush Administration and other administrations have long assailed
disclosures of confidential information by the press, they have seldom gone to
the lengths Mr. Thornburgh has endorsed in recent weeks: the use of polygraphs,
the threat of subpoenas and the presentation of evidence to a Federal grand jury
in Washington.

The tactics drew an angry letter this week from two senior Democrats on the
House Judiciary Committee, who said they ''object strenuously'' to Mr.
Thornburgh's conduct of the inquiry. It has provoked more caustic remarks from
news organizations.

Undeterred by Criticism

Mr. Thornburgh's spokesman, Dan Eramian, said this week that the agency was
undeterred by the criticism.

For the most part Justice Department officials refuse to discuss the inquiry,
except to say that it is serious. But Administration officials say the inquiry
is one of the most intense searches for the source of a news leak since the
press uncovered and prematurely ended the Federal Bureau of Investigation's
Abscam undercover operation on dishonest Congressmen early this decade.

The inquiry focuses on a May 30 report by CBS, quoting department sources, that
the F.B.I. had begun a criminal investigation ''into financial dealings''
involving Representative William H. Gray, a Philadelphia Democrat who was in the
thick of a race to be elected House majority whip.

The report came amid a wave of press disclosures of Federal inquiries into
prominent Democrats, including former House Speaker Jim Wright of Texas,
Representative Tony Coelho of California and Mayor Tom Bradley of Los Angeles.
Enraged Democrats accused the Justice Department of dribbling out word of its
criminal inquiries for Republican political gain, and demanded an investigation.


Search for Sources of Report

Mr. Thornburgh's chief aide, Robert S. Ross, later stated that Mr. Gray was
''not the target'' of the inquiry, which is continuing, and that he was
cooperating with the investigation. Mr. Thornburgh launched a search for the
sources of the Gray report.

In recent weeks, bureau agents have visited Philadelphia, Capitol Hill and even
the Republican National Committee to search for the sources of the disclosure.
The agents have polygraphed some Federal workers, and it was reported this week
that the Justice Department may subpoena telephone records of the CBS News
reporter, Rita Braver, who reported the story.

The agents' findings are being presented to a Federal grand jury impaneled by
the Justice Department's criminal division to consider felony charges against
those responsible for the disclosure.

Mr. Thornburgh has voiced concern that disclosures of criminal inquiries will
unfairly wreck the reputations of people who have not been charged.

Past investigations of unauthorized disclosures have contemplated criminal
charges against Government employees, a law-enforcement official said today, but
the actual indictment of someone for talking to the press would be a departure.

A Navy analyst, Samuel Loring Morison, was convicted of espionage in 1985 after
he sold a satellite photograph of a Soviet shipyard to a British magazine,
Jane's Defense Weekly. The Government also unsuccessfully sought to prosecute
Daniel Ellsberg for theft of Government documents and espionage after he gave
the Pentagon Papers on the Vietnam War to the press in 1971.

Mr. Thornburgh hopes to prosecute the department sources of the CBS report under
a new twist to the law, arguing that their passage of information about the Gray
inquiry amounts to theft of Government property, an offense which can draw a
fine of up to $10,000 and a jail term of up to 10 years.

Before this month, the department had explictly barred the use of the theft
statute to prosecute unauthorized news disclosures, arguing that the law could
be used to bludgeon whistleblowers and others who seek to disclose information
to the public at large. But a department official, John Keeney, told a House
Judiciary subcommittee on Aug. 2 that that policy was being abandoned.

''We have recently re-examined the policy and concluded it is too broad,'' he
said. ''It is no longer applicable to Government employees who leak information
obtained from a criminal investigation.''

The head of the Judiciary panel's subcommittee on civil and constitutional
rights, Representative Don Edwards of California, was among Democrats who called
this summer for a law to penalize those who disclose criminal inquiries.

In an Aug. 21 letter to Mr. Thornburgh, however, he and a second Democrat,
Charles E. Schumer of Brooklyn, cited a ''serious danger'' in using the theft
law, saying ''some leaks are good and some leaks are bad, and officials in the
executive branch will decide which are which.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Democrats Double-Deal on Nicaragua

BYLINE: By John McCain; John McCain, Republican of Arizona, is co-chairman of
the Senate Central America observer group.

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 845 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Administration and the members of Congress who have supported Nicaragua's
liberation from Marxist totalitarian rule learned long ago that Sandinista
promises are worthless. We must now learn a more difficult and much more
discouraging lesson: We cannot depend upon the Democratic leadership in Congress
to honor its commitment to a bipartisan foreign policy.

Long before five Central American presidents signed the recent accord in Tela,
Honduras, calling for the voluntary demobilization of the contras by Dec. 8, the
Administration and Congress struck a deal.

That bipartisan agreement, concluded last February, promised the continued
provision of humanitarian assistance to the contras until February 1990, when
Nicaragua is scheduled to hold elections. It was designed to demonstrate to the
Sandinistas that the U.S. was serious and united in its support for free and
fair elections.

Under that agreement, demobilization would not be imposed upon the contras
before the elections. Repatriation or resettlement before that date was to be
voluntary. Congressional supporters of the resistance insisted on this
provision, and we assumed that its language was unambiguous and would not be the
subject of future disputes. We were mistaken.

Liberal Democrats, who have yet to learn the lessons of the Second World War,
much less those of Vietnam, apparently feel no need to honor February's
agreement or American commitments.

They value even less the need for determination and consistency in defending
American values and security interests.

The bipartisan agreement is now a casualty of their insincerity and their lack
of resolve.

The Democrats have warned that, if the contras refuse to voluntarily disband
before the elections, the approval of the Democratic leadership that is required
to continue assistance beyond Nov. 30 will not be forthcoming.

The Democrats seem intent on violating both the letter and spirit of the
bipartisan agreement. Despite February's understanding that the President is
solely responsible for conducting foreign policy in Central America, one
Democratic Senator and his aides were directly involved in the negotiations at
Tela.

In their undisguised eagerness for the termination of a viable resistance to
Sandinista tyranny, the Democrats will characterize their conduct as ''giving
peace a chance'' or the ''triumph of diplomacy over violence.'' It is nothing of
the kind.

As we should have learned years ago, appeasement never yields concessions from
Marxist dictators. If that lesson is lost on some members of Congress, then we
can only hope that the Administration will bear it in mind and resist demands to
break faith with the contras.

But I am alarmed by recent high-level Administration statements that signal a
hesitant acquiescence in the dismal Democratic retreat now under way on Capitol
Hill.

Benign neglect should not be the hallmark of the Administration's approach to
Central America. The Democratic leadership freely agreed to the obligations we
made to the contras. Retreat from those commitments will sacrifice this nation's
integrity.

Benign neglect and appeasement devalue American influence and strength. They
represent timidity in the advocacy of our values and paralysis in the protection
of our interests. They are not the attributes of a great nation.

The world we seek - a world of free, democratic nations at peace with one
another - cannot be achieved through moral suasion alone. Moral suasion will not
suddenly transform the Sandinistas into apostles of freedom. No amount of
earnest pleading to follow our democratic example will convince the Sandinistas
to keep their promise of free elections. They hold our values in contempt.

While we are told to await the miraculous conversion of the Sandinistas to
democratic values, contras who have already attempted repatriation are being
murdered. The families of those who remain in the Honduran camps are being
persecuted. Soviet military support of the Sandinistas continues undiminished by
a single bullet. And Sandinista assistance to Salvadoran Marxist guerrillas
continues to flourish unrestricted by the accords signed at Tela.

Today, we hear many predictions that a ''new age of democracy'' is approaching.
One would like to think that America is leading the way. If we again desert a
people whom we have trained, equipped and encouraged to fight for freedom and
leave them to the ''good intentions'' of their totalitarian adversaries, then we
can no longer expect the world to respect our word or our influence.

Accordingly, until free and fair elections are held, the Bush Administration has
to guarantee the continuation of humanitarian assistance to the contras who do
not choose to demobilize involuntarily. The Administration can and must provide
the aid needed to honor our commitment to the contras, who remain the only
credible instrument for assuring Sandinista compliance with any portion of past
agreements. An illegitimate election would serve neither U.S. interests nor the
pursuit of regional peace and freedom.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Veternas Say Of New Film On Vietnam, 'It's A Lie'

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 6; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 336 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 23


Leaders of two Vietnam veterans organizations today criticized Brian De Palma's
new film, ''Casualties of War,'' as a false portrayal of the soldiers who fought
in that war.

''Casualties of War,'' which stars Michael J. Fox and Sean Penn, is based on a
book by Daniel Lang about a true incident involving five soldiers on patrol. In
the book, four soldiers rape and then murder a young Vietnamese woman the group
has abducted; the fifth refuses to take part and reports the others when they
return from the patrol.

John Wheeler, the president of the Center for the Vietnam Generation, said at a
news conference that the film depicted those who served in Vietnam as ''morally
insensitive, barely competent soldiers with cynical and cowardly officers.''

''It is a lie about what we were really like in Vietnam,'' Mr. Wheeler said.

Mr. Wheeler, a West Pointer who was instrumental in the building of the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial here, also attacked Mr. De Palma as being among those ''who
dodged Vietnam service by not telling the truth or by manipulating their lives''
and now feel guilty and seek to make veterans look bad.

'A Giant Step Backward'

Marc Leepson, of the Vietnam Veterans of America, said the film made it seem
that rape and murder were common for American soldiers in Vietnam. After several
recent films and television programs with realistic depictions of Vietnam, he
said, Mr. De Palma's movie was ''a giant step backward.''

Peggy Siegal, a publicity agent for Mr. De Palma in New York, said that he had
been informed of the veterans' criticism but that he had no comment. Dennis
Higgins, a spokesman for Columbia Pictures, which released the movie on Aug. 18,
also said, ''We have no comment.''

Vietnam Veterans of America, which serves veterans seeking education and health
benefits, and the Center for the Vietnam Generation, a nonprofit organization
that serves as a clearinghouse for information about the war, are the two most
important Vietnam veterans groups in the country.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 25, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Black Youth Is Killed by Whites; Brooklyn Attack Is Called Racial

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1896 words


A 16-year-old black youth was shot to death Wednesday night in an attack by 10
to 30 white teen-agers in the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn, the police said.

The whites, the authorities said, were lying in wait for black or Hispanic
youths who they thought were dating a white neighborhood girl. But the victim
was not involved with the girl, the police said, and had come to the
predominantly white neighborhood with three black friends to look at a used car.

The killing, which could be the gravest racial incident in New York City since
the Howard Beach attack in Queens in 1986, drew angry denunciations from Mayor
Edward I. Koch and Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward, among other officials, and
was quickly drawn into electoral politics. David N. Dinkins, the Manhattan
Borough President and a leading Democratic candidate for mayor, said, ''The tone
and climate of this city does get set at City Hall.'' [Page B2] Four Youths Are
Held The State Division of Human Rights announced that it would investigate the
attack; the New York Urban League called for ''sting operations'' to test
bigotry in problem neighborhoods, and 20 religious and civic leaders from
Bensonhurst met at Borough Hall to voice abhorrence over the attack and pledge
efforts to combat racism.

The victim of the attack, Yusef Hawkins of the East New York section of
Brooklyn, was shot twice in the chest and died shortly afterward at Maimonides
Medical Center. A companion suffered a slight graze wound, possibly from a
bullet, and the two others escaped injury.

Four white teen-agers were taken into custody yesterday and questioned by the
police.

The police identified the four as Steven Curreri, 18, of 2048 68th Street, a
1988 graduate of Franklin D. Roosevelt High School and a student at Kingsborough
Community College; Pasquale Raucci, 19, of 6712 19th Avenue, a graduate of New
Utrecht High School and an employee of Video Reflections; Brian O'Donnell, 18,
of 1967 65th Street, a graduate of Roosevelt High School and a student at
Brooklyn College, and Keith Mondello, 18, of 6804 20th Avenue, a construction
supervisor at Digi Enterprises. A woman at the O'Donnell apartment would not
open the door, and no one answered the door at the other home addresses.

Two of the young men were put in lineups last night at the 60th Precinct station
house in Coney Island, where they were identified by witnesses as being at the
scene of the shooting, Inspector Richard Mayronne said. He described the two as
''strong suspects'' but would not say which two they were.

The other two teen-agers will face a lineup this morning, Inspector Mayronne
said. No charges were immediately filed.

Residents of Bensonhurst, a well-kept working-class neighborhood of tree-shaded
streets, with low brick homes, flowering geraniums and religious statuettes,
expressed shock at the killing, and friends of the four teen-agers said they
were stunned. ''I can leave my kids with these guys and I know nothing would
happen,'' said Joe Chirieleison, a storefront mechanic. Liza Quinones, 18, a
high school classmate of Mr. O'Donnell, described him as an honor student who
sometimes played basketball with blacks at Public School 205 in the
neighborhood.

Stephen G. Murphy, a lawyer representing Mr. Mondello, said Mr. Mondello had
been at the scene of the shooting and had had a baseball bat. But he said Mr.
Mondello had not had a gun and was not the one who shot.

Mr. Murphy also denied police contentions that Mr. Mondello was the girl's
boyfriend. ''They have no other relationship than that they were neighbors,'' he
said.

'Young Jealous Girls'

He also denied that the killing was a racial incident. ''It was caused by young
jealous girls,'' he said. The girl, Gina Feliciano, 18, ''caused a
confrontation'' by telling Mr. Mondello that she was going to bring as many as
30 youths to beat him and his friends, Mr. Murphy said.

As described by the police, Mr. Mondello was spurned last week by Miss
Feliciano, who, he heard, was dating black and Hispanic men.

The white youths, armed with at least one but probably several guns and at least
seven baseball bats, were staked out by the girl's house at 6801 20th Avenue in
Bensonhurst Wednesday night about 9:20, the police said, when Mr. Hawkins and
his friends passed by on the way to an appointment to meet the owner of a used
car for sale at 1965 Bay Ridge Avenue.

'Talking and Bragging'

''This group was building and talking and bragging,'' Commissioner Ward said,
adding that ''at least one witness heard the word nigger used.''

''They were looking for the new lover,'' Commissioner Ward said.

Alice T. McGillion, deputy police commissioner for public information, said,
''Prior to the shooting, witnesses overheard, 'Let's club the [expletive]
nigger.' '' This, she said was followed by the remark: ''No, let's not club,
let's shoot one.''

One witness, she said, heard, ''Let's get even with Gina'' and ''Let's show
Gina,'' a reference to Miss Feliciano.

Ms. McGillion also said Miss Feliciano had told the police that minutes before
the shooting, one of the white youths showed her a gun and told her, ''You
better watch yourself with your nigger friends.''

Ms. McGillion said Miss Feliciano also reported seeing the whites gather around
Mr. Hawkins and hearing someone ask, ''Is he the one?''

After the shooting, Miss Feliciano went to a telephone booth, where a friend was
on the phone, and they called the police, Ms. McGillion said.

Signs of Trouble

Miss Feliciano was to have celebrated her 18th birthday at home Wednesday night,
Ms. McGillion said, but canceled the party amid signs of trouble. From her
second-floor apartment, she looked out the window and saw a group of youths
gathering on the street. She later joined them, witnessed the attack and has
since been cooperating with the police, Ms. McGillion said.

The police said Miss Feliciano told them she had been dating a dark-skinned
Hispanic man and that her father, who was killed in Vietnam, had been Puerto
Rican.

''In this case, it's a spurned lover who is jealous and is looking for the new
boyfriend,'' Commissioner Ward said at a morning news conference at the 62d
Precinct station house at 1925 Bath Avenue.

Mayor Koch, standing beside him, said the killing was ''an enormous tragedy.''

'There Is Still Racism'

''This,'' he said, ''is a case involving bias, but it's more than that. It's a
spurned lover.'' And he added: ''This says that in the U.S., there is still
racism. The racial relations are far better than in many other cities, but they
are not good enough.''

He said he has asked Gov. Mario M. Cuomo to designate a special state prosecutor
to handle the case because the Brooklyn District Attorney, Elizabeth Holtzman,
was running for city comptroller and would be leaving the prosecutor's office.

Mr. Cuomo said he saw no reason to supersede the District Attorney, and Ms.
Holtzman said there was no need for a special prosecutor. ''We were there from
the middle of last night,'' she said yesterday. ''My office has a proven track
record in these cases.''

The victim, Mr. Hawkins, lived with his parents at 485 Hegeman Avenue in the
East New York section. Distraught relatives declined to talk to reporters who
telephoned their home.

'Reaching His Goals'

But the victim's father, Moses J. Stewart, told a radio station, WLIB, that his
son was ''very, very intelligent'' and had recently been accepted at a technical
high school. ''He was reaching his goals,'' he said. ''He was putting his dreams
behind him because he was achieving his task.''

''To see my son's life wasted,'' he said, ''because of some indiscriminatory
fool with a gun in his hands who saw nothing but a black man is a very, very
vile thing to me.''

And he asked: ''Who will pay for this? Who will pay?''

Mr. Hawkins's companions were identified as Troy Banner, 17, of 652 Hegeman
Avenue, an orderly at Brookdale Hospital who suffered a grazed right forearm in
the attack; Claude Stanford, 18, of 483 Hegeman Avenue, a hardware store clerk,
and Luther Sylvester, 17, of 486 Hegeman Avenue, a student at Automotive High
School.

Going to Look at Car

Here is how the police and witnesses recounted what happened:

At about 9 P.M. Wednesday, Mr. Hawkins and his friends got off the N train at
20th Avenue and 64th Street. They were on their way to meet the owner of a 1982
Pontiac at 1965 Bay Ridge Avenue. Mr. Banner was considering buying the car for
$900.

They stopped in a candy store to buy batteries, film and candy and walked south
on 20th Avenue, passing the four-story apartment house where Miss Feliciano
lives at 6801 20th Avenue.

The white youths were gathered outside Miss Feliciano's house, waiting to see
who might visit her. From the items recovered later, at least seven youths were
armed with baseball bats and at least one had a gun. Witnesses reported no
exchange of words between the two groups before the shooting, which took place
outside 2007 Bay Ridge Avenue. The bats were not used, but four shots were
fired, two striking Mr. Hawkins in the chest.

Elizabeth Galarza, 32, who lives at 6818 20th Avenue, said she heard three shots
about 9:20 P.M., along with cries of ''Bobby, Bobby, oh my God, he's dead.'' The
reference to Bobby was not explained.

About 10 minutes later, Mrs. Galarza - who is trained to administer
cardiopulmonary resuscitation - ran downstairs to find Mr. Hawkins on the ground
with two bullet wounds in his chest, she said. He was clutching a candy bar, she
added.

''His pulse was still there - it was pretty good on the neck,'' she said. ''He
was blinking his eyes. He couldn't talk. I pulled up his T-shirt. I saw two
bullet holes in his chest.''

'Terror in His Eyes'

She went on: ''The young boy clenched my hand. When his pulse stopped, he
clenched tight and let go. He was frightened. He had terror in his eyes. He was
so young and so frightened. I said, 'Come on baby. You'll be fine. Take small
breaths. Just relax.

God's with you.' ''

Mrs. Galarza said she called the police and it took about 15 minutes for a radio
car to arrive, but other witnesses said the police arrived within a few minutes.
Mr. Hawkins was dead on arrival at Maimonides Medical Center.

The police recovered four baseball bats at a schoolyard at 68th Street and three
at other nearby sites. They also found four spent shells from a .32-caliber
semiautomatic pistol.

The police impounded a black Mercury near the site of the shooting, where
witnesses reported seeing someone who may have placed a gun after the shooting.
They were also looking for a black Corvette where witnesses reported seeing
other guns possibly being placed.

Inspector Mayronne said the police were looking for all the youths who were in
the group and that all could be charged as accessories to murder.

At about 4:20 P.M. yesterday, three of those held - Mr. O'Donnell, Mr. Raucci
and Mr. Curreri - were moved out of the 62d Precinct station house, emerging
with rain parkas hiding their heads. They were taken in a police van to the 60th
Precinct station house for the lineup. Mr. Mondello, who had been held at the
61st Precinct station house, was also moved there.

The streets of Bensonhurst were thronged with police officers last night, while
neighbors in groups sat on stoops, talking into the morning hours.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of suspects in shooting death of black youth in Brooklyn
(NYT/Michelle V. Agins); map of Brooklyn showing site of shooting (pg. B2)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 25, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

INSIDE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 89 words



Continental Air in Sale Talks

Texas Air said it might sell a controlling or minority interest in the airline.

Analysts said its chairman was trying to raise cash. Page D1.

The War Goes On

The Vietnam War is still being fought, not only with words but also with
bullets, among America's Vietnamese refugee population. Page A10.

Cold Shoulder in Estonia

Russians who live in Estonia fear that they will become victims of the resurgent
nationalist sentiment in the Soviet Baltic republics. Page A30.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 25, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 942 words



INTERNATIONAL    A3-9, A30

Colombian drug traffickers burned the homes of politicians, dynamited offices of
the nation's two largest political parties, placed bombs in two radio stations
and issued a communique declaring war on the Government.    Page A1



Colombia's Foreign Minister met with a top U.S. official to discuss the wave of
drug-related violence in Colombia and its latest efforts to combat narcotics
traffickers.    A6



News analysis: The U.S. responded in a limited way to the election of a
non-Communist Prime Minister in Poland and to what would seem to be a turning
point in East-West relations.    A1



Poland's Parliament elected Tadeusz Mazowiecki, a devout Catholic and Solidarity
supporter, to be the country's first non-Communist Prime Minister since the
early postwar years.    A8



The Soviets moved quickly to establish cordial ties with the new Polish Prime
Minister and introduced the Solidarity adviser as a political novelty but not a
threat to the current order.    A8



Amid enthusiasm for a free Estonia many residents whose first language is
Russian are angered and frightened. Non-Estonians living there wonder what their
place will be.    A30



The cease-fire in Angola declared two months ago is crumbling, and American
officials expressed concern about increased fighting between Government forces
and guerrillas there.    A3



Syrian-backed Muslim forces shelled Junieh, the main Christian seaport north of
Beirut, as a flotilla of French ships took up positions off the Lebanese coast.
    A3



Israeli kidnapped on the West Bank    A7


Japanese official admits an affair    A9



NATIONAL    A10-12, D18

Voyager 2 cruised over Neptune, its cameras snapping pictures and its sensors
gathering data on the conditions and forces on the outer most planet in the
solar system.    A1



For Voyager 2's ''family,'' it's the last of the first encounters    A12



The stock market surged to a record as investors focused on declining interest
rates and the rising dollar and put further behind them memories of the crash
nearly two years ago.    A1



Is 1989 like 1987? No, but most any measure    D1



Supporters of legalized abortion in Iowa, energized by the Supreme Court's
Webster decision, are creating a powerful new variable in a state so often
considered a political laboratory.    A1



The last Vietnam War skirmishes are being fought with words and occasionally
with bullets by the Vietnamese refugees in the United States. Last week a
leading figure in the debate was shot in California.    A10



A snag has developed in the settlement of a case invoving the Fernald nuclear
weapons plant. Residents near the plant say they may still have the right to
bring claims for cleanup costs for contamination of their property.    A10



Speaker Foley, reacting to an attack by Defense Secretary Cheney over military
spending priorities, denied that his fellow House members were underestimating
the Soviet military threat.    D18



Ambitious television programs for children in San Francisco urge viewers to turn
their sets off and and then go out and do something else, such as read a book or
go to a museum.    D18



Harder substances than diamonds may soon emerge from laboratories, scientists
are predicting, upsetting a long-accepted view that nothing could rival a
diamond in hardness.    D18



Labor leaders were arrested as they took part in a sit-down demonstration at a
courthouse in Virginia to show support for striking coal, telephone and airline
workers.    D18



For a Confederate home for women, it's finally Appomattox    A10


Bass P.L.C. to acquire Holiday Inn    D1



WASHINGTON TALK    A11



Soviet legislators test Congressional waters
Critics say budget chief now deplores policies he created

REGIONAL    B1-4

A black youth was shot to death in Brooklyn when attacked by a group of white
teen-agers. The police said the whites were waiting for black or Hispanic youths
believed to be dating a neighborhood girl.    A1



New York's mayoral candidates deplored the slaying of a black teen-ager in
Brooklyn and said the incident should not be exploited for political purposes.
    B2



Sorrow and rage for neighbors of black youth slain in Brooklyn    B2



Mayor Koch says he has been buoyed by the response to his message thus far in
the New York mayoral campaign. He says the race for the DemoDemocratic
nomination is now between David Dinkins and himself, but adds, ''I'm No. 2.''
    B1



Lauder once said he would be the first Jewish President    B1



Giuliani's campaign begins television commercials    B4


Schools chancellor hunt pauses until after the primaries    B3



Levels of asbestos fibers in the Gramercy Park area of Manhattan will be
measured by environmental officials amid suspicions that the source fibers was a
steam pipe explosion on Saturday.    B1



Leona Helmsley's closing argument was made with her lawyer imploring the jury to
end Mrs. Helmsley's ''terrible suffering'' and ''let her walk out of this
courtroom a free woman.''    B3



The Black Rock Forest in Cornwall, N.Y., now owned by Harvard University, will
be sold to a private foundation that will lease it to a consortium of 15
scientific and educational institutions.    B1



Search for bodies will switch to Bronx playground    B3


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 25, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

War Continues for Vietnam Refugees

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1308 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Aug. 24


Some of the last skirmishes of the Vietnam War are being fought, sometimes with
words and occasionally with bullets, within the sharply fragmented Vietnamese
refugee population of the United States.

One of the boldest and most controversial of the partisans, a writer named Doan
Van Toai, was shot and seriously wounded Saturday on a quiet street in Fresno,
sending tremors of fear through an emigre community that has already learned
that speaking out can be dangerous.

Mr. Toai, a leading advocate of improving relations with the Communist
Government of Vietnam, had managed to anger his fellow immigrants on both the
right and the left, and although there are many theories, it is still unclear
who shot him.

Mr. Toai, who is 43 years old, was listed in critical condition today in a
hospital in the Fresno area after two Asian men in a dirty brown station wagon
without license plates drew alongside him as he walked down a street and fired
three shots into his head and back, the police said.

Tensions Expected to Increase

The attack was the latest of a number of incidents, many of them still unsolved,
including shootings, arson, threats and mysterious suicides. A number of
prominent Vietnamese said they routinely took precautionary measures as a result
of these incidents.

Both Vietnamese and non-Vietnamese who are involved with emigre politics said
they expected tensions and the possibility of violence to increase as the United
States draws closer to establishing normal diplomatic and economic relations
with Vietnam.

One journalist, Trang Tuong Nhu, compared the 800,000 Vietnamese refugees in the
United States with Cuban immigrants, whom she characterized as clinging to an
inflexible anti-Communist approach and hoping Washington would remain
antagonistic toward the country they fled.

Speaking of the attack on Mr. Toai, Dam Phuong Tran, who heads a private group
called the Committee for Human Rights in Vietnam, said: ''It might be from the
extreme right. It might be from the extreme left. It might be the act of a
madman.

''What many in the Vietnamese community don't understand is that this is a free
country, that Toai or anybody else has the freedom to express whatever they
think.''

Opposition to Normal Relations

Mr. Toai's most insistent critics, and the grouping of factions who have been
linked to most of the previous threats and acts of violence, are those on the
right who oppose normalization of relations with Vietnam.

''I suppose there is a list of five or six types of people that could have shot
him, but the most likely candidate is what we call the ex-A.R.V.N. paratrooper
crowd,'' said Douglas Pike, director of Indochina studies at the University of
Cailfornia at Berkeley. The former paratroopers in the Army of the Republic of
Vietnam have a reputation of being fiercely rightist.

In an immigrant population that includes a sizable proportion of former military
men, he said, a peculiar geography has taken shape.

''There are a lot of generals and officers in Washington, a lot of field grade,
upper grade, officers either in Texas or in the Los Angeles area, and in the
lower Bay area of San Francisco you tend to have enlisted men and sergeants,''
Mr. Pike said. ''As a result, emigre politics in the Washington area tends to be
more subtle and sophisticated. In the San Francisco area it tends to be more
direct.''

That area encircling San Francisco includes towns with concentrations of
Southeast Asian refugees like Stockton, Merced and Fresno, where Mr. Toai was
shot.

'Some Crazy Fanatics Around'

Groups of former South Vietnamese soldiers were believed to have been behind a
series of threats against Mr. Toai over the years as he called for improved
relations with Vietnam. After taking similar positions, seeking business
arrangements with Vietnam, or traveling there, other Vietnamese have also been
verbally attacked or threatened. Some have been killed.

''There is a big fear going on in the community with some crazy fanatics
around,'' said one Vietnamese involved with community affairs who did not give
his name for fear of reprisal. ''There are fanatics who still believe that if
they kill people and scare people off, if they try real hard, maybe they can
influence the United States not to have diplomatic relations with Vietnam.''

Prominent figures killed in recent years include Dam Phong, the editor of a
Vietnamese-language newspaper in Houston. Mr. Phong's killers left a note beside
his body identifying themselves as the ''Vietnamese Party for the Annihilation
of Communism and for the National Restoration.''

Tran Khanh Van, a prominent former official of the Saigon Government who lived
in San Francisco, was shot and badly wounded in 1986.

A novelist, Long Vu, was partially paralyzed last year after a beating in an
area called ''little Saigon'' in Westminster, just south of Los Angeles. A vocal
defender of the Government in Hanoi, Nguyen Van Luy, was wounded and his wife
was killed in a shooting on a street in San Francisco.

A California newspaper editor who wrote under the pen name Hoai Diep Tu died
when his newspaper office was set afire. He had been criticized for printing
advertisements for tours to Vietnam and had received death threats.

Two men who spoke out against Hoang Co Minh, an advocate of anti-Communist
guerrilla warfare in Vietnam, died in mysterious apparent suicides in Texas, one
by jumping from a freeway bridge and the other by hanging in his own closet.

The former South Vietnamese vice president, Nguyen Cao Ky, who has kept a low
political profile as a businessman in Southern California, drew sharp criticism
earlier this year for telling a conference of former officers that the time for
fighting had ended.

Jane Fonda of the Vietnamese

Mr. Toai's background and style had caused suspicion and dislike, as well as
admiration, from across the spectrum of the highly factionalized Vietnamese.

Mr. Pike called him the Jane Fonda of the Vietnamese community because of his
approach and the passions it fueled.

A student at Saigon University in the late 1960's, Mr. Toai became a prominent
figure advocating a non-Communist solution without American involvement. He
became a bank manager in the coastal city of Qui Nhon and by his own later
account had clandestine dealings with the Communist National Liberation Front.
After the Communist victory in 1975, he became a member of the finance committee
of the Government in the South, but protested the increasing dominance of the
North as the country unified.

As a result, he was imprisoned for more than two years, but then secured a legal
departure at a time when thousands of Vietnamese were risking their lives in
dangerous escapes by boat.

Since coming to the United States, Mr. Toai has written three books, including a
well-received study of the Vietnamese prison camp system and an one about the
Communist military. He heads a political group called the Institute for
Democracy in Vietnam.

Seen As an Opportunist

''People from both the right and the left don't trust him and see him an
opportunist,'' said Al Santoli, an author of books on Indochina who has shared
public forums with Mr. Toai.

Matthew I. Chanoff, who is working with Mr. Toai on a history of the war, said,
''The main thing is that he believes that the Communist regime is a fact, and
that we should negotiate with them and convince them that reform is in their
best interests.''

Those are dangerous words among Vietnamese in America.

''The thing you're not allowed to say in the Vietnamese community is that it is
time for the United States and Hanoi to make up and to normalize relations,''
said Denis Rockstroh, a journalist who is married to a Vietnamese and who has
monitored the pattern of violence. ''And when you do say it, bad things
happen.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Doan Van Toai (AP)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 25, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

New Clashes in Cambodia

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 81 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 24


Fighting between rival Cambodian factions flared again along the Thai-Cambodian
border, aid workers and Thai officials said today. Residents reported hearing
heavy exchanges in the central sector of the frontier and foreign aid workers
said there had been sporadic clashes over the past five days. The final round of
peace talks on Cambodia is to open next week in Paris to try to hammer out an
overall settlement before Vietnam withdraws its troops from the country by Sept.
26.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 26, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Talks on a Cambodian Agreement Are Deadlocked, U.S. Says

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 939 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 25


The United States said today that an international conference on Cambodia,
convened in Paris a month ago, had made no progress on the most important issue:
the sharing of power between the Phnom Penh Government and its rivals, including
Prince Norodom Sihanouk.

Accordingly, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d does not plan to go to Paris
next week for a meeting of senior officials from the 18 countries taking part in
the conference, a State Department spokesman said.

In the absence of a comprehensive political settlement, American officials said
they were worried that fighting in Cambodia would intensify after Vietnamese
troops complete their withdrawal, as they are scheduled to do by the end of next
month.

'Settlement Is Not in Sight'

The State Department spokesman, Richard A. Boucher, said that Prince Sihanouk
''has demonstrated admirable flexibility'' on the question of power-sharing.

''Unfortunately, his reasonable attitude has not been reciprocated by Hanoi or
the Phnom Penh regime,'' Mr. Boucher said. ''At this point, therefore, a
comprehensive settlement is not in sight.''

Prime Minister Hun Sen of Cambodia arrived today in Paris and declared that
''there will not be any global settlement without elimination of the Khmer
Rouge'' as a political and military force in Cambodia. He said he was not
demanding physical elimination of the Khmer Rouge, but insisted that members of
the Communist opposition faction ''renounce the policy of genocide and break
with Pol Pot,'' their leader.

The Khmer Rouge ruled Cambodia from 1975 through 1978 and presided over a brutal
restructuring of society in which more than a million Cambodians died.
Vietnamese troops invaded Cambodia in December 1978, ousted the Khmer Rouge and
installed Mr. Hun Sen's Communist Government.

U.S. Behind an Uneasy Coalition

American officials said that proposals offered in Paris by the representatives
of Phnom Penh and Hanoi would, for all practical purposes, leave the Hun Sen
regime intact, with negligible roles for leaders of the guerrilla factions
backed by the United States.

In opening the Paris conference on July 30, Secretary Baker said, ''We cannot
accept a continuation of the present regime in Phnom Penh, which was established
through Vietnamese aggression.''

The United States supports Prince Sihanouk and the Khmer People's National
Liberation Front, headed by Son Sann, a former Prime Minister of Cambodia. Both
factions are non-Communist. They have been working together in an uneasy
coalition with the Khmer Rouge, to oppose the Phnom Penh Government.

Unresolved Issues

Delegates to the Paris conference said there had been bitter disagreements on
these issues:

* The Khmer Rouge demanded that references to genocide be deleted from
resolutions to be adopted by the conference. The Vice Foreign Minister of
Vietnam, Tran Quang Co, said the proposal for such deletions was an insult to
the memory of hundreds of thousands of Cambodians and Vietnamese ''barbarously
massacred'' by the Khmer Rouge. A Cambodian official said the dispute was ''an
absurd and indecent semantic battle.''

* Western countries, including the United States, say that the United Nations
should create an international force to verify the withdrawal of Vietnamese
troops and to supervise elections in Cambodia. But the Phnom Penh Government and
Vietnam say the force should be sponsored by the Paris peace conference. Phnom
Penh's supporters say the United Nations is biased because it recognizes the
resistance coalition as the legitimate representative of Cambodia.

* The Khmer Rouge complains that more than a million Vietnamese, including
thousands of armed militiamen, will be left behind in Cambodia after the
Vietnamese troops have departed. Hanoi says that 80,000 Vietnamese civilians
will continue residing in Cambodia.

* While Mr. Hun Sen insists that the Khmer Rouge have no role in an interim
government, Prince Sihanouk contends that the Khmer Rouge should have a modest
role because otherwise ''there would be neither peace nor stability'' in
Cambodia.

'Only a Miracle'

The Foreign Minister of Thailand, Siddhi Savetsila, told reporters in Bangkok
that ''only a miracle can push through an agreement'' at the conference in
Paris. An official at the French Foreign Ministry said today, ''It's too early
to draw a conclusion about what will happen.'' A State Department official said
today, ''I don't know that we've given up, but the prospects for a comprehensive
settlement are not very bright.''

Many countries are sending their foreign ministers to Paris next week. But the
American delegation will be led by Richard H. Solomon, the Assistant Secretary
of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs.

In a last-ditch attempt to rescue the Paris conference, France has proposed a
complex power-sharing formula that would accommodate all the Cambodian factions
while limiting the role of the Khmer Rouge.

Under the proposal, as described by Prince Sihanouk, executive power in Cambodia
would be shared equally by the Prince and Mr. Hun Sen. But all four factions,
including the Khmer Rouge and followers of Mr. Son Sann, would be represented on
an agency supervising elections for a new government.

The Prince had proposed that all four factions share executive power in an
interim government. He saw himself as president and envisioned vice presidents
from the other three factions.

By contrast, Mr. Hun Sen had suggested that the Phnom Penh Government retain
most of its powers and assign responsibility for the elections to a new entity
including spokesmen for all four factions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Hmong Refugees Import A Near-Record Birthrate

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 20, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 709 words

DATELINE: SACRAMENTO, Calif.-


Yia Yang, who promotes birth control among his fellow Hmong refugees from the
mountains of Laos, says he plans to set an example for them by stopping after
just four children.

One of his converts, Nengthao Vang, says he has decided to stop now that he has
13 children. Mr. Vang's sons say they plan to have much smaller families than
their father, who is 76.

But Mr. Yia Yang's yearlong pilot project has encountered reluctance among an
ethnic group that exhibits what sociologists say is one of the world's highest
birthrates.

With a budget of $52,000 donated by the Sierra Foundation, a private group that
supports health and health-related projects, Mr. Yang said he had attracted just
40 clients for birth control from among the Hmong population of about 7,000 in
Sacramento.

Fertility Rate Among the Highest

Studies indicate that the Hmong refugees, who number as many as 100,000 in the
United States, have a fertility rate of 9.5 children per woman, The fertility
rate is the average number of children a woman bears over her reproductive
lifetime.

A study of Hmong refugees in Thailand found them ''at the upper limits of human
reproductive capacity.''

Ruben G. Rumbaut, a professor of sociology at San Diego State University, said
the fertility rate the Hmong have shown is one of the highest in the United
States. It approximates that of the Hutterites, a Christian group that emigrated
from the Ukraine in the 1870's and settled on communal farms in the Dakotas and
surrounding states and Canadian provinces.

The Hutterite fertility rate, which is more than 10 children per woman, is ''the
highest level fertility of any recorded human group,'' according to John R.
Weeks, the director of the International Population Center at San Diego State
University. ''They are the basis by which human fertility is measured.''

''The Hmong would have to be counted as one of the more prolific groups in the
world,'' Mr. Weeks said. ''I cannot offhand think of any other examples of
groups with which we have measured regularly such high levels.''

Job Opportunities Are Few

Large numbers of Hmong refugees, many of whom are in California, are on public
assistance, according to Eric Crystal, program coordinator for the Center for
Southeast Asian Studies at the University of California at Berkeley.

Job opportunities are few for first-generation Hmong immigrants, whom Mr.
Crystal described as basically ''illiterate middle-aged mountain farmers and
former guerrilla fighters coming from the most remote village districts anywhere
in Asia.''

But he said the United States had a special obligation toward the Hmong, who
were known for their loyalty as hired fighters during the war in Indochina.

Refugees from Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos now number more than one million in the
United States, making them the third largest Asian group after the Chinese and
Filipinos, Mr. Rumbaut said.

Large Family Is Lucky

Their numbers continue to grow, both from immigration and from births. An
estimated 200,000 children have been born to Indochinese refugees in the United
States, most of whom arrived only in the past decade.

Among the Hmong, the high fertility rate is attributed partly to the traditional
culture, which prizes large families and favors sons, as well as to very early
marriage, which extends the childbearing years of women.

''People believe that if you have a bigger family you are luckier. God gave you
much,'' Mr. Yia Yang said. ''There is a saying that the room is crowded but
people are not crowded.''

Studies have also found, as Mr. Yia Yang did, a reluctance to adopt birth
control methods or to continue using them once they are introduced.

One of Mr. Vang's sons, Her Pao Vang, who is 20, is studying business
administration at Sacramento City College. He said he planned to have two or
three children because ''I would think a small family would be much better in
the United States.''

The Vang family's pattern appeared to be representative of Hmong refugees, among
whom the educational level of men is about three years while most women have no
education, Mr. Rumbaut said. But children of the refugees are at the middle
level in their classes in grade schools and high schools in America, he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Nengthao Vang with his wife, Pang Vue, and his son Shoua
(NYT/Seth Mydans)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U. of Michigan Curb on Bias Struck Down

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 22, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 190 words

DATELINE: ANN ARBOR, Mich., Aug. 26


A University of Michigan policy aimed at harassment based on racial
discrimination is unconstitutional, a Federal district judge has ruled.

University officials proposed the policy last year after various incidents of
racial disparagement, including one in which a student disk jockey on a campus
radio show allowed a caller to tell jokes about black people.

But the judge, Avern Cohn, ruled Friday that the policy violates freedom of
speech and is so vague that ''persons of common intelligence must guess at its
meaning.'' The ruling will likely have national significance, said Howard Simon,
executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union in Michigan, which
challenged the policy on behalf of an unidentified Michigan student.

''Universities from Duke to Stanford and Wisconsin and in between are faced with
these same kinds of problems and are considering similar policies to the
University of Michigan,'' Mr. Simon said. The policy barred harassment or
discrimination based on race, ethnicity, religion, sex, sexual orientation,
creed, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, handicap or Vietnam
-veteran status.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Military Assumes Wider Role in Anti-Drug Effort

BYLINE: By BERNARD E. TRAINOR, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 24, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1242 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 26


After resisting such a role for years, the Defense Department is preparing to
play a major part in combating the flow of drugs into the United States. The
change has been brought about in part by legislation last year giving the
military a role in controlling drug traffic and in part by a change in attitude
in the leadership at the Pentagon.

As a result, the military services are planning to train and provide technical
support to American and foreign drug enforcement agencies more than ever before.
The military will play the major role in setting up a command, control and
communications network in the United States and in drug-producing regions to
help drug enforcement authorities locate and take timely action against drug
traffic.

The legislation adopted by Congress in September 1988 appropriated $300 million
to the military to fight drug trafficking and broadened the mission of the armed
forces to include surveillance of suspected drug-carrying ships and aircraft, as
well as stepped-up communications and intelligence. This year $470 million for
the drug effort is expected to be earmarked for the military.

But the change also stems from a conviction among senior military officers and
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney that drugs are tearing at the fabric of American
society and pose such a threat to national security that greater military
involvement is warranted.

Resistance to Drug Role

In the past, Defense Secretaries Caspar W. Weinberger and Frank C. Carlucci, as
well as many senior military officers, resisted using the military to combat
drugs because they believed that it would interfere with the services'
traditional military mission.

There was also widespread concern among the senior military leaders that
servicemen combating narcotics might be corrupted by drug dealers willing to pay
large sums to have a blind eye turned to their trafficking.

Administration officials say no American servicemen will be directly responsible
for drug arrests and seizures, either at home or abroad. That job will be left
to authorized drug enforcement agents and police.

The military's role will be to support those directly involved in fighting
drugs, but that is regarded as significant because United States military
equipment, training and technical intelligence support of domestic and foreign
authorities is considered critical if there is to be any hope of stemming the
flow of drugs into this country.

Memories of Vietnam

Although American servicemen are only to advise American and foreign anti-drug
teams, some Pentagon officers with memories of Vietnam say it will be difficult
to avoid direct involvement.

''What if the druggies fire at an Army helicopter carrying Colombian soldiers
into a drug site?'' an officer asked. ''The next thing you know we'll be putting
door gunners on the Hueys and providing the locals with forward observers to
call in artillery.''

But even those in the Pentagon who counsel caution concede that the military
should be doing more to combat drugs.

President Bush announced on Friday that he was sending $65 million in aid to the
Colombian government. The aid package includes helicopters, airplanes, weapons,
ammunition and other equipment, along with technical advisers.

Helping Other Latin Nations

The American military is already helping other Latin American nations. In an
operation called Blast Furnace in 1986, Army helicopters transported Bolivian
forces on raids against drug manfacturing sites in the jungle. Army Special
Forces soldiers are now in Bolivia giving tactical advice to American agents of
the Drug Enforcement Administration. Under another program called Snowcap,
Rangers at Fort Benning, Ga., are training D.E.A. agents in military skills
before they go to major drug regions in Colombia and Peru.

The increased activity comes against a background in which the military's
usefulness in combating drugs is in dispute. Last year a General Accounting
Office report charged that the past Pentagon drug interdiction efforts were not
cost-effective. The report found that in 1987 the Air Force spent $2.6 million
flying drug detection missions, which resulted in only 10 arrests. The Navy
spent $40 million on one of its programs, the report said, which resulted in
only 20 seizures by the Customs Service and other law enforcement agencies.

Legislation Makes Changes

Before last year's legislation specifically assigning an anti-drug role to the
military, the armed forces assisted drug enforcement authorities only if doing
so did not interfere with purely military missions. For example, Navy ships
could carry Coast Guard officers, with the authority to make arrests at sea if a
warship happened upon a drug runner incidental to its assigned activity, but the
ship's captain could not deliberately search for drug boats.

That changed last year in the new legislation. Now American warships may
actively seek drug-runners on the high seas, although the power of arrest still
resides with the law enforcement officers aboard each ship.

Pentagon studies on the drug problem define it in terms of geographic zones,
each requiring different countermeasures.

Source of the Drugs

One zone encompasses the source of the drugs. The studies place particular
emphasis on Latin America, believed to be the source of most of the marijuana
and all the cocaine that reaches the United States, but they also include the
Far East, where much of the world's heroin is produced.

A second zone covers the routes used by drug dealers to bring their goods into
the United States. These are primarily the air and sea routes into the Southern
and Southwestern states and the land route through Mexico and to a lesser extent
through Canada.

The third zone, called the demand zone, is within the United States itself.

By law the Pentagon has the lead in detecting and monitoring illegal drugs
coming into the country by sea and air, and that is where the military is
placing its initial emphasis.

Two Command Centers

Two command centers have been set up to process and evaluate surveillance
reports on possible drug runners and to alert police authorities in the United
States. One center, known as Joint Task Force 4, is in Key West, Fla. It
receives reports from surveillance satellites, ships, aircraft and radar
balloons monitoring the East and Gulf Coasts.

Joint Task Force 5 is in Alameda, Calif., covering the approaches to the West
Coast. The United States military commanders of the Pacific and Atlantic in
Hawaii and Norfolk, Va., are in overall charge of these surveillance missions.

The North American Air Defense Command, with its powerful long- range radar
designed to pick up missile attacks against the United States, has also been
ordered to search for drug planes as they take off from remote jungle sites in
South America and feed its information to the command centers. The Pentagon has
also drawn up a master communications plan designed to tie the various agencies
together to better coordinate the overall anti-drug effort.

With dozens of separate Federal, state and local departments and agencies
combating drugs, command, control and communications procedures have been
chaotic. Many experts studying the problem of drug interdiction believe that the
Pentagon's ablity to organize a coherent command, communications and
intelligence network is the greatest contribution the military can make in the
drug war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM VIEW;
My Hero May Be Your Stoolie

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1623 words


The real-life model for private Eriksson, as the character is identified in
Brian De Palma's new Vietnam film, ''Casualties of War,'' is still living under
an assumed name somewhere in mid-America. It is now 25 years since Private
Eriksson, at immense personal risk, testified against four of his Army buddies
involved in the 1963 abduction, rape and murder of a young Vietnamese woman. The
cost of conscience: permanent anonymity. As originally reported by Daniel Lang
in The New Yorker magazine in 1969, Private Eriksson's story remains as vivid
and disturbing to read today as the De Palma movie is to watch. This says
something not only about our continued preoccupation with the meaning of the
Vietnam War, but also about our gut reaction to people who, for one reason or
another, blow the whistle on former friends. Stool pigeons or heroes? Depending
on the circumstances, there should be no doubt.

Yet there frequently is doubt, if only because the courage to speak out against
prevailing attitudes is something we honor far more often in theory than in
fact. Courage of that sort is often inconvenient, at least in its own time. It's
not easily understood in a society where conformity is king. In films there is
also the problem that such courage can seldom be as briskly and persuasively
dramatized as the rattiest kind of craven behavior.

There's no question about the courage and rightness of the undercover narcotics
agent who, broadly romanticized, has become an icon of television crime shows.
Because drugs are bad, narcs are heroes. So are Mr. Deeds and Mr. Smith, those
oddball protagonists of Frank Capra's populist comedies that snipe at
Establishment figures (who are, in fact, sitting ducks).

Not so clear-cut are our reactions to someone who testifies against friends
and/or former colleagues. We may recognize the backbone it takes, if the cause
is good, but we're also a little in awe of the selfless determination. Such
purity of spirit is scary. In our society, it is as mysterious as some sort of
God-given talent.

The willingness to buck the system, the will to righteousness, is beyond glib
analysis, as Sidney Lumet showed in ''Serpico'' (1973) and ''Prince of the
City'' (1981), two brutal and entertaining films about undercover operations
designed to expose corruption in the New York Police Department. Both Serpico
and Danny Ciello (of ''Prince of the City'') demonstrate a zeal that borders on
the messianic.

''Casualties of War,'' which was also the title of Mr. Lang's New Yorker story,
could never have been made 20 years ago, certainly not on the elaborate physical
scale of Mr. De Palma's production. The film looks as if it cost a mint and it
probably did. It was shot in Thailand with a large cast and crew, though the
fine David Rabe screenplay is lean and the dramatic focus kept short.

The war was still being fought in 1969. The financial investment in a
''Casualties of War'' then would have been too big to risk on a film whose moral
choices would not have seemed as well defined as they do in 1989. The backing of
such an endeavor would have taken more courage than any publicly held
corporation could be expected to demonstrate. Like the antiwar marches of the
period, such a film would have been considered as slander against all American
servicemen in Vietnam, rather than as an examination of particular events.

Only the passage of time has allowed the story of Private Eriksson to become the
stuff of popular entertainment.

In these circumstances it is pertinent to recall ''The Visitors,'' a good,
tough, little-seen 1972 melodrama, which also seems to take as its inspiration
Mr. Lang's piece on Private Eriksson.

The setting of ''The Visitors'' is not Vietnam but Connecticut, where two
psychotic Vietnam vets, recently released from prison, track down their former
comrade, who testified against them after he witnessed a crime that duplicates
the one reported by Private Eriksson. Though the movie takes place a couple of
years after the crucial events and 10,000 miles away from the scene of the
crime, the witness (played by James Woods) is as much the hero of ''The
Visitors'' as Private Eriksson is of ''Casualties of War.''

Also like Private Eriksson (more as he is portrayed by Mr. Lang than by the
movie), he is haunted by the thought that he could have prevented the atrocity
had he somehow acted differently.

What gives ''The Visitors'' added political interest is that it was produced
while the war was still being angrily debated and made on a shoestring budget
(photographed in 16 millimeter) put up by its director, Elia Kazan. It was both
a personal statement and a family enterprise. Chris Kazan, the director's son,
wrote the screenplay, and it was shot at Mr. Kazan's Connecticut house.

''The Visitors'' did not find a large audience here. In France, where there was
little doubt about the war's unpopularity, the critics loved it.

In 1954, in collaboration with Budd Schulberg, the screenwriter and novelist,
Mr. Kazin made another film about the ordeal of a witness, ''On the
Waterfront.'' In the course of several days, Marlon Brando, as a plug-ugly
longshoreman who just wants to live and let live, is persuaded to put his life
on the line to testify before a Congressional committee investigating corruption
on the New Jersey waterfront.

At the time of its release in 1954, ''On the Waterfront'' was seen by many as a
rationalization by Mr. Kazan and Budd Schulberg of their appearances earlier as
''friendly witnesses'' before the House Committee on Un-American Activities.
Both men had named names, thus, in the eyes of their outraged critics,
certifying the authority of Congress to monitor private political opinion.

Seen today, unencumbered by the emotions prompted by the anti-Communist witch
hunts of the late 40's and early 50's, ''On the Waterfront'' survives as an
unashamed classic of its kind. It's one of the few movies about a whistle-blower
in which the witness's ordeal is comprehensible and his ultimate decision
triumphant.

The performance of Brando as Terry Malloy is still the best of his career, but
the entire movie serves to reinforce its theme of social responsibility as
opposed to blind loyalty to one's clan. The theme is not imposed on the movie
from above. It is illustrated from the very beginning after Terry has
unwittingly fingered a mob victim, thrown from a roof to prevent him from
testifying.

''He wasn't a bad kid, that Joey,'' says the bewildered Terry at a sidwalk
post-mortem. ''A canary,'' says someone else with a snicker. ''Maybe he could
sing,'' says another pal, ''but he couldn't fly.'' There are laughs all round.
In ''On the Waterfront'' there is never any doubt that Terry is the force and
presence that gives the film its meaning. Terry, who could have been a contender
but who threw a fight out of loyalty to friends, exemplifies everything that the
film is about. Though the crucial scene in which Terry tells all to the
committee now looks pretty thin, the power of the movie remains undiminished.

The passion of Private Eriksson in ''Casualties of War'' must be taken at face
value. Since the face is that of Michael J. Fox, a decent actor but not a very
complex or expressive one, the De Palma film must rely mostly on the context to
give substance to Private Eriksson's ordeal of doubt and anguish.

The private, in fact, expresses few doubts. His troubles come not from his own
self-questioning but from the Army chain of command, which attempts to dissuade
him from the proper course.

Private Eriksson is a nice kid who was brought up to know right from wrong. That
means that he knows that civilized soldiers should not kidnap a young woman,
take her on a mission as ''a little portable R & R,'' rape her repeatedly and
then, when the fun is over, stab and shoot her until dead.

This is a hole in the movie, which is otherwise moving and profoundly
disturbing. It's not entirely Mr. Fox's fault. The role, as written in the
mostly excellent screenplay, is pallid in comparison with that of the film's
principal heavy. He is the young, cocky, half-educated Sergeant Meserve, in
whose battle-fatigued brain the plan for the abduction is hatched.

The other three men in the five-man patrol go along with the idea, two with more
enthusiasm than the third. Only Private Eriksson objects.

As the possibly psychotic Meserve, Sean Penn is perfectly cast. With his easy,
self-assured grace of manner, his wariness, his old-fashioned cool, Mr. Penn's
Meserve dominates the drama to the extent that any one character does.

''Casualties of War'' is no more successful than most movies in making the
whistle-blower comprehensible as well as singular. Appearing now, in 1989, when
we know how we are expected to feel about Private Eriksson's mission, the film
benefits from the audience's lack of prejudice against the squealer, as well as
its wish to think and feel the right thing.

The story remains a stunner. The director serves it well though, as in almost
every De Palma movie, there are moments when the suspicion arises that Cinema,
meaning flamboyant effect, is given precedence over coherence. It also seems odd
that Mr. De Palma, the man who went wildly and wonderfully overboard with his
baroque remake of ''Scarface,'' should withhold from his audience the fact that
the tough sentences, originally handed down to the defendants, were
substantially modified through appeals and retrial.

It's possible that he thought this information would be too much of a downer,
that it would undercut Private Eriksson's lonely achievement. By withholding the
information, the director also makes the film seem somewhat more positive, even
uplifting, than it has any right to be.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Michael J. Fox as a soldier who turns in comrades to face
rape and murder charges in Brian De Palma's ''Causalties of War''; Marlon Brando
as a longshoreman who puts his life on the line by testifying in ''On the
Waterfront'' (pg. 1); Treat Williams as the cop who exposes police corruption in
Sidney Lumet's 1981 film ''Prince of the City'' (pg. 16); Al Pacino as a police
officer isolated by his exposure of corruption in ''Serpico'' (pg. 17)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

'CASUALTIES OF WAR';
Types of Ambiguity

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 649 words


To the Editor:

Several weeks ago Mike Norman asked if I wanted to participate in an article he
was doing on ''Casualties of War'' [''Brian De Palma Explores Vietnam and Its
Victims,'' Aug. 13]. Because of ambivalent feelings about the movie, I had made
a previous decision not to involve myself in any kind of publicity.

Because Mike Norman was a Vietnam vet and because we had a common friend, I did
not simply refuse his request and hang up. After establishing, I thought, that
we were talking ''off the record,'' I tried to explain to him why I did not want
to participate in the article he was doing. The conclusion of the conversation
was basically that he would state in his article (and I think this is an exact
quote) that I ''had some problems with the movie but had declined to discuss
them.''

However, in his article, Mr. Norman went much further, choosing to represent and
misrepresent the specifics of my views. In no way have I tried to publicly
''disassociate'' myself from the film as his article portrays me. I have no
desire at all to publicly disassociate myself from the film. This is a fact that
should have been obvious since I was turning down the offer for a platform in
which I could have made such a highly exposed public gesture if that was my
desire. To publicly disassociate yourself from something is, in fact, not an act
of disassociation at all, but an attack, and I have no desire to attack this
movie. What I wanted was simply to avoid the distractions that come with an
involvement in publicity, and not entrust the communication of my ambivalence to
the imprecision I feared it could receive.

While it is true that I wish the movie were different in certain parts than it
is, it is also true that Sean Penn and Michael Fox delivered daring, beautiful
performances, as do so many of the other actors. It is true, also, that large
sections of the movie are as original and powerful as any I have ever seen.
Though I cannot deny that compared to some ideal movie in my head, the film is
not what I had hoped for, it is also obvious to me that compared to 95 percent
of what is available in the surrounding theaters, ''Casualties of War'' is a
worthwhile achievement.

DAVID RABE
Mount Kisco, N.Y.

The writer is the author of the screenplay for ''Casualties of War.''

Michael Norman replies: Mr. Rabe and I had at least three telephone
conversations. In each, I explained, carefully and repeatedly, that my only aim
was to explore how the film was transposed from the book. I knew, of course,
that he had problems with the film. He had discussed those problems openly with
many people.

But when a major screenwriter refuses to discuss publicly the movie that carries
his name, that, by any measure, is news. I was obligated at least to mention it.
Meanwhile, I had spoken with a number of other people who, I felt, could fairly
convey Mr. Rabe's position for print. ( Nowhere in his letter does he repudiate
the facts - his specific problems with the director, Brian De Palma - as others
explained them.) Finally, I asked if it was fair to say that he had problems
with the movie and chose not to discuss them.

He replied: ''I feel that's the most, everything considered, the best way for me
to go. I have not and I intend not to. I have taken that position with them
[director, producer, publicist, etc.]. If things, if the situation, changes and
I feel compelled to say something, I will.''

If a posture of calculated silence is not a palpable form of disassociation, I
don't know what is.

Now, for whatever reason, the screenwriter feels compelled to speak, to
reassociate himself with the project. No doubt that will make the people who
worked on it and the company that invested in it very happy.

But there is a world of difference between changing your mind and accusing a
reporter of breaking a trust and inaccurate writing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CAMBODIA'S HUN SEN;
In Phnom Penh, Vietnam's 'Puppet' Is Finding His Voice

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1099 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


LATE last month, just before the international conference on Cambodia opened in
Paris, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Cambodia's former king and leader of the
opposition coalition dominated by the Khmer Rouge, accused Prime Minister Hun
Sen of being untrustworthy. ''You're a former Khmer Rouge,'' the Prince said.

''But you,'' Mr. Hun Sen responded, ''you're still the chief of the Khmer
Rouge.''

Mr. Hun Sen's riposte was somewhat unjust, given Prince Sihanouk's distaste for
the Communist guerrillas who brutally transformed Cambodia from 1975 to 1979 and
killed hundreds of thousands of people, including many members of the Prince's
own family, while keeping him under house arrest. Still, while Mr. Hun Sen tries
to woo the Prince into abandoning the guerrillas and returning home to Cambodia
as chief of state, for now, even as Vietnamese troops prepare to leave Cambodia
by the end of September, Prince Sihanouk has chosen to remain in the chill
embrace of the Khmer Rouge.

Yet in the quickness and self-confidence of his response, one can measure the
growth of Mr. Hun Sen from a tongue-tied 27-year-old, installed by the
Vietnamese in 1979 as the world's youngest and most inexperienced foreign
minister, to an articulate and unintimidated prime minister of 38, whose
deference to the 67-year-old Prince has its limits.

As pressure for a Cambodian settlement increases, the world has had to pay more
attention to Mr. Hun Sen, the most visible spokesman for the Phnom Penh regime.
As good a tactician as he seems to be, much about him is mysterious, including
his basic beliefs. A military commander in the Khmer Rouge until 1977, the Hun
Sen who now argues for private enterprise is at best a flexible pragmatist; at
worst, a cynical charlatan.

Mr. Hun Sen is No. 3 in the hierarchy of the ruling People's Revolutionary
Party, after Heng Samrin, the General Secretary, whose grim portrait in an
ill-fitting suit adorns all state offices, and Chea Sim, the leader of the
National Assembly. Neither sees Western journalists. But Mr. Hun Sen also
retains the post of Foreign Minister, and it is an example of his increasing
grip on the mechanisms of power that from the first of this year, all allied
communication to any Cambodian official, even Mr. Heng Samrin, must first pass
through the Foreign Ministry.

By requiring even the Vietnamese to go through proper channels, Mr. Hun Sen has
been trying to show that he is Vietnam's ally, but not its puppet. Vietnamese
officials expect the Cambodians to begin to insist on regular border checks,
passports and visas for Vietnamese citizens, and do not complain.

''The Vietnamese have learned from the Chinese in this, too,'' a diplomat said.
''Influence works best if it is less obvious.''

Television Appearances

With an eye toward the possibility of internationally supervised elections, Mr.
Hun Sen has also been pressing for a sharper distinction in responsibilities
between the Government he heads and the People's Revolutionary Party, which
retains a collective leadership within the Politburo. And in his constant
appearances on television and visits to the provinces, he is acting more like a
politician. In any future election, Mr. Hun Sen understands that his main
competition would be Prince Sihanouk, the bulk of whose rule, before he was
overthrown in a 1970 coup, is regarded by many older Cambodians as a time of
relative prosperity and peace. Two years ago, when Mr. Hun Sen first met with
the Prince, peasants in the countryside threw themselves on their knees before
the televised image of their former god-king. Mr. Hun Sen basked in the
reflected glory.

Since then, in his effort to bring the Prince home and prove himself a
nationalist, Mr. Hun Sen has gone some way to liberalize what was a fairly
orthodox, Vietnamese-style regime. In a series of constitutional changes,
private property was protected, land rights provided to farmers and Buddhism
restored as the state religion. But these changes were also made to insure that
should the Prince return, he could not take credit for them.

To young people in Cambodia, who have no memory of Prince Sihanouk, Mr. Hun Sen
represents modernity. Returning from Paris this month, he stepped off his
airplane in a French double-breasted suit. He favors imported cigarettes and
wears metal-frame glasses that help mask the scar from the shrapnel that took
his left eye in 1975. Mr. Hun Sen takes advantage of his differences with the
Prince while publicly urging him to come home. Meanwhile, he cleverly explains
the Prince's failure to do so by saying that the Prince remains allied to the
Khmer Rouge, a relationship most Cambodians find disturbing. About his own
experience with the Khmer Rouge, Mr. Hun Sen says little, and his official
biography is mysterious. He says he joined the Khmer Rouge in 1970, after the
coup that overthrew Prince Sihanouk, because the Prince himself had sided with
them and had called for resistance to the American-backed Government of Lon Nol.
But the Australian scholar Ben Kiernan, in his 1985 book, ''How Pol Pot Came to
Power,'' argues that Mr. Hun Sen was in contact with the Communists as early as
1967 when he fled the capital at 16 and worked as a courier for local Communist
leaders before receiving military training.

Split With Pol Pot

According to the Prime Minister's official biography, he rose to command a Khmer
Rouge division and was wounded five times, losing his eye to shrapnel on April
16, 1975, the day before the Khmer Rouge entered Phnom Penh and began their
radical transformation of Cambodian life. How far Mr. Hun Sen participated in
these brutalities is not known, but it is hard to imagine that he stood aside.
He became head of a military region in the eastern part of the country, where
Mr. Heng Samrin and Mr. Chea Sim also served.

In 1977, in a growing rift with Pol Pot, who demanded increasingly
self-destructive attacks on Vietnamese border villages, Mr. Hun Sen fled with
other eastern zone leaders into Vietnam, escaping fierce internal purges. After
Hanoi's invasion of Cambodia in December 1978, they were installed in power in
Phnom Penh.

Both the Vietnamese and the Soviets say, hardly surprisingly, that Mr. Hun Sen
was the brightest of that early core, a quick study with a forceful and
analytical mind. How much of his early ideology he retains is unclear. When
asked that question in an interview in May, Mr. Hun Sen said simply: ''Ideology
doesn't matter right now. What the people want is peace and development.''

But will it matter later? Mr. Hun Sen isn't saying.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

COMRADE ENGVER GOES TO MOSCOW

BYLINE: By Bill Keller; Bill Keller, chief of The New York Times's Moscow
bureau, was awarded the 1989 Pulitzer Prize for foreign reporting.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 25, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5143 words


BY 9:30 A.M., THE DEPUTIES HAVE ALREADY BEGUN drifting into the semicircular
chamber of the Supreme Soviet, half an hour before the bell signals the
beginning of the session. The meeting place is contemporary and, by the
grandiose norm of this country, intimate. Banks of wooden desks, sleek marble
walls adorned by the gilt Soviet insignia, but none of the heroic Lenin statuary
that lends an air of secular idolatry to almost every other auditorium I have
seen in this country.

From the press balcony, a spectator watching the parliament gather can pick out
the new celebrities. This morning, Boris N. Yeltsin, the terror of the Communist
establishment and now the flagman for a faction of ''left-radicals,'' circulates
among the early arrivals, slapping backs and exchanging confidences. Across the
room, Anatoly A. Sobchak, a cocky, telegenic lawyer from Leningrad, confers with
a young army officer, one of the reformist upstarts in uniform someone has
dubbed ''the radical colonels for perestroika.'' Roy A. Medvedev, the historian,
wanders in wearing a dozen pens crammed in his breast pocket and the slightly
bemused look of a man touched by a miracle. A few years ago, Medvedev was hauled
in for interrogation for allowing his anti-Stalinist volumes of history to be
published in the bourgeois West. Now, sweet irony, he heads a special committee
investigating abuses in the federal prosecutor's office.

The Supreme Soviet also includes a sizable bloc of party functionaries and
obedient ciphers, throwbacks to the old days - before competitive elections last
March - when the legislature was a cynical ritual assembled for a few days each
year to ratify the whims of the Communist Party leaders. A Danish television
correspondent once did a wicked profile of the old Supreme Soviet. It opened
with a Soviet official joking that ''there is no unanimity except in the
graveyard,'' and then cut to the deputies raising their hands in zombie-like
unison. The days of unanimity are over, but they have left their mark on many
deputies who owe their careers to the party patronage machine.

Most of the 542 deputies are neither celebrities nor party footsoldiers, neither
magnetic leaders nor compliant followers. They are something new for this
country - earnest apprentices studying hard at the newborn profession of
representative politics.

People's Deputy Nikolai Nikolayevich Engver arrives early, as usual, a short,
blond, gentle-looking man of 50 making his way on a pair of wooden canes to his
seat on the far left aisle, smiling an amiable smile that masks a tortured
history and a dark view of the future.

Among the novitiates of the new Soviet order, who have been entrusted with
making democracy something more than a slogan, Engver is one of the more
studious and thoughtful.

He has been awake since 5 A.M., when the first phone calls came from his
constituents in the central Russian city of Izhevsk. He will be at it until at
least 10 tonight, when the last committee meeting breaks up and he retires to
his tiny room in the Moskva Hotel to make a cup of instant coffee from the hot
water tap and read himself to sleep with detective novels.

Ever since one of the legislative leaders scolded the assembly about
unparliamentary dress habits - one deputy attended in his jogging suit - Engver
has usually worn his wide-lapel gray herringbone suit with a clean white shirt
and red tie. Especially today, when the legislature is exercising its new powers
of confirmation on the officials who will run the federal prosecutor's office,
and Engver has something to say.

''Dear comrade deputies,'' he begins, when he is recognized, at a microphone on
the aisle. ''I want to raise a question that has never really been addressed in
our press, or in Government or party documents. I mean the children born in the
labor camps, in Potma and other camps, who started their sentences at birth.''

There is a stir as deputies turn expectantly toward their little-known colleague
from Izhevsk.

''I was born in the Potma camp, and the label of lagernik, jailbird, has
followed me even during this election campaign,'' he continues. ''Orders were
given: 'This lagernik should not appear in the newspapers.' I overcame this, but
there were other children there besides me. They have grown up, and who knows
how their lives have been affected, what social problems they have encountered,
what limits on their careers. . . . We all, all of us who were there, continue
to pay for it.''

''I want you to understand the burden that rests on us as the new legislators of
this country,'' Engver concludes. ''Do not oversimplify, do not take lightly the
problems of legal rights.''

Engver sits down to the applause of his colleagues. He is so flustered he forgot
to give his name for the record. But now he has identified himself.

NIKOLAI ENGVER'S FATHER WAS BORN IN 1900. HE joined the Cheka, the forerunner of
today's K.G.B., almost as soon as it was founded, in the triumphant flush of the
1917 Bolshevik coup. The teen-age recruit rose to become head of the Transport
Section of the Transcaucasus Secret Police before he disappeared without a trace
into the maw of Stalin's Great Terror of 1937. Nikolai's mother, branded the
wife of an ''enemy of the people,'' was arrested and sent to Potma, a prison
camp for the wives of the fallen elite in the Mordovian Gulag, southeast of
Moscow.

''She was pregnant then, and at the time abortions were illegal,'' Engver
recalled one recent Saturday as we sat in the lobby of the Moskva, the seedy
hotel across Red Square from the Kremlin that is home for provincial
congressmen. ''She was 42 years old, a difficult age for women to give birth.
She could have gotten rid of me, but the women who helped her would have gone to
jail. So she had to give birth to me.

''So I was a pure product of the system, born according to Stalin's laws -the
law forbidding abortion, the law on arresting the wives of enemies of the
people. You have to laugh. A normal person can't hear this without smiling.''

A polio epidemic swept through the camp in the year of Nikolai's birth, leaving
him with a lifeless left leg. When he was 6, his mother was freed and they moved
with his older sister to Izhevsk, a city of metallurgy and weapons factories 600
miles east of Moscow. On the playgrounds, he battled his physical handicap and
the taunts of his playmates that he was the son of a ''spy,'' but he flourished
in the classroom, winning admission to Moscow State University and emerging with
a degree as ''economist, teacher of political economics and of the bases of
political knowledge'' - a specialty, Engver likes to say, that he has only now
begun to practice.

I had several conversations with Engver and had already pegged him as a man of
unorthodox views before I learned that he had been a party member since 1975.
The Communist Party of the Soviet Union is not known as a spawning ground of
free thinkers. But in fact, though the party has awesome power to indocrinate
and intimidate, doctrinaire true believers have long been in the minority, and
even the vague idealism that existed after World War II was severely eroded by
the corruption and empty pomposity of the Brezhnev era. Many, perhaps most,
Soviet Communists view the party as a sort of Ivy League, a prerequisite for a
prestigious career. The party is desperate for talent, and often tolerates
ideological misfits because it is more afraid of clever people outside the party
than in it. When the climate is right, as it is under Mikhail S. Gorbachev, they
slip the bonds of fear.

Thus some of the most articulate separatists in the Baltic Republics (Continued
on Page 56) are party members. So are many of the miners who led the recent
wildcat strikes in the Soviet coal fields. So are the economists now trying to
replace Lenin's legacy with free markets. Boris Yeltsin, who as a boy during the
war, stole hand grenades from an army arsenal, advanced to the party's pinnacle
before his impetuous nature got the better of him. Even now, after being deposed
from the Politburo and after running a political campaign that amounted to an
embarrassing plebiscite on the party, he is still grudgingly tolerated as a
member of its governing Central Committee.

As a university student during the thaw of Nikita S. Khrushchev, Engver was
expelled from the Young Communists League because he and his classmates
criticized the ''cult of personality.'' Not Stalin's, which at that point was
fair game, but Khrushchev's. Engver got his diploma, but he was clearly not a
man to be trusted teaching political science, so upon graduation he was sent to
work as a forestry regulator in the Far East, a macabre assignment for a young
man who could not walk without a cane, let alone negotiate the tundra on skis.
He was reassigned to a machine-tool factory, and eventually returned to Moscow,
where a prominent statistician took a liking to him and adopted him as a
graduate student. Equipped with an advanced degree, he returned to teach
mathematics and statistics at a new university in Izhevsk, and later became a
researcher at a physics institute.

Engver says he favors a multiparty political system. He admires Western concepts
of habeas corpus and the legal rights of the minority. He contends that the
Soviet system of nationalized industry is a form of ''fascism.'' He believes
that most of Marx is out of date and that the notion of party discipline is a
Stalinist deformation. When I asked how a person of such views could consider
himself a Communist, he replied: ''This is how the ideals of Communism are
formulated in Marx's Communist Manifesto of 1848: 'Full well-being and the free
development of each individual.' '' That, and a few benign scraps from Lenin,
are Engver's Communism. ''I have very difficult relations with the First
Secretary of our regional party committee in Izhevsk,'' Engver said, not
surprisingly. ''He asks me: 'What do you think, that our generation has blood on
its hands?' I tell him: 'Not on your hands, but on your conscience. You betrayed
as many of your friends as you could.' ''

In 1987, inspired by Gorbachev's appeal for public involvement, Engver and some
friends organized a club to defend the rights of beleaguered consumers. They
called for public disclosures of how prices were set and goods rationed, and
demanded that shops post notices of the customers' right to return defective
products. This earned him a formal rebuke from the party elite, which derives
both power and perquisites from its allocation of scarce goods. But it made him
a frequent guest on local television.

T HE NEW VOTING procedures that were introduced for the election of the first
Congress of People's Deputies in March owed as much to Tammany Hall as to Thomas
Jefferson. A third of the 2,250 seats were reserved for representatives of the
trustworthy ''public'' organizations, including the Communist Party itself, the
Young Communists League, the docile trade unions, veterans and women's
organizations, even a single seat for the All-Union Society of Stamp Collectors.
The remaining deputies were elected from territorial districts by a procedure
that left the local party regulars plenty of opportunity for abuse. In many
districts, challengers were eliminated from the ballot at carefully stacked
pre-election caucuses, or disqualified by election commissions, or pilloried (or
ignored) by the party-controlled press. In more than a quarter of the districts,
only a single candidate made it onto the ballot.

For all that, it was the headiest electoral experience Soviet voters have had
since 1917. In many cities, an angry citizenry, a few well-organized independent
political groups, a sympathetic press and a complacent party leadership
conspired to present the voters with a real choice. Here, the voters seized
eagerly at the chance to elect those who most convincingly promised change. Even
in many districts in which party luminaries were running unopposed, enough
voters scratched their names off the ballot (voting, in effect, ''none of the
above'') to prevent their election.

In National Territorial District No. 658, Nikolai Engver mobilized the
university students, the supporters of his consumer club, and the large
population of highly skilled workers and managers to be found in a city of
military industry. I asked him what were the particular demands of Izhevsk
voters. Housing? Food? ''The forest,'' Engver said without hesitation. ''The
forest. Cleaning up the forest, so that they can pick berries and mushrooms.
Everything's poisoned.''

''The ecological problem takes first place?'' ''Yes.'' ''Even higher than
consumer goods?''

''Yes. In comparison to the rest of the Soviet Union, we're quite well supplied
in consumer goods. Better than other regions, better than Kazan, better than
Perm. We're part of an industry for which the country was willing to sacrifice
anything.''

The opposition came from two groups, he said: ''First of all, the pensioners,
because they're intimidated. They were intimidated very directly. They were
told: 'If you don't vote against him, it won't be so good for you.' And our
pensioners are old, they still think in terms of Stalin's times. Every fourth
constituent of mine is a pensioner, a veteran of the war, of labor, of the party
- and they voted against me, naturally.

''The other group was the nomenklatura of the party apparatus on the municipal
and district level. Those are very bitter opponents.''

Engver and his supporters contend the party apparatchiki intrigued against him,
spreading rumors of ''anti-Soviet tendencies'' and trying to limit his access to
the press. But he won 60.7 percent of the vote over Mikhail A. Napolskikh, a
factory worker with conservative views who had the tacit support of the local
party machine.

In May, Nikolai Engver came to Moscow for the first Congress of People's
Deputies. His education was just beginning.

THE CONGRESS WAS A jamboree of forbidden topics, broadcast live across a dozen
time zones to a rapt Soviet public. Andrei D. Sakharov, a man the K.G.B. once
force-fed with a pipe to prevent him from dying of a hunger strike during his
exile in the closed city of Gorky, came repeatedly to the podium to condemn the
machinery of repression. A truck driver from Kharkov compared Gorbachev to
Napoleon, and Gorbachev's wife, Raisa, to the Empress Josephine. Speakers railed
at the empty shelves and tainted environment, at the party and its policies and
its leaders, at one another. One deputy tried unsuccessfully to nominate himself
as an alternative candidate to Gorbachev for the powerful new position of
President. The Government later calculated that during these 13 days of
catharsis, the public was so preoccupied by the televised spectacle that in some
industries factory output dropped 20 percent.

Whenever I ran across Engver in the lobby of the Kremlin Palace of Congresses,
where reporters were given free rein to mingle with Politburo members and former
dissidents, he was brimming with the boldness of it all. Leaning forward on his
canes, his blue eyes full of freshman enthusiasm, he reviewed the latest rostrum
triumph with vicarious joy. The day the Congress elected Gorbachev as President,
Engver impishly reported that he had written in the name of two other
candidates, then crossed out all but Gorbachev's and scrawled across his ballot:
''In our great country there must be a choice in the election of the head of
state.''

But sometimes as we talked, Engver's innocent cheer gave way to a tone of dark
premonition. ''You know, our freedom here hangs by a thin thread,'' he said
pensively one day. ''It's only because of Gorbachev that the discussion is not
stopped. That is not enough. It's good that he thinks democratically, but
freedom in our country cannot depend on the mood of the head of state.''

Another day, after excitedly recounting the day's events, he paused and fixed me
with an ironic smile. ''It's very important for us to talk,'' he said, ''because
I don't believe this democracy of ours will last very long.''

There is a popular joke in which a dog explains life under Gorbachev: ''The
chain is just as tight as before, the food dish is just as far away, but they
let you bark as much as you want.'' Engver took delight in the barking, but he
knew the chain was still in place. When the Congress selected 542 deputies from
its ranks to stay on in Moscow as a full-time legislature, the Supreme Soviet,
many of the most outspoken rabble-rousers were eliminated. The Congress closed
with a piteous scene: Sakharov being shouted from the podium as he hectored the
assembly for failing to wrest real power from the Communist Party.

''A Supreme Soviet like this, I fear, will be a screen for the real power of the
President and the state and party apparatus,'' Sakharov managed to declare
before Gorbachev switched off the microphone and adjourned the session.

A S THE STURM UND DRANG of the Congress gave way in late June to the more sober
parliamentary business of the Supreme Soviet, it seemed that the independent
streak might run deeper than Sakharov or the party overlords had calculated. The
televised spectacle had raised the expectations of voters and introduced a sense
of accountability.

Even Engver, whose outsider credentials seemed impeccable, found himself
upbraided by constituents on his first trip home. The voters were satisfied with
his votes to defend the right to demonstrate and to repeal a vague Government
decree restricting anti-state speech. But they were indignant that he had voted
to confirm the appointment as federal prosecutor of Aleksandr Y. Sukharev, a man
who had come up through the legal system during the years of anti-dissident
persecution. Engver had decided that Sukharev was a civil-rights man at heart,
and that the ills of the system should not be heaped on his head. Moreover,
Prime Minister Nikolai I. Ryzhkov, whom Engver respects, had made a personal
appeal for Sukharev. These explanations did not sit well in Izhevsk.

''You have no idea what I went through,'' he recalled upon his return to Moscow,
slumped on a settee outside the Supreme Soviet chamber. ''At the university,
they could not accept at all that a deputy they supported could hold a position
different from theirs. I explained to them why I had voted like that, but they
didn't support me. They told me very unambiguously that I had become more
conservative.''

''We have a horrible political term: soglashatelstvo,'' Engver mused. The word
can be translated as compromise or as appeasement. ''In our political
vocabulary, it's an insult. Maybe you don't have a word like that. This is the
word they hurled in Stalin's day at those who were not abusive enough in
condemning Trotsky, Bukharin and the other 'enemies of the people.'

''But sometimes there is a place for compromise. I think we have to use the best
means toward the fulfillment of our campaign promises. Sometimes this means
confrontation, and sometimes cooperation. Sometimes you have to go head-on, and
sometimes you have to go along.''

The confrontation with his electorate set him agonizing, like many another
freshman congressman, over the conflicting claims on his vote - his
constituents, his party, his own conscience.

He knew the question would arise again. Engver, for example, is an ardent
supporter of a plan to give sweeping economic independence to the Baltic
Republics - Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia - where economists hope to experiment
with free markets. Of Latvian descent himself, Engver regards the Baltic plan as
a (Continued on Page 62) promisin g precedent for regions like Izhevsk. But many
of his constituents are suspicious and envious of the Baltics' bid for liberty.

Engver said: ''I told my voters: 'I didn't always agree with you during the
election campaign, and at the time you liked that. Well, sometimes I'm going to
leave you a little behind. I think later you'll come to understand. If you don't
trust me anymore, recall me.'

''It's not that I've never acted against my conscience. I've often had to do it,
otherwise I wouldn't have survived the period of stagnation. But I swore to
myself that if I were elected, I would not act against my conscience here.''

Other deputies also felt the lash of public opinion, and it began to show up in
the voting. Several of the leadership's candidates for top Government jobs were
rejected, and others, like Defense Minister Dmitri T. Yazov, were confirmed only
after merciless interrogation. Draft economic laws presented to the legislators
by the Government apparatus were torn apart and heatedly debated.

At a party meeting in mid-July, Prime Minister Ryzhkov reported that the party's
majority was not so ironclad as it had seemed.

''When we said that 85 percent of the deputies elected were Communists, we put
too much stock in statistics,'' he told party leaders in an unusually frank
exchange later published in Pravda. ''In fact, this quantitative majority of
party members tells us little. Many of them do not have a clear position on the
main issue that crops up repeatedly in speeches, that is, the attempts to
disparage the leading role of the party in society. . . . If the party does not
find a way out of this situation, then it may lose its influence over the
Government.''

What may force a real test of the party's authority is the creation of an
organized opposition. At the end of July, a number of deputies impatient with
Gorbachev's pace formed an Inter-Regional People's Deputies Group to draft
alternative, more far-reaching legislative proposals. The group is an attempt to
unite radical intellectuals, restive workers mobilized by the coal strike, and
those riding the populist bandwagon of Boris Yeltsin.

Engver generally favors the idea of an opposition to press for more radical
change, but he decided to remain outside the new faction, partly as a gesture of
independence, and partly because he is suspicious of Yeltsin's ambitions. He
believes Yeltsin is an important goad, but would be dangerous in power.

''There are people and parties who are very good at governing, and there are
other people, and other parties, who are good only in the role of opposition,''
he said. ''Communists in the whole world -and this is demonstrated above all by
our own experience - are excellent as opposition parties, and good for nothing
as governing parties.

''When I was a boy, there was a song that was broadcast on the radio every day,
'Our Party Is the Helmsman.' Well, we steered ourselves all the way to
stagnation, and we paid for it in millions of innocent human lives.

''The same with Yeltsin. It would be a lot better if Boris Nikolayevich
recognized that he's not the helmsman, but the lookout - that is, a man of the
opposition. But maybe, in his soul, he has completely different plans. Maybe a
person who plays Charlie Chaplin all his life yearns in his soul to play
Hamlet.''

W ATCHING THE Supreme Soviet invent itself is a little like speed-reading the
Federalist Papers. Profound questions about the nature of government, mixed with
the nuts-and-bolts novelties of parliamentary procedure, hurtle past, driven by
an urgent sense of the country's proliferating emergencies. Many deputies have
pored over books on comparative government, studying British, Swedish and French
parliamentary experience, scavenging ideas. In July, deputies invited William G.
Miller, a veteran United States Congressional aide who is now president of the
educational American Committee on U.S.-Soviet Relations, to come answer
questions about how the American system works. How do you write a law? How do
you amend it? How do you guarantee the minority's right to make its case without
slowing down the process to a crawl? How much staff does a legislator need?
Where does the information come from? How do you schedule the work? Miller, who
helped set up the Senate Intelligence Oversight Committee, found the yearning of
the fledgling legislators deeply moving.

''These are the kinds of questions Jefferson discussed with John Adams,'' Miller
said later. ''That seems to be the sense they have of their role, that they are
writing a new contract between the people and their government.''

Many deputies realize they have little chance of successfully engaging the vast
ap-(Continued on Page 65) paratus of the state and party unless they have
independent legal expertise, the power to subpoena Government records, and other
crucial rights. But the status of the deputies will not be fully resolved until
after the legislature's second session begins, on Sept. 25. In the meantime,
they do not even have secretaries to help cope with the daily crush of
constituent problems. Supplicants who used to write to newspapers with their
complaints against inattentive landlords or abusive bosses now gather outside
the Moskva Hotel to thrust their appeals upon the deputies.

''Often they're not even from my electoral district,'' Engver said after one
morning spent advising a Moscow voter involved in a bizarre dispute with the
local prosecutor. ''The situation with legal help for the population is tragic
in this country. We have between 17,000 and 20,000 lawyers for the entire
country. In London alone there are 14,000, not to mention your country. People
can't find any kind of legal defense anywhere, so they expect us to fulfill the
function of notary, barrister and small-claims court.''

By the time they get to their committee meetings, where they are investigating
the country's accumulated crises and beginning the monumental task of reshaping
its legal code, the deputies are often exhausted. Few have any experience in the
skill of listening and extracting information. Zhores A. Medvedev, a dissident
scientist who was deported in 1973, visited Moscow in July and was invited - in
one of those poetic events that Gorbachev has made commonplace - to appear
before two legislative committees as an expert witness. The subject was a
long-covered-up nuclear disaster in the Ural Mountains in 1957. Medvedev, the
twin brother of the historian, was astonished at the opportunity, but
flabbergasted by the amateurishness of the committee members, compared with his
experiences testifying before the House of Commons and the United States Senate.

''The deputies wanted to speak, rather than ask questions, and much of what they
said was irrelevant to the Urals disaster,'' Medvedev recalled. One deputy, from
a region near the site of the Chernobyl nuclear accident, wanted to know if his
sore throat might be a symptom of radiation poisoning.

Engver concedes that ''we are all first-graders here.''

''The lawyers from the Institute of State and Law and from the Ministry of
Justice come to our committees to discuss the draft laws,'' he said. ''For them,
it's strange to see our legal illiteracy, our ignorance of the legislative
language, and we, in turn, constantly chastise them for being completely in the
dark about the problems of our constituents.''

The moral quandaries of legislating are equally daunting, because each issue
opens a deep well of unresolved grievances.

Engver was assigned to the committee on youth affairs, where he is personally
absorbed with the question of how to help young veterans readjust after military
service in Afghanistan.

A bachelor himself, Engver feels a sense of parental guilt at the country's
silent complicity in the war that alienated so many young men. Many of his
closest friends among the deputies are veterans of Afghanistan.

''I have a guilt complex regarding them,'' he says of the veterans, ''because
when it was time to defend them, we were all afraid.''

But what about Soviet soldiers killed or injured in other overseas ventures - in
Cuba, Korea, North Vietnam, Egypt - where casualties were covered up and never
compensated? Engver wonders, too, what the Soviet Union owes Afghanistan itself.

''Officially, 15,000 of ours were killed there, I don't know how many thousands
unofficially, and 34,000 were wounded,'' he said. ''But there were a million
Afghans killed. And we are guilty of this million. You understand? Our country,
which went through the great patriotic war against Fascism, is guilty of the
deaths of one million people who defended their motherland. If our country were
as rich as yours, then I, as a member of parliament, would have to stand up and
propose that we carry the moral responsibility for the death of the Afghans, and
that we should pay them some material compensation. But we have a budget deficit
of 100 billion rubles. If I raise this question, the constituents won't
understand me.''

H ISTORY AND TEM-perament have made the Soviet people wary of celebrating their
periods of promise, and this period is no exception. To an American, these days
of political renaissance may bring to mind America, 1776. To a Soviet
intellectual like Engver, they bear a more ominous resemblance to the discordant
instability of Russia, 1917. As the Supreme Soviet was concluding its first
session early this month, there was much apocalyptic talk in Moscow about a new
band of Bolsheviks who would seize the moment - the party's power weakening, the
legislature's not yet established - to snuff out this experiment in democracy.
Whether it is out of conviction or out of a reluctance to give in to hope, I do
not know, but Engver predicts a bloodletting.

''As long as freedom is given to you, you are not free,'' Engver said. ''Whoever
gives it decides whether you will be free or not. They've given it to us today,
but tomorrow they can announce on the radio that perestroika is discredited and
over. And that's it. If some radio announcer gets it into his head to make a
little joke, and announces it on the radio, people will believe that perestroika
is over. Don't you think so? God forbid that this should be tested for real.

''This Supreme Soviet is not free yet. But the one that will come to power after
the next elections will be more free, and after the third elections, that will
be a truly free Supreme Soviet.''

The next national elections are planned for 1994, the third elections five years
later. Engver fears the country does not have that long. That will be 10 years
when the explosive dissatisfactions of the public are building, 10 years when
those who cling to power will be looking for any excuse - external threat or
domestic unrest - to close the fist.

''I think our democracy will be baptized in a font of blood,'' he said. ''We
can't escape that. Now forces are being polarized. And when those who will have
to forfeit their power realize that it's the end, they'll have recourse to the
most extreme measures.

''We know our country. In America, a democratic outcome is possible, but here we
have to cleanse ourselves. It will be worse before it gets better.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Nikolai Engver (Nikolai Ignatiev) (pgs 24,26,27)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MY WHITE WHALE, OR THE GREAT NEWSPAPER NOVEL

BYLINE: By STEVE WEINBERG; Steve Weinberg teaches at the School of Journalism at
the University of Missouri, Columbia.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2391 words


I started collecting journalism novels six years ago, just for fun at first, or
maybe because I was flattered that fiction writers would find my chosen career
so alluring, so full of possibilities. But what had begun as little more than a
vague attraction soon took hold of me, tightened its grip and turned this
meandering, benign pursuit into an obsession. I wanted something from these
books, although for a long time I could not have told you just what it was. I
began combing bookstores for them, reading dozens of book reviews each week,
looking for tip-offs that a journalist might be playing a new fictional role. I
scanned every publisher's catalogue I could get my hands on. Fellow journalists,
book dealers, friends and relatives learned to keep their eyes open and report
their findings to me.

Journalism is a weird trade. It plays a clear role at the center of the
democracy but resides in a chaos of perceptions, at once reviled and revered,
misrepresented and romanticized. Janet Malcolm, committing the sin of
overgeneralization, took all journalists to task in The New Yorker not long ago,
calling us seducers of our sources who massage and corrupt the raw material of
life for the sake of The Story. Some people, I am sure, must have thought she
had it just right; it fit the popular tendency toward one-dimensional depictions
of our work. The journalist's job is easy to simplify and stereotype, although
its reality is complex and nuanced, allowing a great deal of freedom of behavior
at the same time that it is rigidly bound by largely unspoken rules. It is the
kind of career that your parents will never figure out, no matter how many times
you try to tell them what your day is like.

Fiction writing ought to be able to help here. Fiction, after all, likes to
think of itself as having a lock on truth. What is a journalist? How does a
journalist think? What conflicts mark the reporter's life? What holds that life
to the thin line of accuracy, prevents and punishes transgressions? A thousand
or so novels have had their way with journalists. I have read hundreds of them,
seeking the truth about me and my kind. It has been enlightening. Turns out that
as a group we have a lot of sex on the job, have no scruples and, of course,
solve murders frequently enough to obviate the need for police in some parts of
the country. And that is about it.

In his book ''The Newspaper in the American Novel, 1900-1969,'' Thomas Elliott
Berry said in 1970 that no American writer had ''created a genuinely memorable
newspaperman character. . . . The great American newspaper novel still remains
to be written.'' It is still true.

David Shaw, who covers the media beat for The Los Angeles Times, was wondering
about the way journalists are portrayed in novels, too. So he cracked open ''The
Almighty'' (1982) by Irving Wallace. ''I figured that when one of the world's
most popular novelists writes about a newspaper publisher, I'd better see what
he has to say on the subject,'' Mr. Shaw wrote in his book ''Press Watch.''
''Who knows how many millions of people will learn all they ever know about
newspapers from Irving Wallace?''

In ''The Almighty,'' Mr. Wallace's publisher, Edward Armstead, is so obsessed
with power that he orchestrates front-page news events, even at the risk of
global destruction. Only one person can stop Armstead from completing his plans
to arrange for the deaths of the Pope, the Secretary General of the United
Nations and the President of the United States. That person is Victoria Weston,
a reporter on Armstead's own New York City daily. Of course she is young and
beautiful in addition to being fearless and resourceful. It is laughable,
puerile stuff, taken as fiction, but in its misconception of the role, the
nature and the capabilities of modern journalism, even as practiced by your
ordinary megalomaniac, it takes the breath away.

The great majority of novels about the press are not as awful as that, but they
do not have much to do with truth, either. Good fun, but disheartening if one is
hoping for something nobler. The hundreds of authors on this level of
verisimilitude are fairly represented by Jean Warmbold, who has written ''June
Mail'' (1986) and ''The White Hand'' (1988). The first book has a magazine
writer, Sarah Calloway, investigating the disappearance of a former lover, a
genetic engineer rumored to be developing an AIDS vaccine with military funding.
The second book reintroduces Calloway, this time investigating a paramilitary
group linked to American intelligence agencies and to rightists in Nicaragua,
Cuba and Sweden. Calloway has no scruples; her cavalier dismissal of ethics is
extraordinary, unlike anything I have ever seen in journalism, all in one
person. She lies about her identity, steals information, sleeps with sources.

That is the fictional journalist, all right. Reporters will do anything -
anything - to get a story. For their pains, they become murder targets or murder
suspects. The lucky ones solve murders or are otherwise deeply involved in
making news as well as reporting it. I have known my share of fornicators and
cheaters, and I also know journalists who have actually made some news; the fact
is that in nearly all cases the characters in these novels are simple-minded
fictive devices and no more. It is strange that novelists misperceive
journalists as an odd species of freelance private investigators, forever
tracking down wrongdoers. Is that the public's perception of us? Don't they know
that we spend more time going to zoning board meetings and press conferences?

Bad writing is everywhere, but journalism seems to have come in for more than
its share of silly plots and wooden dialogue. The depictions suffer from a lack
of verisimilitude that is all the more astonishing when one takes into account
how many of the authors are journalists themselves, some of them household
names: Pete Hamill, Jimmy Breslin, Sally Quinn, Jack Anderson, Douglas Kiker,
Pierre Salinger, Marvin Kalb and Ted Koppel. Mr. Breslin and Dick Schaap are
both capable men, but when they teamed up to write a novel drawn from the Son of
Sam killings, ''.44'' (1978), with ample possibilities for journalists as
characters, it was a pale version of the true story that had captivated
newspaper readers for weeks. In an authors' note, Mr. Breslin and Mr. Schaap
acknowledged their debt to the series of murders in New York City in 1976-77,
but they said they chose to comment on them through fiction so that people hurt
by the killer would not have to suffer more. That is an admirable sentiment. It
is a shame, however, that one of the country's best columnists and one of its
best sportswriters veiled their considerable talents in the guise of fiction.
The novel's newspaper columnist, Danny Cahill of The New York Dispatch, often
seems a parody of columnists Mr. Breslin has known, maybe including himself.

Howard Good, in his book ''Acquainted With the Night: The Image of Journalists
in American Fiction,'' wondered whether the city rooms that had produced the
nation's journalist-novelists might have ''actually stultified their imagination
and warped their artistic judgment.'' Perhaps most journalism novels failed the
verisimilitude test because, surmises Loren Ghiglione, their authors ''are known
to keep one eye on the marketplace. They want to create salable journalists -
heroes and heroines who will not only report murders but solve them
entertainingly enough to make the best seller lists.'' It is also possible that
the authors are fantasizing living out their desires through their creations.

Mr. Ghiglione is the only other person I know of who collects journalism novels.
He owns small newspapers in Massachusetts and is the current president of the
American Society of Newspaper Editors. He is preparing an exhibition at the
Library of Congress, scheduled to open in April 1990, about the journalist in
America. It will include a section on journalism novels.

James Muench, in a master's thesis at the University of Missouri, identified 18
best-selling novels of the last three decades featuring journalists as
characters. Few had anything to do with reality.

For example, in Danielle Steel's ''Changes,'' the network anchorwoman Melanie
Adams falls in love with a source, has a transcontinental affair and eventually
marries him. In most newsrooms, such professional misbehavior would at least
raise some eyebrows; in some it would be cause for reprimand or dismissal. But
in Ms. Steel's fictional world, nobody seems to notice. Adams is so naive that
one wonders how she could have risen above receptionist. She expresses amazement
that anybody recognizes her outside the studio, even though millions watch her
night after night. In her personal life, Adams is just as naive - when her
16-year-old daughter gets pregnant, the supposedly perceptive journalist fails
to suspect anything is wrong until after the daughter collapses on a ski slope
several days after a botched backroom abortion.

Given so powerful a penchant for drivel among writers about journalists, I am
bowled over by the rare credible, insightful novel. A few, not great perhaps but
undeniably good, have come our way. In my view, the best journalism novel
published in this country arrived 18 years ago: ''The Fly on the Wall'' by Tony
Hillerman. The title comes from the metaphor, attributed to Walter Lippmann, of
the journalist who sees all and feels nothing (more than a bit of truth in that,
for some of us). The protagonist, John Cotton, keeps a picture of the symbolic
insect on the pressroom wall in the Capitol of a Midwestern state. He is a gray
sort of guy, gathering information much as most first-rate real-life journalists
do. Mr. Hillerman describes Cotton walking through the Capitol:

''Cotton hurried past the Game and Fish Department offices, past the doors of
the State Veterinary Board, the Funeral Directors and the Embalmers Commission,
the Contractors' Licensing Office and the Cosmetology Inspection bureau. He
reminded himself, as he did almost every day when he used this route, that there
might be good hunting among these obscure agencies forgotten in the Capitol
catacombs. In fact, he had a tip about the Veterinary Board. An anonymous caller
had told him the director was letting his wife use agency gasoline credit cards.
When he could find time he would check it out.''

Of course, I could have cited a more exciting section of the novel, but this
passage lights me up. I cannot recall another fictional jouralist of such good
sense that he would even imagine spending some time digging at obscure
government agencies.

Mr. Hillerman builds his story with inspired exchanges on the philosophy of
journalism between Cotton and a political insider worried that Cotton's
investigation into road-building fraud could harm the Governor's re-election
campaign. It is riveting storytelling from an author who was once a journalist
and today is regarded as one of America's best mystery writers. It is Mr.
Hillerman's only journalism fiction.

High drama has a place in journalism fiction, certainly. And I know the value of
violence, conflict and sex. In fact, Mr. Hillerman's novel contains the murders
of two journalists, a chase scene in the New Mexico wilderness and a political
assassination, none of which is exactly routine on the beat. But the reader gets
some verisimilitude along the way and some classy writing, too.

Ward Just, a former newspaperman, has also acquitted himself well. In ''A Family
Trust'' (1978), a Midwestern clan debates whether to sell its newspaper after
the patriarch editor dies. The narrator who doubles as the newspaper's lawyer
speculates that the venerable editor-publisher Amos Rising secretly hated ''the
news,'' bringing as it does ''uncertainty and disorder to his life and the life
of the community; it threatened the sanity and tranquility of both. He loved the
process, the reporting and layout and editing, the smell of the ink and the roar
of the press. In that way he resembled a great general who hated war.'' In ''The
American Blues,'' Mr. Just's protagonist is talking about the correspondents'
coverage of the Vietnam War: ''No one could fault our zeal. Our enthusiasm for
the fall - its blood and dark rhythms, its delusion, the inexorability of the
descent, the fulfillment of all the worst prophecies - was almost religious in
intensity, and at home our dispatches were followed with the devotion that
Gypsies give tarots. Of course we wanted no wider war.''

There have been some other promising tries recently, by authors writing their
first journalism novels. I am thinking, for example, of Jack Early's small-town
reporter in ''Razzamatazz'' (1985); Ken Hartnett's big-city reporter in ''A
Saving Grace'' (1984); and Cara Saylor Polk's television reporter in ''Images''
(1986). Maybe these people will go on to produce wonderful fiction full of
truth.

The strength of ''Razzamatazz'' is Mr. Early's cleareyed view of journalism as a
usually unromantic craft, especially as practiced in towns such as his book's
Seaville on the North Fork of Long Island. The strength of ''A Saving Grace'' is
Mr. Hartnett's on-the-mark portrayal of how big-city journalists (in this case,
in Boston) can either support or prick the power structure, depending on their
inclinations and their integrity. Ms. Polk's novel is especially encouraging.
The protagonist, Marlena Williams, knows what it is like to start at the bottom
in Wilkes-Barre television news; the novel faithfully portrays the daily,
mundane aspects of journalism. Williams gets in altogether too many compromising
positions with her bosses and her sources to suit me, but at least the novel is
murder-free.

Journalists are by nature observers, not participants. Most of us experience the
world shallowly, moving from story to story, deadline to deadline. It is
possible that, except for an aberration here and there, journalism must be
disguised as something else, such as police work, to be of much use to a
novelist. But I have to believe that journalism, even truly described, is an
interesting way to spend a life, that some greater good would be served by
observing it well through powerful fiction. So I stand here, on the margin of
things, wistfully searching the horizon for our ''Moby-Dick.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing (pg. 24)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

OH, WHAT A LOVELY WAR

BYLINE: By HARRISON E. SALISBURY; Harrison E. Salisbury is the author of
''Tiananmen Diary: 13 Days in June'' and many other works on China and Southeast
Asia.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 825 words



WAR NEWS
A Young Reporter in Indochina.
By Robert Sam Anson.
317 pp. New York:
Simon & Schuster. $19.95.

In the carefully minted resumes that circulate within the Time-Warner colossus,
there is no such category as ''road runner.''

Nor was there 20 years ago when Robert Sam Anson, 24 years old, two years out of
the University of Notre Dame, pulsating with antiwar emotions, took off for
Vietnam with his 21-year-old wife, a 17-month-old daughter and a son of 5 weeks
rocking in a bassinet at his plane seat.

Mr. Anson did not know in the summer of 1969 that he was headed for a career as
a correspondent in Time magazine's Saigon bureau, a ''road runner'' in search of
battle action in Vietnam, then Cambodia - an occupation slightly less dangerous
than washing windows on the Empire State Building without a safety belt.

There was a lot that Mr. Anson did not know about war. It is tempting to compare
him with Stephen Crane, the equally young, equally naive man who wrote ''The Red
Badge of Courage,'' the classic examination of going under fire for the first
time. But Crane was introspective. He wrote his novel before he experienced war.
Mr. Anson was at the other end of the spectrum. He acted before he thought,
hardly aware that the bullets and shells could harm him. Only later did he begin
to think of war's meaning. He arrived in Vietnam something of a smart aleck. He
had carried a placard in an antiwar parade reading, ''War Is Good Business,
Invest Your Son.''

Ultimately Mr. Anson tried to analyze why he and his companions at the Hotel
Royal in Phnom Penh dashed off each day over one of the dangerous roads, knowing
that a colleague had vanished on the same highway the day before. Even today he
finds it hard to untangle. It was, actually, a lot like teen-agers playing
chicken at 120 miles an hour - who would blink first?

''It was,'' he writes, ''a means where every day you could test yourself, your
willingness to push the limits. And God knows it was fun, not just the doing of
it, but the recounting of it later at cocktail time, when everyone claimed the
day's closest call.''

Mr. Anson's was not the war of the grunts; not the heavy war of such journalists
as David Halberstam, Homer Bigart and Neil Sheehan; not the precise diplomatic
explorations of William Shawcross. But it was more than daredeviltry; it was the
war of the little people and the danger they faced. It was war at the grass
roots. It was Mr. Anson's story and he loved it. It never occurred to him that
he might be violating the rules of engagement when he threw himself almost
singlehandedly into an effort to halt the Cambodians from slaughtering their
hereditary foes, the Vietnamese, and dumping thousands of bodies into the
clogged Cambodian rivers.

He began to think of Cambodia as almost a private preserve, as his
responsibility, shared with his equally bold and brassy colleague, the
remarkable T. D. Allman, and his superb Cambodian driver, who had saved his life
too many times to record.

Mr. Anson got to Phnom Penh too late to interview Prince Sihanouk, who had
already been deposed by the dullish Lon Nol. That is a pity. The encounter
probably would have added some lively pages to ''War News.'' Never mind. Mr.
Anson has etched an unforgettable portrait of back-country Cambodia in a state
of dissolution (he leaves the question of responsibility to others to decide).
We come to know his milieu - the dirty little villages, the half-destroyed
towns, the bomb-cratered highways, the jammed one-way bridges, the roadblocks,
the ambushes, the devilish machines of war, the bitter competitiveness of the
young correspondents, freelancers, cameramen, chance-takers. Three dozen of them
had vanished before Mr. Anson himself was taken prisoner by North Vietnamese
soldiers and held for about a month.

These were the hazards of a dirty little war, a kind of shirttail to what was
happening in Vietnam. Mr. Anson had better luck getting his Cambodian stories
into print than those he had filed earlier from Vietnam. But there was the usual
gap between Mr. Anson and his New York City editors. Even his story of his
captivity in the hands of the North Vietnamese was turned to mush by the
chopping-block copy editors in New York.

Mr. Anson was an angry young man, but somehow he managed to swallow the
outrageous humiliations that Time has characteristically inflicted on its
front-line correspondents. Apparently the career of his great Time colleague in
Saigon, Charles Mohr, who resigned in the 1960's in protest over the mutilation
of his copy, was too far down the memory hole to attract Mr. Anson's attention.
At least he does not mention the parallel to his own experience.

''War News'' is the story of a very young man at war, a tale that is told with
gusto and excitement and captures a correspondent's almost reckless pursuit of
danger - a facet of the Indochina experience that has not been recounted before.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE POOR MAN'S ATOM BOMB

BYLINE: By MARIE ISABELLE CHEVRIER; Marie Isabelle Chevrier is a doctoral
candidate at the Kennedy School of Government and an adjunct research fellow at
the Center for Science and International Affairs at Harvard University.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 19, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 800 words



CHEMICAL WEAPONRY
A Continuing Challenge.
By Edward M. Spiers.
Illustrated. 218 pp. New York:
St. Martin's Press. $45.

This year dawned with extraordinary attention to the proliferation and use of
chemical weapons. In early January, representatives of 149 nations met in Paris
and reaffirmed both their repugnance toward such weapons and their intention to
conclude a disarmament treaty that would rid the earth of them. At about the
same time, the discovery of a plant in Libya that allegedly produced chemical
arms triggered a furor of protest by the United States. Revelations that West
German companies provided equipment and expertise to the Libyans added fuel to
the fire. At present, the Western nations are exploring efforts to curb the
international trade in chemicals used in the manufacture of weapons.

The vision of chemical warfare, of a silent, often odorless killer stalking
soldiers and civilians alike, evokes horror in most of us. Edward M. Spiers'
''Chemical Weaponry: A Continuing Challenge'' cuts through this emotional
response. Dispassionately and exhaustively, Mr. Spiers, who teaches strategic
studies at Britain's University of Leeds, catalogues the chemicals that have
been used or stockpiled as weapons since World War I, describing in intricate
and sometimes gruesome detail not only their effects but also the vast array of
means to deliver them to their intended targets. He describes the defenses
against them down to a cavalry horse's gas mask from World War I, and examines
the roles these weapons have played in 20th-century hostilities, from both world
wars to Vietnam to the Iran-Iraq conflict.

Mr. Spiers also discusses the controversies surrounding the Soviet Union's
alleged use of chemical weapons in Afghanistan and toxic ''yellow rain'' in
Southeast Asia, though he fails to indicate that support for these allegations
has steadily eroded. The historical sections of this book provide extensive
information and an appropriate perspective from which to examine the problem of
chemical weapons today.

The usefulness of chemicals on the battlefield, from a historical perspective,
gets a decidedly mixed review. Against unprotected or ill-prepared troops they
can wreak considerable havoc. But their successful use requires technical
expertise, knowledge of meteorological conditions and well-trained forces. And
despite their reputation as ''the poor man's atomic bomb,'' they have never been
shown to be capable of winning a war.

Mr. Spiers fails, however, to navigate the transition from solidly researched
history to the riskier business of informed speculation. In his discussion of
the prospects for chemical warfare, he refrains from judging the existing
literature. While he formulates concise and thorough theoretical arguments about
the use of such weapons, he is unwilling or unable to draw conclusions about the
circumstances under which they would likely be employed. Consequently, the
reader is frustrated by a they-might-but-on-the-other-hand-they-might-not
assessment of the possibility of chemical war.

Moreover, in contemplating the future, Mr. Spiers oversteps his greatest
strength: a thorough, fair and accurate interpretation of the historical record.
He broadens his scope to include biological and biochemical weapons, noting the
potential military applications of early biotechnical research. But he makes no
effort to distinguish technological changes that are already possible, such as
the laboratory production of toxins that occur in nature, from research that may
never bear fruit. Nor does he explain how potential breakthroughs in
biotechnology will overcome current obstacles to the use of chemical and
biological weapons. What good, for example, is the development of more poisonous
toxins, when barriers already exist to using those that are currently available,
like the botulinum toxin, one of the deadliest known substances on earth?

Mr. Spiers' discussion of the various proposals to curb or end the arms race in
chemical weaponry exhibits the same strengths and weaknesses as his material on
the likelihood of warfare. He accurately identifies the limitations of partial
measures such as export restrictions, a chemical-weapons nonproliferation treaty
and chemical-weapon-free zones, declaring that ''the only diplomatic means . . .
of curbing the proliferation and of inhibiting the usage of chemical weapons
would seem to be a global chemical disarmament agreement.'' Yet he is
pessimistic about the nations of the world ever insuring compliance with a
disarmament treaty, even with stringent verification provisions. ''Chemical
Weaponry,'' therefore, offers no hope for escape from the overhanging threat -
the mounting proliferation of these weapons and the constant temptation to use
them.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

AMERICANS FROM THE FARTHEST WEST

BYLINE: By JON FOREMAN; Jon Foreman is a Los Angeles freelance writer on Asian
subjects.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 936 words



STRANGERS FROM A DIFFERENT SHORE
A History of Asian Americans.
By Ronald Takaki.
Illustrated. 570 pp. Boston:
Little, Brown & Company. $24.95.

America's Asian heritage is finally crystallizing in the public consciousness.
As part of this change, an ever-accelerating tide of scholarship is illuminating
contributions to the nation's fabric by Asian immigrants and their descendants.
This scholarly flow takes diverse forms: books and theses, study centers and
seminars, magazines both highbrow and glitzy, even a guide for the unwary editor
on sensitive issues and terminology.

''Strangers From a Different Shore'' is one of the finest products of this
outpouring. Drawn from a wondrous variety of sources, the book is among the
first to examine the composite Asian-American experience in its 150-year
entirety. For the general reader, it is the best volume yet published on the
subject. A blend of scholarly detection, traditional narrative, statistical
analysis and oral history, it also serves as a partial memoir for its
Japanese-American author, a professor of ethnic studies at Berkeley who is
descended from Hawaiian plantation workers.

Mr. Takaki, a prolific historian of American minorities, combines a fraternal
admiration for the assorted Asian nationalities who established themselves in
the New World with an activist's indignation at the obstacles to their
assimilation and recognition. While he duly incorporates the lives of prominent
Asian-Americans, his main concern is with less well-known, and frequently
unknown, men and women and the range of experiences and emotions they have
recounted in letters, diaries, interviews, songs and poetry.

Mr. Takaki argues compellingly that every Asian immigrant group has been forced
in varying degrees to struggle against the idea of the United States as a
fundamentally white society, a concept initiated by the Founding Fathers and
subsequently codified by discriminatory laws on citizenship, marriage, property
ownership and the exact definition of Caucasian. In our present day, Mr. Takaki
gloomily asserts, undeniable advances often mask harsh economic problems and
lurking, occasionally violent, racism. He finds hope only in the greater
willingness of today's Asian-Americans to fight injustice and to articulate more
fully their collective past in America.

In his chronicle, Mr. Takaki ably addresses both of these drives, and his gifts
as a writer and storyteller convert what could have been just a broadside for
the faithful into a grand human panorama. With insight and sensitivity, he
describes the entrepreneurs and the fieldworkers, the celebrities and the
lumpenproletariat. (But not Chinese coolies. The book helpfully recalls that
this class of bonded worker did not exist in America.) A superb balancing act,
''Strangers From a Different Shore'' gives equal time to the older immigrant
communities (starting with the initial migrations from China in the 1840's and
50's) and the newest arrivals from Southeast Asia, comparing the former's
voluntary search for a better life with the latter's flight from war and
persecution. We learn, among other things, that 19th-century conditions were
better for Asian immigrants in Hawaii than on the mainland because of the
islands' multiracial society, and that numerous attempts to divide and control
workers by fomenting ethnic tensions sometimes gave rise to such unlikely
alliances as a short-lived union of Japanese and Mexicans in California.

The moods of Mr. Takaki's stories almost match the variety of his subjects. His
voices are by turns bitter, inspiring and funny. A second-generation Chinese
student at the University of Washington, assailing job bias, fumes: ''Go Further
West, Young Man . . . yes, across the Pacific and to China.'' A Punjab-born
farmer becomes a three-term Congressman. A young Nisei, a United States citizen
born of immigrant Japanese parents, employs the most notorious English vulgarism
to tell her father what she did with her boyfriend, not realizing that the
shocked elder was familiar with such language and understood perfectly.

Mr. Takaki avoids romanticizing his cast. He provides stark examples of
alcoholism, drug abuse and the colorfully devious methods Asian immigrants have
used to circumvent restrictive laws. He is fair to the white corporate
structure, noting at one point that Hawaiian planters did not purposely
segregate laborers' residences by national groups.

At the same time, his account does contain gaps. The perfunctory coverage of
19th-century Chinatown tongs includes barbed references to San Francisco tour
companies that capitalized on lurid stereotypes about these secret societies,
but it ignores the drama of a community terrorized by tong violence for almost
half a century. Similarly, an interesting account of the Yamato farming colony
shaped by Japanese immigrant pioneers early this century in the San Joaquin
Valley might have been accompanied logically by the nearly contemporary story of
Locke, a village near Sacramento settled by Chinese agricultural laborers and
containing approximately 1,500 people at its height during the Prohibition era.
In addition, the book is prone to minor errors when it departs from American
shores to encapsulate world events, blurring key facts about Japanese aggression
in Manchuria and Ho Chi Minh's revolt against the French in Vietnam.

Overall, though, Mr. Takaki succeeds magnificently in his work of investigation
and reclamation. His impassioned and perceptive history is a tribute to one of
the branches of the American family and a service to them all.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Japanese-American child en route to a World War II internment
camp (From ''Strangers From a Different Shore''/Courtesy National Archives)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By GEORGE JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 963 words



REUNION: A Memoir, by Tom Hayden. (Collier/Macmillan, $12.95.) The Chicago Seven
defendant who married Jane Fonda tells about a time long ago when children of
the affluent briefly found common cause with Black Panthers and thought they
could start a revolution. Last year our reviewer, Paul Berman, said this
autobiography is ''evocative, wordy, sometimes inconsistent. But what a story! .
. . I turned the last page feeling a wary admiration for its author.''

REVOLUTIONARY ROAD, by Richard Yates. (Vintage, $8.95.) When Frank and April
Wheeler left Greenwich Village for the Connecticut suburbs, they were convinced
that they could insulate themselves from their dispiriting surroundings with
alcohol, a well-honed sense of ennui and the knowledge that they were somehow
different. It didn't seem to occur to them that their supposedly benighted
neighbors might be thinking much the same thing. ''The excellence of
'Revolutionary Road' lies in the integrity with which its author depicts the
Wheelers' disintegrating marriage,'' Martin Levin said here in 1961. His
characters reveal themselves ''with an intensity that excites the reader's
compassion as well as his interest.'' Vintage has also republished Mr. Yates's
novel THE EASTER PARADE ($8.95), the story of two sisters whose parents' divorce
twists their lives in two very different directions. Sarah becomes trapped in a
marriage, Emily in a search for the perfect man. In 1976 one reviewer called Mr.
Yates ''an unexcelled documentarian of sadness. . . . The details of [the
sisters'] suffering are exact, indisputable, and moving.'' Also available from
the same publisher is a new edition of ELEVEN KINDS OF LONELINESS ($8.95), a
collection of short stories published in 1962.

THE MAKING OF ''THE WIZARD OF OZ'': Movie Magic and Studio Power in the Prime of
MGM - and the Miracle of Production N1060, by Aljean Harmetz. (Delta, $12.95.)
The introduction to this behind-the-scenes look at what was once the height of
special effects wizardry was written by the Wicked Witch of the West, Margaret
Hamilton. ''Now at last I know how I flew,'' she says, ''how I melted, how I
wrote in the sky 'SURRENDER DOROTHY OR DIE.' '' In 1977 our reviewer, Nora
Ephron, called this ''an extremely jolly book . . . full of absolutely
fascinating details.'' It has been republished for the movie's 50th anniversary.


TRACKS, by Louise Erdrich. (Perennial/Harper & Row, $8.95.) In the early years
of the century, the Chippewa ancestors of the characters in Louise Erdrich's
novels ''Love Medicine'' and ''The Beet Queen'' fight winter, smallpox and a
conquering alien culture. ''Her sure sense of the way people think and talk
keeps it hard to remember she is making them all up,'' Jean Strouse said here
last year, ''and her lithe, athletic prose makes wildly improbable events seem
as natural as the weather.''

GENERATION OF SWINE: Tales of Shame and Degradation in the '80s, by Hunter S.
Thompson. (Vintage, $8.95.) A series of columns published in The San Francisco
Examiner massacres George Bush, Pat Robertson and Dan Rather (to pick a few
targets at random) with the chain saw prose Hunter S. Thompson developed in
books like ''Hell's Angels'' and FEAR AND LOATHING IN LAS VEGAS, which Vintage
has also republished ($7.95). He combines ''name-calling, bomb-throwing and
sardonic humor,'' Herbert Mitgang said in The Times last year. ''He's a little
more strident this time out, but if you happen to share his public enemies, Mr.
Thompson's your man. Nearly everything he writes makes yellow journalism pale.''


COLLECTED STORIES: 1948-1986, by Wright Morris. (Nonpareil/Godine, $10.95.)
Wright Morris's fictional realm is peopled by ordinary folk, often from
Nebraska, who suddenly find their lives upset by something unexpected: a meeting
with hippies, a trip to New York, a drowned child frozen in a pond. In 1986 our
reviewer, Rosellen Brown, praised the author's ''unique voice - a touch
irritable, adorned almost affectionately with his characters' cliches,
unsympathetic to pretension, quirkily independent in the face of received
opinion.''

THE CONTROL REVOLUTION: Technological and Economic Origins of the Information
Society, by James R. Beniger. (Harvard University, $12.95.) The Industrial
Revolution begat the Information Revolution, James R. Beniger argues, by
producing a society so complex that it requires computers to keep it from
inevitably slipping toward entropy. In 1986 our reviewer, Langdon Winner, said
he thought Mr. Beniger put too much faith in the value of this high-tech nervous
system, but he praised the book as a ''skillful cross-disciplinary synthesis''
and a ''challenging, highly readable work.''

THE LAST FARMER: An American Memoir, by Howard Kohn. (Perennial/Harper & Row,
$8.95.) A former editor of Rolling Stone goes home to the family farm and uses
the story of his hard relationship with his father to write about the crisis in
American agriculture. The result is ''an intense and disturbing personal
journey,'' Ben Logan said here last year. The book ''ruthlessly examines the new
meanings that surface when past and present are freed from the linear mind and
given the right to merge.''

THE MIDDLEMAN AND OTHER STORIES, by Bharati Mukherjee. (Fawcett, $3.95.) From
Vietnam, the Caribbean, Afghanistan and Sri Lanka to Queens, Ann Arbor and Cedar
Falls, the modern immigrants in Bharati Mukherjee's short stories create a
multiplicity of new worlds. ''They're not tired, huddled or even poor: they own
motels, work scams, teach in college, breeze through on private funds,''
Jonathan Raban said here last year. The book is ''a romance with America itself,
its infinitely possible geography, its license, sexiness and violence.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Richard Yates (Thomas Victor)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NUMISMATICS

BYLINE: By Jed Stevenson

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 54, Column 1; Style Desk

LENGTH: 543 words


The Khmer empire ruled southeast Asia for centuries, but in the last two hundred
years the Khmer homeland, Cambodia, has been torn apart by its former vassals.
In the 1960's Cambodia tried to strike a balance between the forces of Vietnam
and the United States by playing her China card.

And a hundred years before, while unsuccessfully repelling the forces of Siam on
one side and those of Vietnam on the other, King Norodom I appealed to the
French naval forces in Saigon for help in defending his kingdom.

Admiral Lagrandiere, the French naval commander, arrived in the royal capital of
Oudon in 1863 to sign a treaty of protection. The treaty provided for a French
Resident-Superior to report to the French forces in Saigon and created a new
capital city, Phnom Penh.

During this time few Cambodian coins circulated within the country, although
several denominations of Cambodian copper and silver coins existed. Almost all
internal transactions were through barter as the economic base was nearly
entirely agricultural. For extremely large transactions and any foreign
commerce, the coins of choice were the ubiquitous Spanish ocho reales or Chinese
silver coins.

In the 1870's King Norodom adopted the currency system of France and ordered new
coins to be minted. His ministers turned to the west for the design and
manufacture of the coins. A Belgium engraver, Henri C. Wurden, designed the
bronze five-centime and ten-centime pieces, the silver 25- and 50-centime coins
and the silver one, two and four-franc pieces. The bronze coins were struck at a
British mint, but silver coins were either coined in France or Cambodia. All the
coins are dated 1860, which was the first year of the reign of King Norodom I,
but the coins began circulating in Cambodia somewhere around 1880.

A new series of the coins was struck in 1899 to commemorate the death of the
Cambodian Queen Mother and the original dies were placed on presses shipped from
Europe. But the hot, humid climate of Cambodia pitted and fouled the dies and
these later coins were marred by a graininess not apparent in the 1880 run.
Several dies broke while the new coins were being pressed and die errors are
apparent on many coins. Quality control was haphazard and the sizes and weights
vary greatly.

Cambodia remained a French protectorate and Siam returned the western provinces
in 1893. In 1945 the Japanese defended Cambodia's declaration of independence
from France, but after the war ended, Cambodia returned to France's control
under an agreement of limited independence. In 1949, she was granted further
independence and became a member of the Indochina Federation and the French
Union.

Not until 1953, some 70 years after those first coins, was Cambodia allowed to
mint a new series of coins - 10, 20 and 50-cent pieces with a typically
Cambodian motif.

Seminar

Anyone interested in discovering how coins are graded - why one coin is worth
hundreds of dollars and another seemingly identical one is worth much less - can
attend a seminar given by the American Numismatic Association, Sept. 15-17 at
the Hyatt House, 2349 Marlton Pike, Cherry Hill, N.J. For more information
contact the association, 818 North Cascade Avenue, Colorado Springs, Colo.
80903-3279.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 27, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Vonnegut Hails the 'Dignity of Women'

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 12LI; Page 8, Column 3; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1106 words


KURT VONNEGUT is ready to talk about how much fun he had writing his new play,
''Make Up Your Mind,'' which will have a staged reading at the John Drew Theater
in East Hampton tomorrow, and about how funny it is.

But who can resist asking him about weightier things, like his view of the world
here and now?

After all, here is the author who was heralded by students of the 60's as their
most relevant literary figure. And after he recounted his horrible wartime
experiences in ''Slaughterhouse-Five,'' his sixth novel, which was published in
1969, Mr. Vonnegut was called ''the voice of the silent generation.''

Situation Termed 'Hopeless'

For the next two decades, he went on espousing feminist and pacifist causes, as
well as anti-Establishment and pro-humanist attitudes.

Mr. Vonnegut, whose breakthrough novel ''Cat's Cradle'' (1963) dealt with the
end of the world in surreal comic terms, obliged for the moment.

''It's a mess,'' he said. ''The damage, worldwide, is permanent: the number of
forests wiped out in Europe, the kids with no education here. And the situation
is hopeless. ''No one's going to do anything about it. The planet won't be
saved. It wouldn't be cost effective to do so.'' Almost as if one were looking
back to a kindred doomsayer of another era, he added:

''When the Austrian-Hungarian Empire blew sky high, it was said that the
situation was hopeless, but not serious.''

That said, Mr. Vonnegut wanted to make it clear that in ''Make Up Your Mind'' -
his second play, in contrast to a slew of novels and short stories - he has no
political, ecological or cosmic concerns.

A Response to Loneliness

''All a play is is a party - a novelist's response to loneliness, with the
director, the actors and the audience as the extended family, which is nice,''
he said.

Since one has come to expect the unexpected from Mr. Vonnegut, it should come as
no surprise that the play's staged reading will not follow a traditional format,
wherein the playwright appears for a question-and-answer session at
performance's end. Instead, Mr. Vonnegut will take care of all that at the
beginning.  ''To liven things up, we're doing it as a radio play, with the
actors in front of microphones and an announcer describing the action,'' he
explained.

''So, he'll ask me questions and then I'll go off and the play'll begin right
away. But it'll never be done that way again. The play has movement and is meant
to have a full production. This is a one-time-only event.''

And then the play will be deemed ''ready to go,'' according to Mr. Vonnegut and
the evening's co-producer, Sam Schacht. Where, neither of them can say, although
they go on referring to Off Broadway possibilities, London offers and unnamed
regional theaters.

The Road to Survival

Mr. Schacht, an actor for more than 30 years, as well as a director, producer
and teacher of acting - ''Diversity is the road to survival,'' he contends -
received Mr. Vonnegut's script and met the author through their lawyer, Don
Farber.

''I thought it was a script of special moment and enormous commercial
potential,'' said Mr. Schacht, a long-time visitor to the Hamptons who is
renting a home in Springs this summer.

''And it's being done here, where there is the right population for a Vonnegut
play - a strong sampling of the kind of knowledgeable, sophisticated,
arts-oriented, literate audience we're aiming at.''

Lest one get the notion that ''Make Up Your Mind'' is mere fluff, Mr. Schacht,
whose last stage appearance was in the Off Broadway production of Sam Shepard's
''True West'' and who will next be seen in the film ''A Shock to the System,''
which was made in Montauk this summer, said:

''The play is about something, but open to being viewed as being about a lot of
things, like the relationship of innocents to powers in the world, to dreamers
versus realists, to idealists versus pragmatists.

''The message is what you see in it. It's a comedy-comedy, in a Vonnegut way.''

Various Descriptions

Just what that Vonnegut way is has been variously described as a zany and
sardonic softening of a moralistic manner, with humanity persisting through
pessimism, as well as being comically despairing, whimsically irreverent,
desolately winsome, gaily despondent and concerned with the randomness,
gratuitousness and blurriness of nearly everything.

And it is its creator, rather than the producer, who appears more willing to be
pinned down about the play's plot, if not its underlying meanings. Said Mr.
Vonnegut:

''Our good-looking, 35-year-old hero is going nowhere. He's got to make it, and
so he invents a new therapy for people who have trouble making decisions - or
sticking to them.

''He sets up an office in the same building as his father, who is a marriage
counselor, and forms the organization 'Make Up Your Mind Inc.', even though he
can't afford to incorporate. One of his clients is a very rich woman with whom
he falls in love.''

It's Called 'Decisiology'

And what is that new-fangled therapy called? Decisiology. That may be a
more-accessible coinage for a writer who made his mark making up words like
granfalloon, karass and foma, all from ''Cat's Cradle.''

''Make Up Your Mind'' represents Mr. Vonnegut's second original foray into
theater. His first play, ''Happy Birthday, Wanda June,'' which was set during
the Vietnam War, was about the return to civilization of a now-obsolete
Odysseus/Hemingway type hero. It played for four and a half months during the
1970-71 season.

Attempts by others to transfer Mr. Vonnegut's material to the stage have proved
less successful, such as a musical version of ''God Bless You, Mr. Rosewater''
and ''Between Time and Timbuktu,'' a misguided collage of his short stories,
which, Mr. Vonnegut acknowledged, ''didn't make sense.''

The author/playwright spends summers in his 1740 Sagaponack house, which he has
owned for 10 years. ''It's twice as old as the germ theory,'' he said.  The
67-year-old Mr. Vonnegut has been married to the photographer Jill Krementz for
10 years. He has three children from his first marriage (to Jane Marie Cox),
three adopted nephews and an adopted daughter Lily, who is 6. About his play,
Mr. Vonnegut commented: ''I'm not using the arts for political purposes. If I
have an ax to grind, I'll do it for the Op Ed page. The play isn't knocking
anything.

''Why not ask what does it celebrate? The dignity of women under trying
circumstances, that's what.

''But the most important character is the audience. Finally that character will
be arriving on the 28th, and then we'll see where we're really going.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Kurt Vonnegut at his home in Sagaponack, with actor Sam
Schacht (Jill Krementz)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 29, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Philippines Arrests Guerrilla In Slaying of a U.S. Colonel

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 168 words

DATELINE: DAVAO CITY, Philippines, Aug. 28


Troops on Sunday arrested a Communist guerrilla who admitted taking part in the
slaying of a United States Army colonel in April in a Manila suburb, the
military announced today.

The guerrilla, Juanito Itaas, 25 years old, was arrested with a companion in a
public vehicle here after intelligence reports linked him to the slaying of Col.
James Rowe, the military said. Colonel Rowe, a decorated Vietnam War veteran who
escaped after five years in a Vietcong prison camp, was slain on April 21 on his
way to work at the Joint United States Military Assistance Group in Quezon.

Communist rebels claimed responsibility for the assassination. Maj. Gen. Ramon
Montanao, acting military chief of staff, said he now considered the Rowe case
solved.

It was the first time the military has reported the arrest of one of the
assassins. In June, the police arrested a messenger for a university newspaper
in connection with the slaying but said later that he was not believed to have
been among the assailants.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 29, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Glum Mood at Cambodian Talks

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 412 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Aug. 28


Foreign Minister Roland Dumas of France called on ministers from 19 nations
today to make one last effort to agree to a peace plan before a monthlong
conference on Cambodia ends on Wednesday.

With the last round of the talks beginning today, Mr. Dumas, acting as host and
co-president of the conference, asked the representatives at the meeting to
accept ''in a political leap forward the necessary compromises'' to end two
decades of war in Cambodia.

Nonetheless, many ministers were pessimistic that the conference could come up
with a peace plan that would satisfy both the Vietnamese-backed Government of
Prime Minister Hun Sen and the three-party guerrilla coalition fighting to oust
him.

Mr. Dumas said the ministers should seek agreement on these five points:

* The role of the United Nations in supervising a Cambodian transition once
Vietnam withdraws 26,000 remaining troops by Sept. 27. The Hun Sen Government
objects to a large United Nations role, arguing that the organization favors the
guerrillas.

* The issue of whether to include the word ''genocide'' in the final communique.
The Khmer Rouge, the dominant faction in the coalition seeking to oust Mr. Hun
Sen, insists that the word be excluded. More than one million people died when
the Khmer Rouge undertook a brutal restructuring of the nation from 1975 to
1979. The Vietnamese, who ousted the Khmer Rouge before installing Mr. Hun Sen,
insist that the word ''genocide'' be included.

* The problem of Vietnamese remaining in Cambodia after the troop withdrawal.
Mr. Hun Sen's opponents say they fear that one million Vietnamese will remain in
Cambodia, and that many of those will do Hanoi's bidding.

* The means to bring about a truce.

* The question of national reconciliation, specifically what form a provisional
government should take. The adversaries disagree over whether the Khmer Rouge
should be part of the government. The Vietnamese and the Americans say no. But
the Khmer Rouge's Chinese backers, as well as Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the head
of the opposition coalition, say the Khmer Rouge, which has the strongest rebel
army, should be included.

Foreign ministers from 13 nations are at the talks. Because the conference is so
far from a solution, Secretary of States James A. Baker 3d decided not to attend
the session. The Soviet, Chinese and British Foreign Ministers and Secretary
General Javier Perez de Cuellar of the United Nations have said they would not
come.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 29, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Joseph Alsop Dies at Home at 78; Political Columnist Since the 30's

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1314 words


Joseph Alsop, the syndicated Washington columnist whose robust opinions appeared
in newspapers around the country for five decades, died yesterday morning in his
house in the Georgetown section of Washington. He was 78 years old.

Reached at his house, his sister-in-law Patricia Alsop - the widow of his
brother and former collaborator, Stewart Alsop - said Joseph Alsop's death was
caused by severe anemia, lung cancer and severe emphysema, all of which he had
been fighting for more than a year.

Mr. Alsop, who was related to the Oyster Bay branch of the Roosevelt family, was
a shrewd, dogged, well-connected newsman with an exaggerated old-school manner,
and he dearly loved controversy.

He was a fierce supporter of the United States effort in Vietnam and, in the
late 1950's, a champion of the view that the United States was letting the
Soviet Union open a dangerous ''missile gap.''

When he retired as a columnist in 1974, his Washington political column was
believed to be the longest-running nationally syndicated column of its kind,
appearing three times a week in 300 newspapers.

Column Was Born in the 30's

He wrote the column jointly with Robert E. Kintner from 1937 until World War II,
when he joined the Navy. He and his brother Stewart collaborated on the column
from 1946 to 1958, when Stewart began writing for The Saturday Evening Post.
Joseph Alsop wrote by himself from then on. The columns first appeared under the
title ''The Capital Parade'' and later under the heading ''Matter of Fact.''

In New York, Joseph Alsop's columns long appeared in The Herald Tribune, and for
years he and Walter Lippmann were major adornments of the paper's opinion
columns.

Despite his passion for picking sides - he once called himself ''one of the
warmest American supporters of the Israeli cause'' - he thought of his columns
as largely reportorial. ''I do have strong opinions,'' he said in a 1974
interview, ''but I do try to give the customers value for money - which are the
facts on which my opinions are based.''

A Bite in the Style

Mr. Alsop's writing was often gloomy, flinty and biting and so was he, though he
could be charming.

Writing on Southeast Asian issues early in 1971, he asserted that Senator J. W.
Fulbright, the Arkansas Democrat who was chairman of the Foreign Relations
Committee, and other Senators were ''downright eager to be proved right by an
American defeat in war and will loathe being proved wrong by U.S. success in
Southeast Asia.''

James Reston, columnist for The New York Times, termed that allegation
''unspeakable'' at the time.

Mr. Alsop was gloomily conservative about many foreign affairs questions. ''Can
the free societies survive, and if so, how?'' was a question he posed. He was
known as an exponent of the policy of containing Communism.

Phenomena in Soviet Union

In addition to warning about what he saw as the Soviet Union's ominous military
might, he mused about all sorts of phenomena inside the Soviet borders,
including variations in grain harvests.

On domestic issues, Stewart Alsop described his brother and himself, in a 1971
interview, as longstanding and ''very square 'New Deal' liberals.''

In his legwork in Washington and elsewhere, Joseph Alsop was a skillful and
remarkably durable practitioner of what is sometimes called access journalism.

He was a well-born and well-educated Connecticut Yankee, and he made use of
various establishment ties and other carefully nurtured friendships to get news
and gain insights. Over the years, he did much entertaining at his Georgetown
house. Guests were sometimes awed to find his cousin, the Washington grande dame
Alice Roosevelt Longworth, on hand.

''That's the way Joe plays the game,'' Mrs. Longworth said in a 1971 interview .
''I know that whenever I go over to Joe's house for a dinner party I am working
for him. I don't mind a bit. I know Joe uses me. Good heavens, he uses
everybody!'' #2 Passions: Art and Archeology Mr. Alsop had longtime passions for
art collecting and archeology. His cultural interests ranged from early art and
art collecting to landscape architecture in contemporary Georgetown.

He built up a substantial collection of art, decorative objects and furniture,
and sold much of it as the years passed. But he kept some things that gave him
great pleasure, and in 1983 the New York Times columnist Charlotte Curtis called
him ''Washington's ultimate connoisseur.''

The art in Mr. Alsop's houses over the years included family portraits, Japanese
lacquer work, Chinese porcelain, oriental hangings and ancient bronzes from
Persia. Earlier, Mr. Alsop wrote on archeology for The New Yorker magazine.

Of Art and the Collector

In June and July 1978 he gave a series of six lectures at the National Gallery
of Art in Washington on ''The History of Art Collecting.''

In the past two decades, he wrote repeatedly on cultural subjects. His book
''The Rare Art Traditions: The History of Art Collecting and Its Linked
Phenomena Wherever These Have Occurred'' came out in 1982, and James R. Mellow,
an art and literary critic, wrote in The New York Times Book Review that ''this
is a genuine and quirky book: It provokes ideas; it raises objections.''

''As a history of art it is odd and frequently original,'' Mr. Mellow observed,
''reminiscent of some 18th-century volume by a gentleman-scholar who has made
himself an authority on his avocation.''

He also served on the boards of the American School of Classical Studies in
Athens and Dumbarton Oaks. And he retained an unfulfilled ambition to write a
book on the origins of art. He had been recently working on a volume of memoirs,
in collaboration with Adam Platt, under a contract with the New York publishing
house of W.W. Norton.  Roosevelt and the Supreme Court Mr. Alsop steadilyl wrote
magazine articles and books. His first book, ''The 168 Days'' (1938), was a best
seller about President Franklin D. Roosevelt's unsuccessful campaign to enlarge
the Supreme Court. It was written jointly with Turner Catledge, a Mississippian
who was then a Washington reporter for The New York Times. He later became its
executive editor.

The plainspun Mr. Catledge noted in his memoirs that Mr. Alsop ''was an
exceedingly well-educated young man and a wonderful stylist,'' given to
''references to Shakespeare and the classics.''

Joseph Wright Alsop Jr. was born on Oct. 10, 1910, in Avon, Conn., the son of a
prominent Republican who failed several times to win the Connecticut
governorship, and the former Corinne Douglas Robinson, who founded the
Connecticut League of Republican Women in 1917. Both parents served in the
Connecticut General Assembly.

Wartime Aide to Chennault

He graduated from the Groton School in 1928 and Harvard College in 1932. He was
a reporter for The Herald Tribune in New York and in Washington before teaming
up with Mr. Kintner, who became president of the National Broadcasting Company.
Mr. Alsop spent much of World War II in Asia as an aide to Gen. Claire L.
Chennault of the Flying Tigers.

Other works of which Joseph Alsop was author or co-author were ''Men Around the
President'' (1938), ''American White Paper'' (1940), ''The Reporter's Trade''
(1958) and ''F.D.R.: A Centenary Remembrance'' (1982).

Mr. Alsop married the writer Susan Mary Jay Patten, now known as Susan Mary
Alsop, in 1961. They were divorced in 1978.

Stewart Alsop died in 1974 of leukemia. Joseph Alsop is survived by a brother,
John D. Alsop, a prominent Republican, of Old Lyme, Conn.; a sister, Corinne
Alsop Chubb of Chester, N.J.; a stepson, William Patten of Camden, Me.; a
stepdaughter, Anne Milliken of Salt Lake City, and seven step-grandchildren.

A funeral service will be held at 11 A.M. Thursday at St. John's Episcopal
Church on Lafayette Square in Washington. A memorial service is to be held in
Washington next month.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

CAMBODIA TALKS SAID TO COLLAPSE

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 664 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Aug. 29


A monthlong international conference aimed at bringing peace to Cambodia appears
to have collapsed, with officials predicting today that there will be
large-scale fighting between the warring Cambodian factions before serious
negotations can resume.

A spokesman for a 19-nation conference on Cambodia said, ''There was not, at
this stage, a possibility for movement on the part of the Cambodian parties, and
the time has not yet come for a compromise.''

Conference participants said the Cambodian factions appeared to want to fight
further to test each other's military strength before they resumed negotiations.


Spring Conference Planned

Jean Gueginou, a French Foreign Ministry spokesman who is host and co-chairman
of the conference, said an international conference would probably be
reconvened, most likely in the spring.

He said the current conference, which began in Paris on July 30, would probably
end with a short communique on Wednesday. The talks appeared to be going so
poorly that a formal session scheduled to be held today was called off.

About 26,000 Vietnamese troops backing the Government of Prime Minster Hun Sen
are scheduled to withdraw before Sept. 27, and with the Vietnamese gone,
officials foresee an intense civil war between Mr. Hun Sen and the three-party
coalition trying to oust his Government.

'Too Early' for Compromise

''We see indications that we may be in for this period of military testing,'' an
American official said.

Only when the sides have measured their relative strength on the battlefield
will they be ready to break the negotiating deadlock, conference officials said.

''It is too early to arrive at a compromise, but it isn't too early to begin to
work toward it,'' Mr. Gueginou said.

China's Khmer Rouge Demand

Participants in the conference said the main stumbling block to an agreement was
whether the the Communist Khmer Rouge should be included in a provisional
Cambodian government. More than a million Cambodians died under Khmer Rouge rule
in Cambodia between 1975 and 1978.

Vietnam and the United States insist that the Khmer Rouge play no part in a
future Cambodian government. Vietnamese forces invaded Cambodia in December 1978
and ousted Pol Pot's Khmer Rouge regime a month later.

But China, the biggest supporter and supplier of the Khmer Rouge, demanded that
the Khmer Rouge be part of a provisional government that would exist until
elections were held.

Although Washington disagrees with Prince Sihanouk, the head of the guerrilla
coalition, over the future role of the Khmer Rouge, it has strongly backed his
efforts to oust the Hanoi-backed Government. The Prince contends that the only
way to bring about a lasting peace in Cambodia is to include the Khmer Rouge in
a future government.

'Real Balance of Forces'

Officials at the conference see bitter fighting over the next few months between
Mr. Hun Sen's 50,000 troops and the Khmer Rouge, which with some 40,000 troops
has the strongest army in the guerrilla coalition. Prince Sihanouk has about
18,000 troops, and Son Sann, a former Prime Minister and head of another
faction, has about the same amount.

The United States is providing aid to the guerrillas, but not weapons, while
Beijing has provided military supplies to the Khmer Rouge.

At a briefing, an American official said the 19 nations might meet again ''some
months down the road when perhaps the realities on the ground have given people
a clearer sense of the real balance of forces that are fighting.''

The nations at the conference, including the United States, the Soviet Union,
China, Canada, Japan and the nations of Southeast Asia, were seeking to develop
a comprehensive peace plan to end two decades of fighting in Cambodia.

'Very Complicated Problem'

Today, the leaders of the anti-Government coalition met in informal talks with
the co-chairmen of the conference, Foreign Ministers Roland Dumas of France and
Ali Alatas of Indonesia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Statement on Cambodia

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 384 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Aug. 30


Following is the text of a statement issued today by the international
conference on Cambodia:

At the invitation of the Government of France and under the co-chairmanship of
His Excellency Ali Alatas, Foreign Minister of Indonesia, the International
Conference on Cambodia met in Paris from July 30 to Aug. 30, 1989. Participating
in the conference were the representatives of Australia, Brunei Darussalam,
Cambodia, Canada, China, France, India, Indonesia, Japan, the Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, the United States of America, Vietnam and Zimbabwe in its capacity as
current chairman of the nonaligned movement. Cambodia was represented by the
four Cambodian parties. The Secretary General of the United Nations and his
representatives also participated in the conference.

Accord Not Yet Possible

The conference, mindful of the previous efforts made at the Jakarta informal
meetings and elsewhere, achieved progress in elaborating a wide variety of
elements necessary for the reaching of a comprehensive settlement to the tragic
conflict in Cambodia. The conference noted, however, that it is not yet possible
to achieve a comprehensive settlement. It was therefore decided to suspend the
conference.

The conference urges all parties concerned to intensify their efforts to achieve
a comprehensive settlement. To facilitate these efforts, the co-presidents of
the conference shall lend their good offices as required to participating
parties and countries who can facilitate a comprehensive settlement, including
the reconvening of the committees as appropriate.

The co-presidents will begin consultations within six months with the
participants in the conference with a view to reconvening the conference.

The French Government expressed its readiness to make the appropriate
arrangements to reconvene the conference in due time in Paris.

The Indonesian co-president and all the participants expressed their sincere
appreciation and deep gratitude to the Government and people of France for
hosting this important conference and the excellent arrangements made as well as
for their generous hospitality extended to all delegations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Talks on Cambodia Break Off in Anger

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 785 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Aug. 30


As a monthlong international conference aimed at bringing peace to Cambodia
ended in failure, the warring Cambodian factions angrily blamed each other today
for the breakdown of the talks.

But participants in the 19-nation talks, which included Cambodia's four feuding
factions, said they would begin consultations in a few months in the hope of
resuming negotiations.

Although the delegates tried to put a positive face on the outcome by saying
that the talks were merely being ''suspended,'' the Cambodian adversaries
appeared as hostile to each other as ever.

Prince Norodom Sihanouk, head of a three-party opposition coalition, called the
Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen ''lackeys of Vietnam,'' while Mr. Hun Sen
called the Prince's Khmer Rouge allies practitioners of genocide, who should be
excluded from any new government.

''It is not yet possible to achieve a comprehensive settlement,'' the conference
participants said in a brief final statement. ''It was therefore decided to
suspend the conference.''

Next Round on the Battlefield

Many officials predicted that the conference would reconvene next spring after
the opposition factions battle the Hun Sen Government's army during the
six-month dry season to test each other's military strength.

With Vietnamese troops scheduled to withdraw by Sept. 27, some officials said
that if the opposition or the Phnom Penh Government establishes military
dominance over the next few months, there might not be any need for the
conference to be reconvened.

''We need time so that the spirit of reconciliation can overcome the spirit of
confrontation,'' said Foreign Minister Roland Dumas of France, one of the
conference's two co-chairmen. ''The parties will be tempted by action. That
would be regrettable.''

American officials and Prince Sihanouk said the conference had failed because
Mr. Hun Sen and his backers in Hanoi were too inflexible in negotiating the
shape of a provisional government that would lead to elections.

But Mr. Hun Sen and the Vietnamese accused Prince Sihanouk of being unyielding,
saying he should not have insisted that the Khmer Rouge be included in an
interim government.

Ouster of Khmer Rouge

Vietnam invaded Cambodia in December 1978 to oust the Khmer Rouge Government of
Pol Pot, which sought to brutally remake Cambodian society beginning in 1975.
More than one million people died in the effort, in which cities were emptied of
people and the educated killed.

''They did not want to discuss and look for ways to prevent the return of the
genocidal regime of Pol Pot, to prevent a civil war,'' Mr. Hun Sen said at a
news conference.

Many officials said another reason for the deadlock was the failure of the
United States, the Soviet Union and China to press the warring factions harder
to resolve the conflict.

Instead of seeing a peace settlement, many officials now worry about an increase
in the fighting. China is expected to increase supplies to its Khmer Rouge
allies; the Soviets are expected to step up aid to Mr. Hun Sen, and Washington
is increasing support for Prince Sihanouk's army.

Prince Sihanouk predicted that ''the final victory'' would belong to the
opposition after the Vietnamese troops withdraw. ''The day when Vietnamese
colonialism under its different forms would have disappeared from Cambodia, the
pro-Vietnamese regime of Mr. Hun Sen will also cease to exist.''

Some officials said, however, that the Khmer Rouge, which has the strongest army
within the opposition, could strengthen its position in the more intense
fighting expected this year.

A Self-Made Quagmire

The United States has insisted that the Khmer Rouge be excluded from any future
government, but many officials say Washington is caught in a policy trap because
it is backing Prince Sihanouk, who has allied himself with the Khmer Rouge.

''The United States really seemed to be quiet at the conference,'' a Western
diplomat said.

When the talks began on July 30, many diplomats were optimistic that they could
develop a comprehensive peace plan that would end 20 years of warfare in
Cambodia. Vietnam, Mr. Hun Sen's main sponsor, was eager to improve ties with
the West and reduce its assistance to Phnom Penh, aid that was draining its
already weak economy. Thus, Hanoi was expected to push Mr. Hun Sen to settle.

The conference statement said the co-chairmen, Mr. Dumas and Foreign Minister
Ali Alatas of Indonesia, should begin consultations within six months with the
participants ''with a view to reconvening the conference.''

''We tried our best,'' Mr. Alatas said. ''There has been too many casualties,
too much suffering. Do you expect a conference like this to go smoothly?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Wave of Vietnamese Refugees Straining Japan

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 617 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Aug. 30


Braving distances of up to 1,500 miles at sea, thousands of boat people from
Southeast Asia and China have begun arriving at Japanese shores in recent
months, straining Japan's refugee centers and posing difficult new challenges
for the Government.

Almost every day this month, a boat has pulled up at Nagasaki or some other
Japanese port or has been spotted at sea by a tanker or other vessel and brought
to Japan, where the refugees have been put in already overcrowded shelters.

Refugee officials say most of the refugees are Vietnamese, including a
significant number who came from southern China after migrating there years ago.

The drama of refugees arriving directly at Japanese shores has been unusual for
a country widely known for its homogeneity and traditional uncertainty about
immigrants and foreigners, although in 1985 Japan took the extraordinary step of
agreeing to absorb 10,000 Indochinese refugees.

That quota hasn't been reached yet, and as other major destinations like Hong
Kong have been beset by refugees and seek to stem the tide, Japan, with a
booming economy and growing wealth, has become a magnet even though it is
farther away. #2,600 This Year More than 2,600 refugees have arrived this year,
most of them in the last month. While the problem is not nearly as large as the
one faced by Hong Kong, where about 50,000 refugees are held in detention,
Japanese officials acknowledge that they have been surprised by the influx and
do not have the ability to handle everyone. Government shelters are filled with
more than twice the number of people they were equipped to handle.

''Frankly speaking, our Government was not ready,'' said Masanori Dodo, a human
rights and refugee official at the Foreign Ministry. ''But we are now making
every effort to catch up with this newly born situation.''

Today it was reported that 35 of 180 refugees reaching the southern city of
Kumamoto fled into nearby mountains, apparently fearing that they might be
deported because of the growing crisis at refugee centers. Another group of 102
boat people arrived at Nagasaki this morning.

Since agreeing in 1985 to accept the 10,000 refugees, Japan has absorbed more
than 6,200 from camps and shelters in other countries. But never before have
large numbers of boat people come to Japanese shores directly.

''We don't have direct evidence, but we assume the word has gotten back to those
Vietnamese planning to leave that Japan's asylum policy is relatively
generous,'' said Christopher J. Carpenter, the Japan representative for the
office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

Although the refugees' journeys have been far, the Japanese press accounts
suggest that they have not been as harrowing as journeys of some boat refugees.
The route from southern China to Japan has been direct, so that there have been
no reports of ships lost or adrift. According to the press reports, the recent
journeys to Japan have been helped by the ability of the ships to stop at
islands along the way to allow the refugees to exchange jewelry, clothing or
valuables for food and supplies.

Screening Is Considered

Japanese officials said today that the recent influx was forcing them to
consider screening the refugees to identify those genuinely seeking political
asylum, possibly deporting those deemed to have been escaping poverty.

But officials said a final decision on the possible screening of refugees might
not occur for another month.

Screening refugees to accept only those seeking political asylum was a measure
agreed upon at an international refugee conference in Geneva in June. The
procedure has the support of the High Commissioner for Refugees.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of refugees arriving at port in Nagasaki, Japan (Agence
France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

WASHINGTON TALK;
Politics Sneaks Aboard on Military-Base Mission

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 995 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 30


When politicians have trouble dealing with tough issues, they frequently turn to
commissions to bail them out. Such was the case with the closing of military
bases, an unpalatable task that Congress consigned to a special panel to
insulate the process from political influences.

A transcript of the commission's closed sessions, however, provides a revealing
glimpse into the political seepage that occurred in deliberations from June
through December of 1988, when its recommendations were made public. And it
portrays members who were immensely dissatisfied with their work.

Several were so concerned about how the public would judge them that they wanted
the transcript of the sessions destroyed after their recommendations were made
public. ''We should shred it and then ask if we did the right thing,'' one
advised.

In the end, the transcript was saved and recently became available, but the
names of the commissioners were mostly blotted out. They were led by former
Senator Abraham A. Ribicoff, Democrat of Connecticut, and former Representative
Jack Edwards, Republican of Alabama.

An Expected Intrusion

From the beginning, Mr. Ribicoff made clear that politics would intrude into the
process. ''We are expected to operate in an independent manner,'' he said in a
portion of the transcript that identified his remarks, ''but that in no way
implies that we operate in a vacuum.''

As the group prepared its report in December, one member observed: ''We are a
child of politics, and I think, as a child of politics, we ought to say what we
think about the process and indicate that, hey, we're a little frustrated.''

When the commission had completed its survey of 3,500 bases, it drew up a list
of 86 to be closed, five to be partly closed and 54 others that would change as
units were moved. The recommendations have been accepted by the Defense
Department and Congress, although money has not been appropriated to begin the
closings, which are scheduled to start on Jan. 1.

The commission's list had to be accepted or rejected as a whole, to prevent
Congress from picking and choosing. Citizens' committees have mounted campaigns
to save two bases, Chanute Air Force Base in Illinois and the Army's Jefferson
Proving Ground in Indiana. But they have been unsuccessful thus far.

When all was done, the savings came to $694 million a year after five years, far
from the $2 billion to $5 billion that had been widely foreseen when the
commission was created, ''We are going to have to make some gut judgments here
as to what makes sense and what does not make sense,'' one commissioner said in
arguing to set aside the formula that the panel had laid down to help its
decision-making. The formula took into account factors like each base's military
utility, the state of maintenance and how much had been invested in it.

Voice of Frustration

''We are wasting our time if we are expecting to come up with numbers that are
going to justify something,'' he added. ''We are not going to get there.''

The transcript shows that the members felt hampered by the short time they had
to survey the bases, as well as by a requirement that any cost of closing a base
had to be covered by savings within six years. They grumbled that they were not
permitted to count the sale of land as a saving, but they accepted without
complaint the omission of cleanup costs from the accounting.

Winding up its work last Dec. 14, one frustrated member blurted out, ''I would
hope that we would not be perceived as having labored and brought forth a
mouse.'' Another asserted that anyone thinking that the commission had been
effective ''is out of his gourd.'' A third agreed, saying, ''This was a terribly
eccentric exercise.'' But a fourth cautioned, ''Let's don't admit we have done a
lousy job.''

Nowhere was politics more evident than in the long and hard debate over Fort
DeRussey in Honolulu. It is a choice property on the beach at Waikiki, with a
public park and a hotel where military people enjoy rest and relaxation.
Soldiers and officers on leave from the war in Vietnam often met their wives
there for brief interludes.

The commission's staff estimated that Fort DeRussey's 75 acres would be worth
$213 million and that selling it would more than cover the cost of acquiring
another recreational area elsewhere in Hawaii. ''If you could densely populate
it with hotels,'' one aide said, ''you could probably get double that amount.''

Where the Main Interest Lay

There was little debate over its purely military value. But several
commissioners worried that the city of Honolulu, seeking to maintain the park
area, would acquire Fort DeRussey without paying full value for it, or that
Japanese investors would buy it, or that Congress would be annoyed because it
had recently voted that the fort should be retained.

One commissioner warned that Fort DeRussey would be a problem, no matter what
they decided. ''I think this is one that's going to try our credibility any way
you do it,'' he said. Another agreed, saying, ''I do think this would be a
lightning rod if we don't do something with Fort DeRussey in the report.''

If the commission recommended retaining Fort DeRussey, the members feared an
outcry from communities in which a base was to be closed. ''And if we do close
it,'' a commissioner said, ''they're going to say these are the most heartless
12 men in the whole history of the United States since the landlord at Valley
Forge.''

Another commissioner argued: ''You've got to sell it. I mean, even if it's the
last piece of American property on Waikiki Beach, you've got to sell it. It's
worth a zillion dollars.'' Still another countered, ''I don't feel like putting
my thumb into the eye of Congress.''

In the end, politics won out over economics, and Fort DeRussey was omitted from
the closure list. ''I don't think we can do it,'' said one of the co-chairmen.
''O.K., let's move on,'' said the other. Nobody objected.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Fort DeRussey in Honolulu, which was omitted from the list of
bases recommended for closing. (NYT/John Titchen)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 1, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Bleeding Cambodia

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 451 words


The bitter breakdown of the Paris peace conference on Cambodia opens a
horrifying possibility. If Vietnamese forces withdraw as scheduled this month,
Pol Pot's genocidal Khmer Rouge army could once again shoot its way into power.

Almost as bad would be a diplomatic solution that gives the Khmer Rouge a full
share of power in an interim regime. Yet it was largely because Prince Sihanouk
insisted on such a Khmer Rouge role that the Paris conference broke down.
Incredibly, the Prince had the full support of the United States.

The State Department insists it opposes an equal role for the Khmer Rouge in an
interim regime, even as it supports the Prince's demand for just that. With a
new bloodbath now imaginable, The time has come for Washington to rethink its
confused and confusing strategy.

Washington's reluctance to legitimize the Hanoi-installed regime of Prime
Minister Hun Sen is understandable. But Cambodia's two Communist movements are
not equivalent. Though he once belonged to the Khmer Rouge, Mr. Hun Sen is no
mass murderer. He now seems to recognize a need for market reforms and a
political broadening of his regime. He would limit the Khmer Rouge to taking
part in a postwar peace council.

Vietnam invaded Cambodia in 1978, ending a three-year Khmer Rouge reign of
terror that cost a million Cambodian lives. A resistance coalition sponsored by
China and the U.S. challenged the harsh Vietnamese occupation. The impasse
finally ended this year when Hanoi, trying to end its isolation, promised to
pull out its troops. Without them, however, the Hun Sen regime is ill matched
against the Khmer Rouge-dominated resistance.

Prince Sihanouk now contends that he and his non-Communist allies need the Khmer
Rouge as a counterweight to Hun Sen. And he appears to count on American arms
for his forces in a military showdown.

Wisely or not, Congress has given the Bush Administration authority to provide
arms to the non-Communist resistance. But in present circumstances, arming
Prince Sihanouk would risk siding militarily with the Khmer Rouge. A bad
Communist regime could be replaced by an abominable one.

Until the start of the Paris meeting, the U.S. had reason to give Prince
Sihanouk the benefit of the doubt. It's time now for Western nations, Cambodia's
neighbors and the Soviet Union to search for an approach more likely to thwart
the Khmer Rouge.

Hanoi, under pressure from the Soviet Union and for its own urgent economic
reasons, is now striving to end its isolation. If the aim of U.S. policy is to
prevent a Khmer Rouge comeback, Washington could at least test Vietnam's
intentions. In any event, tying U.S. policy to the Prince's gyrations no longer
makes sense.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 1, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Is Sending Military Specialists to Train the Colombians

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 770 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 31


Detailing a more ambitious role for United States servicemen being sent to
Colombia, the Pentagon said today that it would dispatch 50 to 100 military
personnel to train Colombians to operate and maintain the $65 million worth of
arms and equipment promised by President Bush.

The announcement by Pete Williams, the Pentagon's chief spokesman, represented a
somewhat larger commitment of American servicemen than White House officials
have suggested to assist the Colombian Government's war with drug traffickers.

The White House spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, said last week that the
Administration expected to send a few dozen military technicians, who would
assist in the maintenance of equipment sent by the United States.

Plans to Train Advisers

But at a briefing today, Mr. Williams said the Administration had decided that
the contingent of servicemen would include communications, maintenance, supply
and munitions specialists.

Mr. Williams said no decision had been made on whether the American military
personnel would act as tactical advisers to the Colombians or, if so, whether
they would accompany Colombian forces on anti-narcotics operations. Americans
initially went to Vietnam as trainers in the 1950's, then moved into an advisory
role in the 1960's before combat forces were deployed there.

Even though no decision has been made, military officers said they were
preparing to select and train advisers if the President orders them sent. While
officers and noncommissioned officers might be proficient in their own
specialties, they would need training on how to advise Colombians.

All American military personnel in Colombia will operate under normal rules of
engagement, Mr. Williams said, which means they will have the right to fire to
defend themselves and to use reasonable force to protect their equipment and
munitions.

'Potential Dangers Down There'

Colombia is experiencing a campaign of bombing and violence by the drug
traffickers, a situation that could place American military personnel at risk.
''They have to know that there are potential dangers down there,'' an
Administration official said.

In the Pentagon, however, officials said they had not yet received guidance from
the White House on the policy of responding to an attack, beyond the rules of
engagement.

In Kennebunkport, Me., where he is vacationing, President Bush was vague in
discussing the use of force in Colombia. During a brief news conference with
Prime Minister Brian Mulroney of Canada, Mr. Bush was asked whether he favored a
multilateral force intervening in Colombia to help stamp out the drug business.

''There's no question that multilateralism makes great sense in trying to
help,'' the President said. He emphasized, as he has all along, that any United
States action should come in the context of a response to a request from
Colombia.

First Scheduled Arrivals

The first American military people would arrive in Colombia on Friday and the
first equipment, two Lockheed C-130 Hercules cargo planes, are scheduled to fly
there Sunday. The four-engine, propeller-driven C-130's, which were the
workhorses of the Vietnam War, can carry troops and be armed as gunships.

Mr. Williams declined to say where the people and equipment would come from or
where they would land in Colombia, citing the need for secrecy to avoid
jeopardizing security.

Officials from the United States and Colombia have been negotiating for several
days on a list of other arms and equipment that will be turned over to the
Bogota Government under the emergency aid plan announced by the President a week
ago. They are close to an agreement, Mr. Williams said.

That list will determine how many American military people and what kind of
specialists will ultimately go to Colombia, he said.

'All the Dough We've Got'

Mr. Williams said the Colombians had also asked for Cessna A-37's, which are
small, twin-engine turbojets for counter-insurgency operations. Mr. Williams
said no decision had been made on whether they would be furnished.

In response to a question about whether the Colombians had asked for more than
the $65 million worth of arms, Mr. Williams said: ''We don't have the ability to
provide anything, in terms of this aid package, above the $65 million. And
that's the constraint under which we're operating. That's all the dough we've
got in the account.''

Further, he said, ''we are constrained under this emergency program to provide
equipment that we have; we can't go out to a third party supplier and acquire
things, buy things, and then give them to the Colombians.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 2, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Giamatti, Scholar and Baseball Chief, Dies at 51

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2215 words


A. Bartlett Giamatti, the Renaissance scholar and former president of Yale
University who gave up a brilliant academic career in 1986 to join the
rough-and-tumble of big league baseball, died after apparently suffering a heart
attack at his summer home on Martha's Vineyard yesterday.

The 51-year-old Dr. Giamatti, who became commissioner of baseball last spring
after more than two years as president of the National League, collapsed at
midafternoon at his home in Edgartown, Mass., and was pronounced dead at
Martha's Vineyard Hospital in Oak Bluffs.

''He was found unconscious and in full cardiac arrest,'' said Steven Mac-Kinnon,
the deputy police chief in Edgartown. He said officers who rushed to his home
administered cardiopulmonary resuscitation and took him to the hospital, where
doctors tried for more than an hour to revive him.

Banned Rose

He was pronounced dead at 4:32 P.M., said a hospital spokeswoman, Linda
Brantley, who added that his wife and a son, Paul, were with him. While a heart
attack was believed to be the cause of death, Dr. Robert W. Nevin, the Medical
Examiner for the Dukes County district that includes Edgartown, scheduled an
autopsy for today in Falmouth, Mass., at the family's behest.

Dr. Giamatti, who resolved months of controversy last week by banning Pete Rose
from baseball amid allegations that he bet on games, left New York City
yesterday morning to spend the weekend with his wife, Toni, and other members of
his family at their retreat on the island off Cape Cod. His home was in Hamden,
Conn.

The announcement of his death prompted expressions of sorrow around the nation
from leading figures in education, government and sports, as well as from
colleagues and former associates and students, many of whom recalled his zest
for life and an astonishing range of learning.

President Bush, a Yale alumnus, said Dr. Giamatti in a brief tenure as baseball
commissioner ''made a real contribution to the game, standing for the highest
possible ethical standards.''

Waves in Baseball

''Bart Giamatti's premature and shocking death is a tragedy for his family, for
Yale and for the nation,'' Benno C. Schmidt Jr., who succeeded Dr. Giamatti as
president of Yale, said last night. ''He gave of himself magnificently as
teacher, scholar and leader.''

Though well known in scholarly circles for decades, Dr. Giamatti's name did not
become a household word until 1986, when he entered major league baseball and
began making waves by tinkering with the strike zone and revamping the balk
rule.

Sports fans may remember him best for taking on Pete Rose, the pugnacious
Cincinnati Reds manager and former playing star whose fall from grace was said
to have been precipitated by a secret passion for gambling, including bets on
his own team. Mr. Rose consented to the ban in a written agreement but has
continued to deny that he bet on games.

Mr. Rose may apply for reinstatement after a year and it will be up to Dr.
Giamatti's successor to rule on it. Baseball's executive council, composed of
the two league presidents and eight club owners, will administer baseball until
a new commissioner is chosen.

Mr. Rose's lawyer, Robert A. Pitcairn, said his client was ''deeply saddened''
by the news of Mr. Giamatti's death. ''In spite of their dispute, Pete had great
personal respect for the Commissioner,'' Mr. Pitcairn said in a statement in
Cincinnati. ''He extends his deepest sympathy to Commissioner Giamatti's
family.''

Scholarly Depths And Campus Pinnacles

But while an avalanche of publicity marked Dr. Giamatti's tenure in baseball, it
was his academic tenure in New Haven that may best be remembered.

In a career that plumbed the depths of scholarship and rose to pinnacles of
American university life, Dr. Giamatti became one of the nation's leading
scholars in English and comparative literature; wrote books on Dante, Spenser
and other subjects, and, from 1978 to 1986, served as the 19th president of
Yale, his alma mater.

The youngest person in 200 years to hold the coveted presidency of Yale, Dr.
Giamatti, who was only 40 when he succeeded Kingman Brewster, was anything but
the stuffy blue blood that was the stereotype of Ivy League academic leadership.

''A human being as president of a university - my God, what will that be like?''
quipped a colleague when Dr. Giamatti was selected by Yale's 16-member governing
corporation. In 11 years as a professor at Yale, he had captured the respect of
administrators, the faculty and students, not only for his academic excellence
but also for his style.

Known to friends as Bart, Dr. Giamatti was a man of wit and passion, who in his
public and private utterances seemed to exude what made Yale distinctive: a
striving for excellence, a devotion to undergraduate education, a love of the
humanities and the virtues of learning for its own sake.

His handsome, urbane predecessor had presided over a period of turbulence and
expansion with a patrician manner and a relish for political and social issues,
and some alumni said he went too far in trying to understand and make
compromises with students angered over the Vietnam War and racial injustice.

Dr. Giamatti, a short, stocky man with a beard gone white, was first and
foremost a teacher. He resolved to put the university back on a solid footing,
academically and financially. He inherited an institution that, by all accounts,
was in a malaise. Among the problems were budget deficits, a foundering
capital-fund drive, crumbling buildings, an uncertain academic mission and a
disgruntled body of alumni.

His first task, upon taking office in July 1978, was to get control over the
finances of a school that had run up more than $10 million in cumulative
deficits in the previous three years. After two years, Yale reached what he
called ''financial equilibrium.'' Focusing on new income, he soon turned the
corner.

During Dr. Giamatti's tenure, the size of the endowment rose to $1.35 billion
from $544 million and alumni contributions rose to $26.4 million from $9.6
million. When he left office in 1986, it was generally agreed that Yale's
finances were in order, the physical plant was well on its way to being restored
and, despite inconsistent performances by the football team, Yale's 100,000
alumni were once again enthusiastic.

Ivy Vision And Turn to Diamond

The changes he wrought were big and small. He downgraded water polo from a sport
to a club activity, phased out 40 senior faculty positions and adopted a new
billing system under which students paid tuition earlier.

Dr. Giamatti's most trying moments involved labor relations, most conspicuously
a 10-week strike in the fall of 1984 by Local 35, the newly formed union of
clerical and technical workers. The walkout produced antagonism between striking
and nonstriking employees that persisted long after the settlement.

In his academic policies, Dr. Giamatti pushed undergraduate writing, providing
funds for a new set of intensive composition courses that eventually reached
nearly all of the students, and he successfully urged the faculty to reinstate a
foreign language requirement.

He also encouraged more interdisciplinary majors and programs of study,
reinforcing his goal of a leaner, more versatile institution. ''My goal has been
to encourage jointness, to push people to think of affiliations rather than to
operate as solo entrepreneurs,'' he said.

While his focus at Yale was on university life, he occasionally spoke out on
issues of national concern. In a 1981 address to incoming freshmen, he called
the Moral Majority and similar conservative groups ''peddlers of coercion''
engaged in ''a radical assault'' on civil rights and pluralism in America.

Later, he criticized the Reagan Administration for what he called defense
spending at the expense of education, and for the ''chaos'' of its education
policies.

Dr. Giamatti, a heavy smoker who once said cigarettes were his ''primary vice,''
announced late in 1985 that he would give up Yale's presidency the following
year. He had been unable to write the major work on the Renaissance that he had
long planned, he said. But within a year, he had put down new roots in a world
of baseball that he had long romanticized.

The rules of the game, collective bargaining and a variety of other
controversies marked his new life in the game. But the most widely publicized
events of his tenures as president of the National League and as the
commissioner of baseball had to do with Pete Rose.

In 1987, he suspended the Cincinnati manager for 30 days for twice shoving an
umpire during an argument on the field. And nine days ago, on Aug. 24, he
announced the agreement with Mr. Rose that banned him from baseball for life.

Life of Joy In Academic World

Angelo Bartlett Giamatti was born in Boston on April 4, 1938, and reared in
classic Ivy League fashion. His parents were Valentine Giamatti, a Yale graduate
and professor emeritus of Italian at Mount Holyoke College, and Mary Claybaugh
Walton, a graduate of Smith College.

He grew up in South Hadley, Mass., near Springfield. He was never an athlete,
but he developed a lifelong interest in sports, especially baseball, and served
as manager of the South Hadley high school baseball team. Encouraged by his
parents, he also developed an aptitude for languages and literature. The
dinner-table conversations often centered on such topics as Dante's ''Divine
Comedy.''

While his father was on sabbatical in Italy, the boy attended the International
School of Rome. He subsequently graduted from Phillips Academy in Andover,
Mass., and then entered Yale, where he majored in English. He earned a
bachelor's degree, magna cum laude, in 1960, and went on to Yale's graduate
school as a Woodrow Wilson Fellow, obtaining a doctorate in comparative
literature in 1964.

That fall, he began his teaching career as an instructor in Italian and
comparative literature at Princeton University. In 1965, he was promoted to
assistant professor at Princeton and the following year, after teaching a summer
course at New York University, he joined the Yale faculty as an assistant
professor of English.

He advanced rapidly through the academic ranks at Yale, becoming associate
professor of English in 1968, an associate professor of English and comparative
literature in 1970 and a full professor in 1971.

Outside classrooms, he served as master of Ezra Stiles College, one of Yale's 12
undergraduate residential colleges, from 1970 to 1972, and as director of the
university's visiting faculty program from 1974 to 1976. In 1977, he assumed the
newly founded John Hay Whitney Professorship of English and Comparative
Literature.

''He's the best English teacher I've ever had,'' one student said in a typical
comment. ''He makes you excited about the subject, even if you're not.''

During those years, he became known in academic circles as both a teacher and
scholar. His first book, ''The Early Paradise and the Renaissance Epoch,'' was
published in 1966, and was followed by ''Play of Double Senses: Spenser's Faerie
Queene.''

His latest book, which appeared last year, was ''A Free and Ordered Space: The
real World of the University.'' Its wide-ranging ideas examined the nature and
purpose of a university, the goals and principles of education and the
relationships between the university, the government, private industry and other
institutions.

His writings over the years displayed an astonishing range, and included
articles for Harper's magazine on Muhammad Ali and other pieces on Tom Seaver,
the former Mets pitcher. His lifelong love of baseball (and of the Boston Red
Sox) he once summarized in response to a question about his aspirations.

''All I ever wanted to be,'' he said, ''was president of the American League.''

Sports Business Looking for a Leader

He did not exactly get his wish. Instead, after stepping down from the
presidency of Yale, he was elected president of the National League in June of
1986 and assumed that post in December of that year. After two and a half years
at that helm, he became the commissioner of baseball last April 1, succeeding
Peter Ueberroth.

The club owners, who selected him, knew that baseball faced important new
ethical questions and that the commissioner would have to be a person of
unassailable integrity.

''We knew when we brought him in that we needed someone to handle the sort of
problems that for some reason we hadn't had before,'' said Avron Fogelman, a
co-owner of the Kansas City Royals. ''We wanted the kind of man who could be
totally objective. Whatever decision he makes on this, nobody wins except the
integrity of the game.''

A month after he became commissioner, Dr. Giamatti said in an interview: ''I'm
the world's expert on sterotypes held by academics about athletes and held by
athletes about academics. To me, both of them are caricatures. This is not the
first time in my life where you know going into a job that you're going to hear
in stereo what was wrong with what you did.''

Survivors include his wife, the former Toni Smith, whom he met at Yale and
married in 1960; three children, Marcus Bartlett, Paul Edward Valentine and
Elena Walton Giamatti, and a brother, Dino, of Scarboro, Me.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 6, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

An obituary on Saturday about A. Bartlett Giamatti referred incorrectly in some
copies to a book he wrote. It is ''The Earthly Paradise and the Renaissance
Epic.''

GRAPHIC: A. Bartlett Giamatti, Renaissance scholar, former president of Yale
University and commissioner of baseball, left his mark on the game he loved. He
was 51 years old. (DOT/Brad Trent, 1988) (pg. 1); A. Bartlett Giamatti in 1986
at the head of his last commencement procession as president of Yale University
(Associated Press); Mr. Giamatti in a production of the ''Nutcracker'' at the
American Shakespeare Theater in 1977, shortly after he was chosen to head Yale
(The New York Times) (pg. 6)

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 2, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Colombians to Protect U.S. Personnel

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 673 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 1


The Defense Department said today that security for the 50 to 100 American
military personnel being sent to Colombia to assist in an anti-drug campaign
would be provided by the Colombian Government. The Pentagon's chief spokesman,
Pete Williams, told reporters that American military personnel ''will not
participate in operations and will not accompany Colombian personnel on
anti-narcotics operations.''

Mr. Williams also said eight A-37 airplanes designed for counterinsurgency
operations would be flown to Colombia on Monday and five UH-1 Huey helicopters,
the versatile troop and cargo haulers of the Vietnam War, would be delivered on
Tuesday.

Security in Mind

Asked whether the United States was putting soldiers at risk by placing their
security into the hands of the Colombians, who have been unable to stop a wave
of bombings and assassinations, Mr. Williams said:

''I don't want to be interpreted as agreeing with the premise of your question.
So I'll simply say that, obviously, the consideration of the security of our
forces is as serious a concern for the United States as it would be anywhere.
And we have taken these measures - you know, the decision that we've made is
with the security of our forces in mind.''

Asked whether the Americans in Colombia would be armed, Mr. Williams said, ''I
don't know.'' Asked whether they would be permitted to shoot back if attacked,
he said, ''I just don't want to get into any of that.''

On Thursday, Mr. Williams said the normal rules of engagement would apply,
meaning that all Americans would have the right to protect themselves and their
equipment with reasonable force.

From National Guard Bases

On other details, Mr. Williams said two C-130 Hercules cargo planes to be
delivered to Colombia on Sunday would come from National Guard bases in
Louisville, Ky., and Martinsburg, W.Va. Both will carry spare parts for delivery
to Colombia.

The A-37 counterinsurgency planes, which are small twin-engine jets, will come
from Air National Guard bases in Illinois and Michigan. Mr. Williams also said
they would be the only planes given to Colombia under the current program. There
had been speculation that Colombia wanted jet fighters.

Mr. Williams did not say where the Huey helicopters would come from but did say
they would not be counted against the $65 million in emergency aid promised by
President Bush; instead, they are coming out of a separate, previously arranged
military sales program. In addition, he said, ''we will provide trucks, jeeps,
small boats, individual weapons, radios and troop support equipment as the
Colombian Government had requested,'' but he gave no details.

The first 10 Americans have arrived in Colombia from Panama, Mr. Williams said.
Others will follow to help unload and reassemble equipment and to train
Colombians, he said.

As the Schedule Demands

''They will continue to come and go as the training schedule and logistic
support mission demands throughout the duration of this mission,'' he said.

Mr. Williams said the equipment was being shippped in a sequence intended to
allow the Colombians ''to begin to use what we send them immediately.'' The
first equipment, including the C-130's, ''will be that with which the Colombians
are most familiar,'' he said.

He also said bulletproof vests for Colombians engaged in protecting law
enforcement officers would be shipped in the C-5 cargo planes carrying the
helicopters. More helicopters may be shipped later, he said.

Mr. Williams said he did not know how much the equipment would consume of the
$65 million allotted by the President. ''Scorekeepers in the Pentagon are
keeping track, and we'll obviously make sure that we keep within the $65 million
limit,'' he said.

The Pentagon spokesman said Americans going into Colombia would not all be in
the same place, but he said he would not disclose where they would be for
security reasons. He left open the possibility that some Americans would go into
Medellin, the stronghold of the drug traffickers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 3, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

West Point Gynecologist Denies Seducing Patient

BYLINE: By JAMES FERON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 39, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 690 words

DATELINE: WEST POINT, N.Y., Sept. 2


A gynecologist at the United States Military Academy has denied seducing a
patient earlier this year, as she accused him of doing, but he admitted having
an affair with a former patient at Fort Sill, Oklahoma, which would be a breach
of the same regulations he is accused of breaking at West Point.

The doctor, Major Ernest Flores, took the stand at an administrative hearing
Friday evening after two weeks of testimony by women he treated at the Keller
Army Community Hospital here. Some accused the 44-year-old doctor of sexual
misconduct, while others praised his care, saying he hugged and kissed them in a
caring, open and supportive way.

If the hearing officer finds evidence that the doctor breached Army rules
against sexual misconduct, a judicial hearing - the military equivalent of a
grand jury - and then possibly a court martial could be conducted.

The complainants, all the wives of servicemen, said they feared their testimony
would hinder their husbands' careers. The women said they sought outside legal
help after Army authorities seemed reluctant to take action. The hearing was set
after they went to the West Point Superintendent, Brig. Gen. Dave R. Palmer.

Major Flores was accused by one patient, Kathi Baker, of violating the
doctor-patient relationship by having sex with her while she was recovering from
a hysterectomy. She said the incident took place in his apartment after they
shared a bottle of champagne she had given him for saving her life.

Col. Stephen J. Harper, who is conducting the hearing, asked Mrs. Baker, 29, if
there had been enough time for her to leave the apartment. She replied that she
had been ''in a terrible mental and emotional state'' and ''confused.''

Major Flores, an 18-year veteran who won a Silver Star and two Purple Hearts in
Vietnam, denied having sexual relations with Mrs. Baker or with any hysterectomy
patient. He declined to accuse her of lying, saying ''I don't know if she thinks
she did'' have sex.

He admitted inviting her to his apartment, but said that other patients had come
to his base quarters with medical problems during off-duty hours.

Major George W. Weightman, a surgeon who worked with Major Flores at the
hospital here, said ''he is a warm, compassionate, touchy-feely person'' who
''conveyed an impression of caring deeply'' for his patients.

Major Flores admitted having a year-long affair with a married patient five
years ago while he was stationed at Fort Sill. The woman, Rose Foster, is not
among those charging Major Flores with sexual misconduct. She said she heard of
the case through television, thought his behavior was similar to the charges he
could face here and asked to testify ''to help protect the women at West
Point.''

Ms. Foster, 29, testified that she met the doctor when she was pregnant with her
second child. She then suffered a miscarriage, was having difficulty conceiving
again ''and was desperate to have another,'' she said. Major Flores ''said he
would help me conceive,'' she said. Then ''he asked me out,'' she said.

After several meetings, she said, ''he seduced me.'' They continued seeing each
other ''a couple of times a week'' until she discovered she was pregnant. Her
husband ''deserted'' her, she said, after she told him Major Flores was
responsible for her pregnancy.

The major, who continued to be her physician, ''wanted me to get an abortion -
he gave me the money,'' she said, but she declined to do so.

Accompanied by her 4-year-old son and carrying papers that she said proved the
major's paternity, Ms. Foster spent three days waiting to testify.

At the request of the complainants' lawyers, the Army has sent questionnaires to
a ''sampling'' of Major Flores's patients to see if others have complaints but
are reluctant to come forward.

Major Flores does not face any formal charges yet. Col. Harper, assistant
director of the law department at West Point, is seeking to establish the facts
in the case. Hearings like this can be closed in sensitive cases, but Colonel
Harper made it clear that his superiors had overruled him and granted the
complainants' request for an open hearing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 3, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Senate Star Rides a Wave of Great Expectations

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 22, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 939 words

DATELINE: BROKEN BOW, Neb., Aug. 30


The questions were gentle and the atmosphere was downright warm the other day
when Senator Bob Kerrey held forth at the Big Red Cafe in the small town of
Chappell.

They greeted the freshman Democrat with the kind of proprietary pride lavished
on the University of Nebraska Cornhuskers in a good year (or probably in a bad
year as well, judging from the slogan on the wall: ''Damn Right, I'm a
Husker'').

Mr. Kerrey was patted and fussed over and smiled upon. He is a former Governor,
a Medal of Honor winner who lost a leg in Vietnam and spoke out against the war,
an all-purpose celebrity who once dated the actress Debra Winger. ''Nice
threads,'' a man said, teasing the local boy who made good.

It was an emblematic moment as Mr. Kerrey traveled through western Nebraska this
week, a politician living in a charmed circle. Mr. Kerrey, one of the few
Senators to speak out against a constitutional amendment to outlaw flag burning,
is moving onto broader playing fields in Washington, eager, untested and not
without qualms.

'Charisma,' Says a Campaigner

In Nebraska, the 44-year-old native of Lincoln has a fiercely loyal following.
''He has charisma,'' said Madeline Aufdengarten, an executive secretary at a
community college and a longtime Democratic campaigner. ''You better believe
it.'' In Democratic circles in Washington, which have the same appetite for
fresh faces that Hollywood did in the heyday of the studio czars, Mr. Kerrey is
a starlet.

For many Democrats, he is a potentially powerful figure in an ever-rougher
politics of values fought around issues like the Supreme Court's ruling that
flag burning could be a protected form of political speech. Republicans have
hammered on such issues in the past, saying they are guardians of traditional
values and a strong military, thus keeping Democrats on the defensive.

''Somebody like him has a little more freedom,'' said G. Peter Burger, a lawyer
in McCook who watched Mr. Kerrey work a cocktail reception the other night.
''He's really immune from charges of, 'You're not as patriotic as I am.' ''

A Democratic strategist in Washington put it bluntly: ''The one thing he ain't
is a wimp.'' A House Democratic aide said, ''He's become an empty vessel into
which Washington pours all these expectations.''

Wariness in the Spotlight

Mr. Kerrey grimaces at such talk, the fast promises of political Washington. ''I
don't trust it,'' said the Senator, a businessman whose first run for office
landed him in the Governorship. ''I feel like I'm getting sucked into a carny
game at a state fair. 'Put another dollar on the board here, boys!' It doesn't
smell right. It doesn't smell like a good deal to me.''

For all his protests, he is sidling up to the booth. He does not shrink from
talk of national issues, politics and themes, the currency of ambitious men.

Opponents of a constitutional amendment against flag burning were delighted when
he threw his weight behind their cause. In an angry speech on the Senate floor,
he said he understood the outrage at the ruling and felt it himself but believed
the Court's decision was right.

He took President Bush to task for supporting the amendment, accusing him of
playing politics instead of leading. He still seemed angry when he talked about
the issue in a coffee shop in Broken Bow.

''Where does it lead?'' he asked. ''When you're all done arguing, what have you
got? Have you built a house? Have you helped somebody? Have you created a better
world? Have you fought a battle worth fighting? Or are you banging into shadows
on the wall of a cave? It seems to me there's nothing produced from it and
you've divided the nation.''

All Quiet on the Home Front

Mr. Kerrey said he had heard ''almost nothing'' about his position on flag
burning since he came home, although an Omaha World-Herald Poll published this
month showed that 63 percent of the Nebraskans surveyed supported an amendment.
That poll also registered a 75 percent approval rating for Mr. Kerrey. Conducted
Aug. 15-17, it was based on telephone interviews with 621 registered voters and
had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus four percentage points.

Dan Parsons, communications director for the state Republican Party, said many
Nebraskans were simply unaware of Mr. Kerrey's position. ''What is unfortunate
for the state is that what Bob Kerrey wants and what the state of Nebraska wants
are two different things,'' he said. ''He's left of center and the people of
Nebraska are moderate to conservative.''

But after just eight months in the Senate, he has the confidence and the
cockiness of a man pulling 75 percent in the polls.

Still Riding the Wave

There is an intellectual coltishness to the man. He says he is eager to plunge
into health care, and he held meetings throughout western Nebraska this week,
free-form tutorials with doctors, nurses, business people, government officials
and average citizens.

He told people his two basic principles are that health care should be available
to all and that costs should be controlled. ''Do you think it's possible? I
don't,'' said Dr. Jay Matzke, a family practitioner in Sidney, after one of
those meetings.

For now, though, in these late summer days, Mr. Kerrey is still riding a wave of
great expectations at home and in Washington. He talks of qualms and doubts, but
he stays on the wave.

''I continue to believe that if we just trust ourselves a bit more than we do,
our ideas and our solutions are just as good as anyone else's,'' he told a group
of Nebraskans in an anthem for a region and perhaps for a self. ''I'm riding all
of you.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 10, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about Senator Bob Kerrey,
Democrat of Nebraska, misstated his age. He is 46.

GRAPHIC: Photo of Senator Bob Kerrey visiting with Claire Jensen, 8 years old,
at the dedication of a library in Minden, Neb. (NYT/Mel Evans)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 3, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi Now Says Ho Died on Different Day

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 16, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 186 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 2


Vietnamese leaders have asserted that they falsified the date of Ho Chi Minh's
death and changed portions of his will, putting the leader's body on display in
a glass mausoleum when his initial wish was to be cremated.

The Vietnamese Communist Party leader, Nguyen Van Linh, issued a statement
admitting to ''a number of problems regarding President Ho Chi Minh's testament
and the day on which he died,'' the official Hanoi radio said on Thursday.

The statement said that because Ho's death, on Sept. 2, 1969, fell on Vietnam's
National Day, the party leadership announced that he died a day later ''to
prevent the date of Uncle Ho's death from coinciding with a day of great
national rejoicing.''

Mr. Linh said a section of the will in which Ho requested that he be cremated
was changed with his permission before his death in 1969. When he died, his body
was embalmed and placed in a glass coffin displayed in a Soviet-style mausoleum
in Hanoi, the statement said, ''so that compatriots nationwide, particularly the
southern compatriots and international friends, might have a chance to visit the
uncle.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 3, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Refugees Riot in Hong Kong

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 769 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Sept. 2


In the second major refugee riot here in a week, a Vietnamese man was killed
today and 11 others were injured during a disturbance that began with a dispute
over a gambling debt. The riot reflected a growing tendency toward violence
among the frustrated Vietnamese boat people crowded into Hong Kong's detention
centers.

For the first time, British Army soldiers were called in to assist the police.
The 30 soldiers searched for weapons in the Sek Kong detention center, the site
of today's violence, where 7,000 boat people are housed in tents pitched along
an asphalt runway belonging to the British Air Force. A Government spokesman
said the soldiers used metal detectors to search for buried caches of homemade
weapons.

Last Sunday, 1,000 Vietnamese rioted on the island of Tai A Chau, and despite
the use of tear gas, the small contingent of police officers there were unable
to restore order and was forced to withdraw from the island. After a night of
assaults, robberies and five reported rapes, the island, where 5,500 Vietnamese
were detained, was retaken when helicopters ferried in more than 350 riot police
officers. Twelve arrests have been made, and one Vietnamese was charged with
rape.

No Electricity, No Toilets

Tai A Chau, virtually uninhabited before the Vietnamese were moved there about
three months ago, has no electricity, running water or toilets. The boat people
there have been living in crumbling, abandoned village huts and makeshift tents,
surrounded by piles of garbage and human feces.

Conditions there are so squalid that the Government said on Friday it could not
control a recent cholera outbreak and would begin evacuating the island next
week, increasing overcrowding, at least temporarily, in other camps.

Sixteen cases of cholera have been reported so far among people on the island.
After a cleanup of Tai A Chau, and the construction of some crude housing,
Vietnamese will again be housed there, officials said.

'Total Breakdown of Order'

The police said today's violence at the Sek Kong camp, which is in the rural New
Territories area of the colony, began at 6 A.M. and raged for three hours as 200
boat people fought each other with sharpened tent pegs, water pipes, bottles and
stones. Several hundred riot police officers were called in restore order, and
46 people were arrested.

''What's happening inside these camps is a total breakdown of order,'' said a
worker with a relief agency that deals with the Vietnamese. ''Normal controls
are gone. Parents do not even control their children. People are hopeless and
frightened. Tempers are frayed.''

Hong Kong is struggling to house and control more than 55,000 Vietnamese, only
about 14,000 of whom are regarded as refugees and await resettlement in other
countries. Hong Kong officials have said that Vietnamese who arrived after June
16, 1988, must prove they are fleeing religious or political persecution.
Otherwise they remain jailed in prison-like detention centers until they can be
returned to Vietnam.

According to Hong Kong officials, most of the Vietnamese crowding into Hong Kong
are fleeing their country's grinding poverty.

Mandatory Repatriation

The Hong Kong Government has maintained that the only solution to the Vietnamese
problem is the forced repatriation of the boat people. Sir David Wilson, the
Governor, returned today from a meeting in London with Britain's Foreign
Secretary and announced he hoped to reach an agreement with Hanoi on mandatory
repatriation by the end of the year.

Over the summer, there have been scores of disturbances in the camps, with
police officers and detainees suffering injuries. A police spokesman said there
have been six slayings in the detention centers this year.

The police believe today's riot began when an argument broke out among
Vietnamese who had gambled on the outcome of a camp volleyball game. They said
that no one had come forward to identify the detainee killed during the
violence.

After the riot, the police displayed hundreds of crude handmade weapons
confiscated in the camp, including long metal tent pegs sharpened into knives.

Robert van Leeuwen, who runs the office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees here, said that overcrowding and prolonged incarceration have made
life inside the centers tense and volatile.

While acknowledging that Hong Kong has been forced to struggle with the huge
task of feeding, housing and caring for tens of thousands of Vietnamese - 30,000
of whom arrived in the past year alone - relief agencies have recently
criticized conditions inside the camps.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 3, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
Cambodia Has Exhausted Every Step Short of War

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 537 words

DATELINE: PARIS


A MONTH of peace talks on Cambodia ended in failure last week with the warring
factions seeming intent on going back to the battlefield to settle matters
there. Diplomats struggled to put the best face on the negotiations by saying
they would reconvene the talks in a few months, but no one expects that to
happen until the Cambodian armies have tested each other's strength.

Upon returning from Paris, Thailand's Foreign Minister, Siddhi Savetsila, said
in a news conference in Bangkok: ''The war will go on and it will be a civil
war. Fighting will be the decisive factor at this moment.'' Diplomats said they
were not sure who would gain the upper hand - the Vietnamese-backed Government
of Prime Minister Hun Sen or the three-party coalition fighting him. The
Chinese-backed Khmer Rouge, who are widely despised because of their ruthless
rule from 1975 to 1979 in which a million Cambodians died, are expected to
launch an offensive. The non-Communist forces of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, who
has American support, will try to make headway from bases in Thailand.

The Equation Changes

Certain to change the military equation is that Vietnam has pledged to withdraw
its 26,000 troops by Sept. 27, and nobody knows how well Mr. Hun Sen's forces
will fight with their backers gone. In addition, there are other uncertainties:
How much will China continue to back the Khmer Rouge? How much support will the
non-Communist opposition forces draw from other powers, including the United
States? Will the Soviet Union increase aid to Mr. Hun Sen? The answers could
determine not only whether Mr. Hun Sen or the opposition will prevail but what
role the Khmer Rouge will play in a Government.

Many diplomats say the combat could be far more intense than in recent years if
the superpowers increase aid to the factions. Military experts say the Khmer
Rouge's estimated 40,000 troops can be expected to make modest to substantial
gains. Mr. Hun Sen's 50,000 troops and 50,000 militia members have performed
unevenly but are expected to hold their own in some areas. Western officials say
Prince Sihanouk's army will do well, although it has had little success so far.

Some diplomats fear that if the Khmer Rouge emerge as the big winners,
Washington will be left in a quandary because it does not want them in a future
government but Prince Sihanouk has maintained his uneasy alliance with them.

The main stumbling block at the talks was that Mr. Hun Sen and Hanoi wanted the
Khmer Rouge excluded from any provisional government, while Prince Sihanouk and
his allies insisted that including them at this stage was the only way to bring
peace. The Prince's allies argue that the time to exclude the Khmer Rouge would
come later, through elections, which the Khmer Rouge could be expected to lose.

''The parties will not come back to Paris until they have tested each other on
the battlefield and have reached an impasse,'' said Tommy Koh, Singapore's
spokesman at the talks. But, he added, ''If Hun Sen's forces succeed in
defeating the Khmer Rouge and the non-Communist resistance, we will not need
Paris II.'' As usual, the only thing that seems certain after two decades of war
is that more Cambodians will die.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Last week's funeral procession for Yusuf K. Hawkins, the young black
man killed in the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn (Impact Visuals/Bill Biggart)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 3, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MISUSE OF THE I.R.S.: THE ABUSE OF POWER

BYLINE: By David Burnham; David Burnham is a former New York Times reporter.
This article is adapted from his book ''The I.R.S.: A Law Unto Itself,'' to be
published next January by Random House. Copyright c 1989 by David Burnham.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 25, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5372 words


PETER K. BROS - CHIEF OF THE RULINGS section No. 2, exempt organization
technical branch of the Internal Revenue Service, in Washington - was responding
to an application for tax-exempt status. Some months earlier, the Minnesota
Association for the Improvement of Science Education had applied for such
status, including in its statement of purpose the desire to encourage the
continued ''teaching of evolution in the public schools as the only recognized
scientific theory of the origin of life on earth.''

In his Oct. 23, 1981, letter, Bros seemed personally affronted by the request.
''When you advocate that 'evolution' should be taught in the schools, state
specifically what you mean by 'evolution' or what 'theory of evolution' should
be taught,'' Bros wrote. ''What gives you the standing or the prerogative to
deem certain version[s] of the origin of life on earth as pseudo-scientific? Why
are you opposed to permitting the granting of equal time in school curricula to
the teaching of the theory of creationism?''

Sister Lucy Knoll, a science teacher in the Roman Catholic school system of
Minneapolis who was also the association's secretary, understood the power of
the I.R.S. and its individual bureaucrats. Within two weeks, she dispatched a
low-keyed, six-page response to Bros's questions.

''The pseudo-scientific versions of the origin of life on earth,'' she in-formed
the tax man, ''are those that are derived from other than scientific data.
Pseudo-scientific versions are put forward by numerous groups in our society,
especially by religious fundamentalists whose views of what the Bible teaches
are contrary to those of modern science.''

Sister Knoll's formal response to Bros was dispassionate. But the complaint she
wrote to Roscoe L. Egger Jr., I.R.S. Commissioner during most of the Reagan
Administration, had a different tone. ''The letter from Mr. Bros is partisan in
the extreme and expresses his hostility toward the scientific view of the origin
of life on earth,'' she informed Egger. ''The questions he asks are those one
might expect from a totalitarian regime.''

Sister Knoll demanded the association's request for tax exemption be assigned to
another official. She and the association's board members also shot off angry
letters to their Congressmen, who contacted the I.R.S. A few months later, the
association was granted tax-exempt status.

In the grand tradition of great bureaucracies, the I.R.S. blandly insisted that
it had all been a misunderstanding. Bros's original response, the agency said,
was merely intended to make sure that the association was presenting a ''full
and fair exposition of the facts'' of the case.

Although Sister Knoll and her colleagues won, in many cases the personal views
of I.R.S. officials have determined how the tax agency interpreted tax laws. The
result: The I.R.S., which regularly intrudes on the lives of more Americans than
any other Federal agency, has arguably become the single most powerful
instrument of social control in the United States, deciding on a wide range of
matters that are far removed from the collection of taxes.

The power of the I.R.S. is based on a number of factors: O Size. With 123,000
employees, the I.R.S. is the largest Federal law-enforcement agency. It is
generally acknowledged as the greatest tax-collection system in the world,
bringing to the United States Treasury an annual $1 trillion from 200 million
taxpayers. O Information. It is a truism that the institution with the most
information usually has the most power, and the I.R.S. has a computerized
national data base unmatched by any other Federal agency. Today, with the help
of high-speed computers, information presented by taxpayers on their income tax
returns is compared with the billions of bits of data given the I.R.S. by the
nation's employers, banks, corporations, universities, car dealers, state tax
agencies, real-estate agents and other assorted record keepers. To collect the
information it deems necessary, the I.R.S. has the power to order - without a
warrant - banks, employers and other institutions to provide data about a
taxpayer. (All other Federal, state and local police forces are required to
obtain a warrant to get such information.) O Legal authority. One unique I.R.S.
weapon is its independent authority to impose civil penalties. If a taxpayer
feels the penalty is not justified, he can challenge it, but because of the
special nature of civil tax law, the legal burden of proving his innocence
almost always rests with him. This contrasts with criminal cases, in which the
burden of proving the suspect's guilt rests with the government. The I.R.S. can
grant or refuse tax-exempt status to various kinds of educational and charitable
organizations, which means the agency's decisions can affect a broad range of
social activities, including the practice of religion, the role of private
schools, the availability of birth-control counseling, and the right of various
groups to present their sometimes unpopular views.

Furthermore, the I.R.S. is empowered to make a ''jeopardy assessment'' - that
is, without prior approval of a judge, to seize the assets of any taxpayer who,
it believes, might be contemplating flight. In fact, a Federal law makes it
extremely difficult for Federal judges to enjoin the agency from making such a
seizure. O Complexity and ambiguity of tax laws. The Revenue Code of the United
States, the law that is passed by Congress, is printed on some 2,200 pages. The
I.R.S. regulations interpreting the law require an additional 7,600 pages.

Last year, Money magazine asked 50 tax preparers to complete the tax return of a
hypothetical couple with three children who earned a combined salary of
$100,000. The make-believe family's investments included stocks, mutual funds
and corporate and municipal bonds, as well as a second home that was
occasionally rented out.

The 50 tax pros came up with 50 different tax bills. When the magazine conducted
the same survey with 50 other tax preparers this year, the confusion was even
greater.

The confusion extends to I.R.S. agents as well. A 1987 study - conducted by the
I.R.S. and the General Accounting Office, an investigative arm of Congress - of
nearly 1,000 I.R.S. employees assigned to answer taxpayer questions, found that
more than one-third of the answers were incorrect or incomplete.

The result is a Kafkaesque world in which neither the enforcers nor the citizens
understand the law. This gives I.R.S. agents a free hand to pick and choose
their targets. O Nothing must stop the collection of taxes. Federal cash
payments - to the nation's highway builders, welfare and Social Security
recipients, defense contractors, and public and private institutions that
provide an assortment of services vital to the well-being of American citizens -
are the lifeblood of Congressional politics. To guarantee their re-election,
incumbent members of Congress must deliver the goods to their constituents, but
Congress cannot give away money unless the Treasury is continually replenished.

This political imperative of not messing with the I.R.S. comes close to being a
law of nature almost as unbending as the force of gravity. The I.R.S. is,
therefore, rarely examined by Congress, which has the major responsibility of
insuring that the agency is working fairly and effectively.

Throughout the history of the tax agency (which began as a continuing
organization during the Civil War), very few commissioners - who are appointed
by the President and confirmed by the Senate - remained in office long enough to
understand and lead the agency. This prevented the tax agency from becoming the
personal kingdom of one man, but it also meant that only a few commissioners
gained sufficient knowledge of the agency to be fairly held accountable for
either its successes or(Continued on Page 50) its failures. The rapid turnover
at the top has guaranteed that the agency is run by a small cadre of senior
civil servants who have spent their entire careers slowly inching up the
promotion ladder. Not surprisingly, most of them are cautious men who have
adopted the I.R.S.'s generally conservative view of the world.

Largely left to their own devices, I.R.S. agents have, on many occasions, abused
their authority for private or political ends. This summer, a House subcommittee
disclosed that some high officials at the Internal Revenue Service had, from the
early 1980's through last year, engaged in questionable and unethical practices.
Furthermore, said the House panel, the tax agency's anticorruption unit had lost
a great deal of its effectiveness.

Abusive and arbitrary acts by I.R.S. agents are nothing new, and charges of
corruption among agents in such cities as Los Angeles, Cleveland, New York and
Chicago have been regularly investigated. But more serious, perhaps, than such
corruption (given the agency's size, most employees appear to be doing an
honorable job) is the misuse of the agency when it comes to political or
ideological issues. The history of the I.R.S. is riddled with repeated instances
of agents acting out of self-interest or pursuing their own ideological agenda,
as well as examples of Presidents, White House staff and Cabinet officials
pressuring the tax agency to take political actions.

O CCASIONALLY, THE actions that the I.R.S. fails to take have as much
significance as those it takes. In 1981, an umbrella group of organizations
favoring abortion rights filed a Federal suit against the Roman Catholic Church,
the I.R.S. and the agency's boss, the Treasury Secretary. The suit accused the
church of using tax-exempt contributions for improper political purposes. It
also charged that the I.R.S. and the Treasury Secretary had ''consistently
overlooked these violations and failed and refused to perform their statutory
duty to enforce the [Tax] Code and the Constitution.''

As one instance of what it viewed as a violation of the church's tax-exempt
status, the abortion-rights group cited ''A Pastoral Plan for Pro-Life
Activities'' that the United States Catholic Conference and the National
Conference of Catholic Bishops had adopted in 1975. One section of this plan
called for the creation of Congressional pro-life action groups that would
''work for qualified candidates who will vote for a constitutional amendment and
other pro-life issues.''

By failing to withdraw the church's tax-exempt status because of these
activities, the pro-choice group contended, the I.R.S. in effect provided the
church with a substantial illegal subsidy for its political campaigns.

The I.R.S. has yet to take any public action against the Catholic Church, and
the suit is still pending in Federal court. For the entire eight years of the
Reagan Administration, say its critics, the inaction of the I.R.S. strengthened
the hand of the Administration's strongest political ally on the abortion issue.

Over the years, the actions the I.R.S. has taken against ''unpopular'' groups
and movements have assumed various forms. The agency has brought tax-evasion
charges, taken away or denied tax-exempt status, or resorted to the annual
audit. Often, the targeted organizations will exhaust themselves mentally and
financially defending against these actions.

For many years, civil rights activities were a major agency concern. In 1954,
the liberal Mississippi publisher Hodding Carter took the then-daring step for a
Southern newspaper of endorsing the Supreme Court's school-desegregation
decision. Almost immediately, Carter's newspaper, The Delta Democrat-Times,
became the subject of a long series of annual I.R.S. audits. Like many who are
selected for intense I.R.S. attention, the Carter family has never been able to
uncover documents that would support their belief that the audits were
politically motivated.

The Carters were not the only I.R.S. targets as the South moved into this
difficult period of social change. In the late 1950's, the I.R.S. began auditing
Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Years later, several of his lawyers and the Southern
Christian Leadership Conference were audited as well. After the auditors raised
questions about some deductions he was unable to document, King settled, paying
the I.R.S. $500 in back taxes. He settled as well with the state of Alabama,
which had also brought civil tax charges against him.

Then Alabama had second thoughts. King became the first person ever prosecuted
by the state on criminal tax charges. The civil rights leader and his lawyers
were forced to expend a great deal of time and money on refuting those charges.
Just before the case went to trial, King's lawyers discovered that he had kept a
personal diary that had detailed contemporaneous notes disproving the charges.
The notes were so persuasive, in fact, that on May 28, 1960, an Alabama jury
defied the prejudices of those times and acquited King.

O N MANY OCCA-sions, the pressure to use the agency as an instrument to curb
dissent came from the White House. John F. Kennedy mobilized the I.R.S. against
the right-wing, fundamentalist Christian ministers who had been so critical of
his religion during his Presidential campaign and his first months in office.

The first warning was in a speech by Kennedy on Nov. 18, 1961. The subject: the
cold war. The President called on the nation to ignore the voices of fear and
suspicion: ''Let our patriotism be reflected in the creation of confidence in
one another, rather than crusades of suspicion.''

A week later, the President suggested how this new enemy should be dealt with.
At a news conference, a reporter sought his views on the legality of campaign
contributions supporting ''right-wing extremist groups.''

''As long as they meet the requirements of the tax law,'' Kennedy responded, ''I
don't think that the Federal Government can interfere or should interfere with
the right of any individual to take any position he wants. The only thing we
should be concerned about is that it does not represent a diversion of funds
which might be taxable to - for nontaxable purposes. But that is another
question, and I am sure the Internal Revenue system examines that.''

Several days later, the tax agency began an audit of 22 ''extremist
organizations.'' Subsequently, several of the targeted groups lost their
tax-exempt status.

During the Johnson and Nixon Administrations, the focus of the I.R.S.'s effort
at political control was individuals and organizations demonstrating for civil
rights and against the American presence in Vietnam. (Publicly, Lyndon B.
Johnson worked hard for welfare legislation and signed the 1964 civil rights
bill.) On June 16, 1969, Randolph W. Thrower, I.R.S. Commissioner during the
Nixon Administration, wrote a memorandum for the record about a meeting he had
had that day with Arthur F. Burns, then counselor to the President. According to
Thrower, Burns said that Richard M. Nixon was concerned ''over the fact that
tax-exempt funds may be supporting activist groups engaged in stimulating riots
both on the campus and within our inner cities.''

In late July, Donald Bacon, assistant commissioner for compliance, sent the
other I.R.S. assistant commissioners and the agency's chief counsel a
confidential statement about the formation of a group to coordinate all I.R.S.
monitoring of ''ideological, militant, subversive, radical and similar type
organizations.'' This unit was soon officially named the Special Service Staff
(S.S.S.).

I.R.S. opposition extended as well to a handful of lawyers who sought to use the
Federal courts as a forum where important questions of social equity could be
decided. The I.R.S. was initially baffled by these groups, which challenged the
performance of both business and government regulatory agencies. Some requests
for tax-exempt status were stalled, some were granted and others were denied.

One such public-interest group was the Project on Corporate Responsibility,
which first filed its application for tax-exempt status on Sept. 3, 1970. Over
the next two years, the I.R.S. asked time and again for additional information,
and lawyers for the project kept asking the I.R.S. for a decision. Finally, on
May 2, 1973, the group filed a suit asking a Federal court to order the I.R.S.
to rule one way or the other. Two weeks later, the project was denied tax-exempt
status.

The lead lawyer for the group - now the Center on Corporate Responsibility -was
Thomas A. Troyer. With court approval, Troyer began discovery proceedings in the
files of the I.R.S. and the White House. He soon found clear indications of
political intervention. The center's application had, in fact, been approved
within the I.R.S. That decision was reversed, however, after it was referred to
Roger V. Barth, a former Nixon operative who had recently been appointed the tax
agency's assistant to the Commissioner.

On Dec. 12, 1973, Federal Judge Charles R. Richey handed down his decision, one
of the rare instances the agency has been formally reprimanded for engaging in
political manipulations.

''A showing of political influence renders the Service's ruling null and void,''
Judge Richey wrote. ''It is outside the law. The court is concerned not only
with direct political intervention, but also with the creation of a political
atmosphere generated by the White House in the Internal Revenue Service which
may have affected the objectivity of those participating in the ruling in the
plaintiff's case.''

The following year, the group won tax-exempt status.

A LTHOUGH NIXON WAS notorious for treating the I.R.S. as though it were his
private domain, the records show that Franklin Delano Roosevelt may have set the
stage for the use of the tax agency for political purposes by most subsequent
Presidents.

One of the most brazen instances of a political vendetta during a Presidency was
the Roosevelt Administration's attack on Andrew Mellon. No historian has been
able to determine why Mellon so enraged F.D.R., but there is speculation that
the New Deal President saw the millionaire who served as Republican Treasury
Secretary from 1921 to 1932 - a time of Wall Street excesses followed by the
Great Depression - as the symbolic enemy. Nor has a document emerged that
directly links Roosevelt to the decision to go after Mellon.

Elmer L. Irey, head of the criminal division of the Treasury's tax enforcement
branch in Washington from 1919 to 1946, acknowledged in his 1948 autobiography
that Treasury Secretary Henry Morgenthau Jr. ordered him to develop tax charges
against Mellon even though he, Irey, knew that the former Treasury Secretary was
innocent.

A Justice Department memo written about the case in early 1934 shared Irey's
sentiment: the charges against Mellon were either invalid or could not be
proved. Nonetheless, on March 11, 1934, the Roosevelt Administration announced
it would seek criminal tax-evasion charges against Mellon. According to the
Justice Department, he owed the Government additional taxes for 1931 of about
$1.3 million, plus a 50 percent fraud penalty. The Bureau of Internal Revenue,
as the tax agency was then known, subsequently upped Mellon's alleged tax debt
to more than $3 million.

The Roosevelt Administration then suffered one rebuff after another. In
Pittsburgh, Mellon's hometown, a Federal grand jury (comprising five laborers,
two mechanics, two farmers, two clerks, two engineers, a carpenter, plumber,
writer, lumber dealer and one banker) refused to indict Mellon on any charge.

The case moved to a new battleground - the Board of Tax Appeals, in Washington.
At the time, the tax board, theoretically an independent agency, was housed
within the executive branch, and board members tended to side with the
Government. But after weeks of hearings and after reading voluminous legal
briefs, the board on Dec. 7, 1937, issued a ruling that rejected the most
significant aspects of the charges. Mellon was found to owe $485,809 - about
one-sixth of the tax agency's claim - but the board dismissed all the criminal
and civil fraud penalties.

On another occasion, President Roosevelt himself, using his influence over the
tax agency, came to the aid of a favored member of the Democratic Party.

In July 1942, the tax agency began a routine examination of the books of Brown &
Root, a Texas defense contractor. What had caught the attention of the local
agents were some company ''bonuses'' and ''attorney's fees'' that the recipients
were hard-pressed to explain. The year before, Lyndon Baines Johnson, an
ambitious young Texas Congressman with close ties to the company, had run for
the Senate. I.R.S. auditors had an informed hunch that the bonuses and fees,
which the company had deducted as business expenses, were actually campaign
contributions, which, of course, were not deductible.

The agent in charge of the investigation was Elmer C. Werner. During the next 18
months, Johnson and his allies made repeated efforts to persuade the White House
to order the I.R.S. to drop the inquiry. Johnson convinced James H. Rowe Jr.,
then a White House staff member, that the investigation had been inspired by
enemies of the New Deal in Texas. Rowe sent Roosevelt a memo urging that the
investigation be halted.

For a while, I.R.S. investigators refused to be deflected. By January 1944,
Werner and his colleagues calculated that Brown & Root owed more than $1 million
in back taxes, plus a 50 percent fraud penalty.

On Jan. 13, 1944, Johnson met with Roosevelt in the White House. A few hours
later, Elmer Irey, Werner's boss, telephoned the investigating agent in Texas.
Irey said he had just been ordered to brief the President on the Brown & Root
inquiry the next morning. Irey asked Werner to send him ''detailed information
on political payments made by Brown & Root Inc. to the Lyndon Johnson 1941
Senatorial campaign.''

Three days after Irey's meeting with Roosevelt, an I.R.S. agent dispatched from
Atlanta to look over Werner's material found the evidence insufficient for
criminal prosecution. All Brown & Root was re-(Continued on Page 58) quired to
do was pay $372,000 in back taxes in a civil proceeding that, by law, was
confidential.

Johnson, with the President's help, had avoided a public scandal that almost
certainly would have ended his political career.

F EW CONGRESSMEN doubt the I.R.S. will strike back if sufficiently provoked. The
fear of the tax agency is so great that many would prefer to give it a wide
berth. Among the cases in which the I.R.S. used its power to squelch or threaten
its Congressional critics are two in which information leaked by the I.R.S.
short-circuited the careers of Senators heading committees that had dared to
criticize the agency.

On Aug. 6, 1968, William Lambert, an associate editor of Life magazine and an
investigative reporter, received a phone call from Sheldon S. Cohen, then I.R.S.
Commissioner. Lambert remembers that Cohen was ecstatic. ''He just wanted to
offer me the I.R.S.'s congratulations.''

The occasion of the call, says Lambert, was the defeat in a Democratic primary
of Senator Edward V. Long, a noisy and difficult critic of the I.R.S. It was an
article written by Lambert linking the Missouri Senator to the president of the
International Brotherhood of Teamsters, James R. Hoffa, that had led to Long's
defeat.

Long, a wealthy banker and lawyer, had been Missouri's Lieutenant Governor when
he was appointed United States Senator on Sept. 23, 1960, after the death of the
incumbent Thomas Hennings. Three years later, Long was named chairman of the
Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Administrative Practice and Procedure, a post
his predecessor had held.

The broad mandate of the subcommittee allowed it to investigate almost any
subject. Long and the subcommittee's chief counsel, Bernard Fensterwald Jr.,
decided to hold hearings on how several Federal enforcement agencies were
improperly invading the privacy of American citizens.

Long's hearings during the mid- to late 1960's on the improper use of wiretaps
and bugging devices by some agencies, including the I.R.S., were given
considerable coverage in the press. In February 1967, Long published ''The
Intruders,'' a book that described how Federal agents had been routinely
ignoring Government rules in their secret surveillance.

I.R.S. and Justice Department bureaucrats involved in ordering the buggings were
outraged by Long's hearings. Although most of the improper surveillance had
taken place during the Kennedy Administration, it fell upon Sheldon Cohen,
appointed Commissioner by President Johnson, to defend the I.R.S.

In late 1966, according to Lambert, an official in the Justice Department who
worked closely with the I.R.S. and who was an old friend, provided him with a
juicy lead about Long. The official told Lambert he should investigate the
connections between Long and Jimmy Hoffa. The link, the informant said, was
Morris A. Shenker, a well-known Missouri criminal lawyer with ties to the
teamsters' union.

''I went to St. Louis, met Shenker and did a lot of other reporting,'' Lambert
recalls. ''Then I came back to Washington and began pumping people I knew in the
Justice Department.'' That was when Lambert was given the final tip that quickly
led to the publication of his story: during 1963-64, Shenker had paid Long a
$48,000 fee (the circumstances of this payment was to become a subject of
controversy).

Lambert says that, although this second bit of information also came from
''someone in Justice,'' the original source had to be the I.R.S. Lambert was
confident of his source because the tax agency and Justice Department were then
conducting a joint investigation of the teamsters. He emphasizes, (Continued on
Page 61) however, that he was not actually shown a copy of the tax returns of
either Long or Shenker. (There was one later case, says Lambert, when the I.R.S.
actually provided him with the tax return of a member of the House.) Lambert's
article ran in the May 26, 1967, issue of Life. There were several charges:
Senator Long was strongly influenced to take up the investigation of Federal
snooping by his friends in the teamsters' union. His hearings on the I.R.S.'s
improper wiretapping had blunted the Government's war against organized crime.
He could have accepted an illegal payoff.

Long denied any impropriety. He said that Morris Shenker was a distinguished
Missouri criminal lawyer with many clients, that the $48,000 payment was a legal
finder's fee, and that the I.R.S. had previously not found fault with it. The
Senator also noted that innuendos were raised about his business and legal
associations only after he had exposed unlawful activities on the part of
Government agencies.

The Senate's Select Committee on Standards and Conduct investigated Lambert's
charges against Long and found no impropriety. Long had been an open booster of
Hoffa, whom he once described as a dynamic and fighting union president, a man
he was proud to support. And though Morris Shenker did have close connections
with the teamsters' union, he was also a longtime political figure in the
state's Democratic Party.

The Life magazine article, however, had a devastating effect on Long's career.
Fifteen months after its publication, an ambitious young politician named Thomas
Eagleton defeated Long in the 1968 Democratic primary and went on to win the
general election. Long retired to his 1,600-acre farm and died in 1972.

Another Senator who incurred the wrath of the I.R.S. was Joseph M. Montoya, the
amiable old-line Democratic politician who had begun his career as a state
legislator in the 1930's. In December 1972, the director of the I.R.S. district
in New Mexico began a search of the agency's files for information about him.

The search was begun shortly after Montoya, chairman of the appropriations
subcommittee that approved I.R.S.'s funds, announced that he planned to hold
hearings on the agency's performance.

For an agency that had largely escaped regular Congressional oversight,
Montoya's announced plan may well have sounded like an open declaration of war.
And it was, in fact, one of the most difficult moments in the history of the
I.R.S. The Montoya subcommittee had lined up a number of powerful witnesses who
were prepared to present evidence that the agency managers were inept. In
addition, the first stories about how the Nixon Administration had misused the
I.R.S. were beginning to surface.

By the time the Montoya hearings got under way in Washington, in February 1973,
the I.R.S. investigation of the Senator was rolling along. At one point, Donald
C. Alexander, the new I.R.S. Commissioner, was reported by the Southwest
regional commissioner as being delighted by the search of the agency files on
Montoya. In the summer of 1973, however, Alexander ordered the Southwest
regional commissioner to drop the investigation.

In October 1975, The Washington Post ran a front-page story by its investigative
reporter Bob Woodward, in which several officials of the I.R.S. accused
Alexander of improperly halting the investigation. The article quoted agency
officials as saying they believed Alexander had halted the audit of Montoya
because of the Senator's influence over the I.R.S.

Woodward reported the story had been leaked by I.R.S. agents. To this day, it is
unclear whether the target was Alexander or Montoya or both. Alexander himself
says a key motive was the hostility some I.R.S. supervisors in the Southwest
felt toward the Senator, a leading Hispanic politician. (Because of the high
sensitivity of the late Nixon years to all questions of secret deals, and
because Montoya had been a member of the Senate Watergate committee, Alexander's
decision was then examined by both the Treasury and the Justice Departments. The
verdict: Alexander had violated no laws, but his handling of the case left much
to be desired.) In a speech on the Senate floor on Nov. 20, 1975, Montoya
insisted that his hearings on the I.R.S. were fair. ''I do not consider myself
to be an enemy of the I.R.S. and I do not believe that the subcommittee has
given any I.R.S. employee reason to be fearful of our power.'' But some I.R.S.
employees were fearful, he suggested, and it appeared that they had decided to
strike.

Although Woodward's story had noted that there was no evidence that Montoya had
illegally evaded taxes or was aware of or sought special treatment from the
I.R.S., the mere existence of a preliminary tax investigation was politically
damaging. One year later, Harrison H. Schmitt, a conservative Republican and
former astronaut, unseated the two-term Senator.

Since Montoya's departure from Washington, the Senate appropriations
subcommittee has not held extensive oversight hearings on the tax agency.

A T THIS SUMMER'S House hearings on corruption within the I.R.S., the former
head of the agency's criminal investigations division in Los Angeles was, among
other charges, accused of harassing a blue-jeans company at the instigation of a
rival that had offered him a job; a Washington official was cited for routing
many of his trips through Atlanta to visit a girlfriend; a Chicago supervisor
was charged with accepting gratuities from a delinquent taxpayer.

Two years ago, a study of I.R.S. managers by the agency itself found that they
saw organizational policy as ''too authoritarian . . . too conservative and too
demanding of conformity.'' As for taxpayers, a 1987 Louis Harris and Associates
survey for the I.R.S. showed that about one out of five Americans viewed I.R.S.
employees as dishonest or not knowledgeable.

On July 5, Fred T. Goldberg Jr., a tax lawyer, became the new Commissioner of
the I.R.S. Whether he can successfully build on the work of his 41 predecessors
remains to be seen. But he and Congress could do much worse than to carry out
the suggestions of the great 18th-century economist Adam Smith.

''The tax which each individual is bound to pay ought to be certain, and not
arbitrary,'' he wrote. ''The time of payment, the manner of payment, the
quantity to be paid, ought all to be clear and plain to the contributor, and to
every other person, so that the tax payer is not put in the power of the tax
gatherer.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Sister Lucy Knoll, challenger of I.R.S.(Stephen Dahl). Sorting tax
returnsat the Ogden, Utah, Service Center.(Roger Ressmeyer).Photos of critics
and targets.(page 26). Photo of computer tape room where tax returns are
stored.(Roger Ressmeyer)(page 27)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 3, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

DINING OUT;
Chinese With an Indonesian Accent

BYLINE: By PATRICIA BROOKS

SECTION: Section 12CN; Page 27, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 897 words


THE name of one of New Canaan's newest restaurants, the Little Kitchen of New
Canaan, could be a little misleading. Instead of the homey image of pot roast
and Mom's apple pie that such a name might evoke, this small restaurant is a
study in the sophisticated use of minimum space and intelligent decorating. Two
tiny rooms are made light and sunny by the choice of color - salmon pink, bright
blue, kelly green and white - in the rattan furniture, posters and walls.

A greater surprise is that the specialties, hinted at in the use of Chinese
celadon tableware, are from China and the countries of the South China Sea, most
specifically Indonesia, Vietnam and Malaysia - home bases of the kitchen
employees.

What sets the Little Kitchen of New Canaan apart from other Chinese-style
restaurants in the area is its menu. True, there are a few old faithfuls -
General Tso's chicken, hot and sour soup, barbecue beef sticks, spring egg roll
- but there are many far more appealing offerings. There are dishes with an
Indonesian accent, and a few that seem to be adapted to and influenced by the
light touch of contemporary American cuisine. Another surprise is the moderate
prices, with many of the better entrees under $10.

A clear favorite among several dishes not to be found elsewhere in Connecticut
was an appetizer of crispy eggplant pancakes with ground beef. It was crunchy
and flavorful enough to convert an eggplant skeptic among us. Another appetizer,
Sichuan dumplings in red-hot oil, while not original, was pleasingly spicy in
its sesame sauce and tasted freshly made, as did all the dishes on our various
visits. In fact, a hallmark of the restaurant is its use of high-quality fresh
ingredients. Nothing tasted tired or reheated.

The Little Kitchen is inconsistent in its menu labeling. Dishes that are starred
for spiciness were sometimes surprisingly bland (home-style curry chicken, an
unappetizing renbang beef stew with fatty meat, and tamarind delicacies), while
several dishes with no stars were among the zestiest.

For instance, cold noodles with sesame sauce, not starred, proved the spiciest
dish of all, enhanced by the creative ornamentation of crunchy bits of
crisp-fried onions on top. (Such touches were evident on other dishes, and many
platters were enhanced by artful vegetable carvings.) An unstarred entree of
China Sea lamb with fresh basil was also deliciously incendiary.

As in so many of the Little Kitchen's dishes, a light hand maintains balance
between delicate and hot, between deft saucing and gloppy saturation. Not a
single dish wallowed in glutinous sauce. Rather, the sauce merely laced
ingredients together, as in green jade chicken, a beautiful platter of sauteed
chicken strips and whole al dente green beans, highlighted by fresh ginger.

Especially good - and subtly seasoned - was ginger duck, a medley of duck
pieces, red and green peppers, sauteed onions and pungent ginger slivers. Ginger
prawns, Chinatown style, consisted of jumbo shrimp in their shells, enlivened by
ginger and a peppery wine sauce. Crispy shrimp with walnuts were glazed rather
than batter-fried crisp, allowing the flavor and texture of both ingredients to
sing loud and clear. Such was also the case with golden sesame beef, crisp but
chewy, sweet and tangy, and prawns, Bali style, laced with ginger, snow peas,
red pepper chunks, scallions and onions.

There were few disappointments. The prawns with mustard sauce lacked subtlety, a
rare problem here. The mustard overshadowed jumbo shrimp, water chestnuts,
broccoli and sweet red peppers in its one-note intensity. On the other hand, the
dish called tamarind delicacies (chicken, baby corn, green beans, broccoli and
red pepper) was too subtle, minus both spiciness and the sour-tart tamarind
tang.

The Little Kitchen of New Canaan, not yet three months old, is good enough and
creative enough to be forgiven its few inconsistencies and occasional timid
seasoning. Even if its Indonesian dishes lacked their characteristic fiery
intensity, the restaurant is to be applauded for offering them, and the chef's
light touch deserves an extra bravo.

The Little Kitchen does not have a liquor license but serves a complimentary
glass of white wine or beer. Dinner for two - two courses each - came to $26,
with tax and tip added. Dessert consists of fortune cookies and diced fresh
fruit served gratis, a brief but satisfactory ending to a refreshing dining
experience.

LITTLE KITCHEN OF NEW CANAAN
Very good

 64 Main Street, New Canaan (across from Town Hall). 972-6881 or 972-6885.

Atmosphere: Small and brightly decorated with rattan chairs, big fans and
posters.

Service: Cheerful, experienced and quick.

Recommended dishes: Sichuan dumplings in red-hot oil; cold noodles with sesame
sauce; crispy eggplant pancakes with ground beef; ginger prawns, Chinatown
style; ginger duck; crispy shrimp with walnuts; green jade chicken; prawns, Bali
style; golden sesame beef; China Sea lamb with basil.

Price range: Lunch entrees $4.50 to $6.50 (includes soup and rice); dinner
entrees $5.95 to $25.

Credit cards: American Express, Mastercard, Visa.

Hours: 11:30 A.M. to 10 P.M. Monday through Thursday; 11:30 A.M. to 11 P.M.
Friday and Saturday; noon to 10 P.M. Sunday.

Reservations: Accepted.

Wheelchair accessibility: Ground-level access.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 3, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Making the Most Of Parkland In an Era of Limits

BYLINE: By JAMES FERON

SECTION: Section 12WC; Page 1, Column 5; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1626 words


A DECADE ago, Westchester's five public golf courses were losing $360,000 a
year, not including another $100,000 in equipment costs. Players who had to tee
off from rubber mats and suffer rough fairways were hardly pushing past each
other to get onto the greens.

Last year, the five courses made a profit of $410,000 and paid for the purchase
of another $107,000 in equipment. Automated irrigation systems had been
installed, drainage improved, tee-off mats replaced by grass and other changes
made at a cost of $4 million. Parking lots were regularly crowded even as the
dawn broke.

'Phenomenal' Change

The change has been ''so phenomenal,'' said Joseph M. Caverly, Commissioner of
Parks, Recreation and Conservation, ''that we are moving to build two new
courses,'' both at the county-owned Mohansic Park in Yorktown Heights, where the
existing course was laid out in 1925.

Mr. Caverly, who is retiring as Commissioner after 14 years, was clearly
delighted with the boom in golfing interest, as well as with the popularity of
other recreational services that the county has developed and tended for many
decades.

The interest in acquiring land for public use was established as early as 1917
with the creation of the county parks system. There are now 32 public
recreational facilities, and with more than 16 acres for each 1,000 residents,
Westchester has one of the highest ratios of green space in the state.

To examine Mr. Caverly's tenure as Commissioner is to learn that appropriate
development is as crucial as acquisition in providing recreation. But is it
possible to have too much parkland, and what are the limitations on expenditures
for the use of this land? Parks commissioners have had to wrestle with these
questions for years.

Mr. Caverly, who is 67 years old and has served in his field for 40 years, said:
''There is an interesting statistic you should be aware of. Westchester has the
highest ratio of revenues to expenditures in parks and recreation of any major
city or county in the nation. This year we project income of $13 million from
fees, permits, concessions and other revenues, and an operating budget of $20
million. In other words, we recover two-thirds of our operating budget while
Milwaukee, for example, brings in 35 percent; San Diego, 42 percent; Los Angeles
23 percent and New York City, 6 percent,'' he said, citing a survey he had
conducted in 1986 for the Urban Park and Recreation Alliance, a national
organization of major city and county recreation officials.

Credit for the county's apparently flourishing parks and recreation program can
be attributed, organization leaders and other observers say, to a positive
attitude about these matters by county organizations, a dedicated parks staff
and enlightened elected officials, in this and past administrations.

Mr. Caverly, who earns $93,855 a year, was hired by County Executive Alfred B.
DelBello, a Democrat, and retained by Andrew P. O'Rourke, a Republican. He has
been supported by succeeding majorities on the County Board of Legislators.
These officials have maintained the interest demonstrated by earlier political
leaders in preserving land for public use.

Under Mr. Caverly, Mr. O'Rourke said, the county's land bank increased by 1,000
acres, to 16,000 acres, with a goal of 20,000 acres by the year 2000. Some sites
have been renewed, such as the plaza at Kensico Dam in Valhalla, and some have
been developed long after their purchase.

60,000 a Year at Muscoot Park

Muscoot Park in Somers is an example. The county bought this 777-acre farm in
1968 from the Hopkins family, ''but nothing was being done there,'' Mr. Caverly
said, adding that ''it was in complete disrepair and there were no activities;
it wasn't opened to the public.''

That changed in 1975 when Muscoot Park emerged as an interpretive farm and
today, after a total investment of $1.1 million, it attracts 60,000 visitors a
year. The farm has a variety of animals - borrowed at first, now purchased - and
offers activities that re-create 19th-century farm life. There are other plans
for it, involving another acquisition, the adjoining 207-acre Lasdon estate.

''Muscoot and Lasdon are separated by the Amawalk River, a fly-fishing stream
that is part of the New York City watershed,'' Mr. Caverly said. ''We'd like to
link the two parks with a walking bridge across the Amawalk, but we'd need New
York City's approval, of course.''

The Lasdon property, representing the kind of gift that county officials seek to
supplement the increasingly costly purchase of property, is the site of the
county's Vietnam Memorial and is scheduled for hiking and nature trails.

A 'Living Will' Gift

A similar gift, the largest given during Mr. Caverly's 14 years as commissioner,
is the 135-acre estate in Bedford, known as Merestead, of Dr. Robert Patterson,
a retired orthopedic surgeon, and his wife, Margaret Sloane Patterson, a
great-granddaughter of the founder of W. & J. Sloane, the home-furnishings
store.

Fearful that the 26-room Georgian mansion would eventually be torn down by
developers - it once required a butler, a lady's maid and six other indoor
servants to keep it going - the Pattersons gave it to the county through a
''living will,'' which enables them to own it and live in it for their
lifetimes.

Mr. Caverly, who said the Pattersons also provided an endowment for the
property's upkeep, envisions tour groups and music recitals. The gift includes a
carriage house, which may become a reception center for visitors who will see
all the furnishings in the main house as well as a collection of letters from
all the Presidents except John F. Kennedy and Warren G. Harding.

The county, under Mr. Caverly, also has persuaded local authorities to help
support recreational sites, such as the Lenoir Preserve in Yonkers, which
contains the Wightman House and is used in part by the Yonkers Board of
Education to teach culinary arts and landscaping. The school maintains the front
lawns of the building and the county the remaining 40 acres.

The County Parks Department also has invested considerable effort into drawing
financial assistance from corporations, organizations and individuals to help
support the increasingly ambitious recreational calendar, which now includes 200
concerts and other musical events offered each year. The number of sports,
entertainment, cultural and conservation programs tripled under Mr. Caverly.

Staff Has Been Cut Back

The Parks Department, meanwhile, has seen its staff shrink under budget cuts
imposed on all levels of county government. ''Ten years ago we had 352 full-time
staffers; today we have 292,'' Mr. Caverly said. ''By 1981 we were closing some
parks, like Willson's Woods Park in Mount Vernon, Kingsland Point Park in North
Tarrytown, Georges Island Park in Montrose and Cranberry Lake Preserve in White
Plains,'' he said, noting that all have since been reopened.

The controversy over alleged political patronage at Playland Amusement Park in
Rye touched Mr. Caverly's office, but only tangentially, he indicated, as did
the costly role played by the Marriott Corporation in managing Playland, where
the hotel chain incurred heavy losses for two seasons several years ago.

Brought in to replace the Playland Commission, which ran the park since its
opening in 1927, Marriott had sought to replicate its successful operations in
Santa Clara, Calif., and Hershey, Pa. But attendance plummeted at Playland to
600,000 a season from about 1 million when the new managers put a fence around
the park. Marriott lost an estimated $5 million over two years, Mr. Caverly
said.

County officials declined to reactivate the independent Playland Commission,
choosing to run the park themselves. E. Richard Keeler, who had worked in other
county departments, had been selected to manage the seaside amusement park. Mr.
Keeler will stand trial Sept. 11 on charges of theft of county services and
illegally ordering county employees to perform political work for the Republican
Party.

New Electrical System Installed

Mr. Caverly, who said he had had nothing to do with Mr. Keeler's selection,
looked toward today's Playland - with no fence and no admission charge - as
ready for expansion with the completion of a $3.5 million renovation of the
site's utilities. A new electrical system ''should mean an end to the brownouts
that had resulted in fire trucks and ladders getting people off the ferris wheel
and roller coaster,'' he said.

''We also have separate meters, so we can tell how much electricity we use at
the ice casino, which operates at a great loss; the beach and pool, and the
amusement park itself, which is close to self supporting,'' he said. He said the
increased power capacity would make new rides possible, such as a water flume
for next season.

Mr. Caverly, who was born in Waverly, N.Y., between Elmira and Binghamton,
attended Ithaca College and spent three years training frogmen in the Navy
during World War II. He then began a career of four decades in the parks and
recreation field, including 12 years as head of Rochester's department and seven
years as San Francisco's director.

Retirement will not close the chapter, either. He said he planned to remain
active as a consultant, ''trying to find top people for recreational facilities,
zoos and administrative conservation jobs around the country'' - a recreational
head hunter, he agreed.

This will done through Creative Leisure Services, a company formed by his wife,
Mary, who ''works with people who are going to retire,'' Mr. Caverly said,
''analyzing their interests, skills, hobbies and things they'd like to do.'' The
Caverlys plan to remain at their home on Lakeside Drive in Katonah.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Parks Commissioner Joseph M Caverly at the Kensico Dam Plaza
in Valhalla (NYT/Joyce Dopkeen)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 3, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

George McGovern Elects Innkeeper

BYLINE: By ANDI RIERDEN

SECTION: Section 12CN; Page 1, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1633 words


IN the freshly renovated lobby of the Stratford Inn, the proprietor offered
visitors coffee, pastries and a handshake. ''Hope you're enjoying your stay,''
he said in a familiar reedy voice to one couple who watched in awe as their
host, the 1972 Democratic nominee for President, filled his cup with orange
juice.

It was late in the morning and George McGovern, looking rested and fit, had been
out for hours, strolling through the lobby, meeting with his staff and chatting
with guests. The night before he had hosted a party for the cast of ''St.
Joan,'' performed at the recently reopened American Festival Theater in
Stratford. The party had lasted until 2:30 A.M.

''We had a terrific time,'' said the former three-term Senator from South
Dakota. ''All 60 members of the cast were here. Andrea Marcovicci sang and
played the piano. Others performed impromptu skits. This place was really
jumping.''

Mr. McGovern, who attended the play with his wife, Eleanor, and two of their
five children, added that he felt an affinity with the American Festival
Theater, the former American Shakespeare Theater, whose revival paralleled his
purchase of the Stratford Inn last fall.

During the 1960's, the American Shakespeare Theater maintained a close
connection with the inn on Main Street, which accommodated many of the theater's
actors and directors. The theater went into bankruptcy in 1981 and was bought by
the state in 1982. This season it reopened as the American Festival Theater.

''It's the fall and rise of the old Shakespeare Theater and the Stratford Inn,''
Mr. McGovern said. ''Once again we're both beginning to flourish.'' Since the
McGoverns bought the eight-acre property just off the Merritt Parkway in
October, they have spent $700,000 renovating nearly all the inn's 150 rooms, as
well as the conference room, lobby, lounge and dining room. Its distinctly
country atmosphere is dominated by earth tones and offers bookbound guests a
fireplace and library. Mr. McGovern said his wife, whom he called a ''genius in
the garden'' planned to landscape the grounds.

Built in 1961, the Stratford Inn had changed hands several times before being
bought in 1981 for $1 million by P. V. Doyle, a friend of the McGoverns' and a
wealthy Irish businessman who owned several hotels in Ireland and the United
States. When a fire destroyed the McGoverns' Washington apartment in 1984, the
family stayed at Mr. Doyle's Normandy Inn on Wyoming Avenue while their home was
being restored.

During their stay, the couple became interested in hotel operations. When Mr.
McGovern, who had made several real estate investments in the Washington, area,
heard that the Stratford Inn was for sale, he flew to Ireland and made Mr. Doyle
an offer. After negotiations, the Doyle family agreed to sell the property to
the McGoverns for $1 million. Its Connecticut site attracted both the McGoverns;
her ancestors had settled in the Stratford and Milford area during the 1640's.

''We think New England is one of the premiere places of the world and we always
loved Connecticut especially,'' said Mr. McGovern, sitting in a lounge chair,
his back facing a window overlooking the Housatonic River. ''Both times when I
ran for President, Senator Abraham Ribicoff made the principal nominating
speech, so I had a connection with the state through him over the years.''

A Corridor of Memorabilia

An eye-catching addition to the inn is the memorabilia corridor where the
67-year-old Mr. McGovern displays posters and photos of his long political
career. On view are photographs of the former Senator with John F. Kennedy,
Robert M. Kennedy, Indira Gandhi, Hubert H. Humphrey and Pope John Paul II.

His favorite is one of a disgruntled hound dog lying and waiting outside the
McGovern California campaign headquarters. The photo appeared on the front page
of The Los Angeles Times the day after the 1972 Presidential election.

''He used to come by to see us every single day,'' Mr. McGovern said. ''He kind
of adopted us. But the day after the election, everything was closed up. So he
wasn't too happy about that.''

The McGovern's son, Steven, 37, hopes to run the hotel while his parents are
traveling or in Washington. Mr. McGovern and his wife recently returned from
Europe where he spent six weeks as a visiting professor at the University of
Berlin.

This fall, Mr. McGovern is teaching a course entitled ''America Since World War
II'' at the University of Bridgeport, as well as leading a seminar on United
States domestic and foreign policy issues. As a visiting professor, he will hold
the university's Frank Mercede Jr. Distinguished Visiting Chair in Public Policy
and Ethics.

The son of a Methodist minister, Mr. McGovern's rise to political prominence
began in South Dakota in 1956, when he defeated the popular Republican House
incumbent, who had underestimated his opponent's hard-driving campaign style.
After losing a bid for the Senate in 1960, President Kennedy appointed Mr.
McGovern the director of the Food for Peace program, which was intended to make
food surpluses available to underdeveloped countries.

Back to the 60's

After a second try in 1962, Mr. McGovern was elected to the Senate. Over the
next 18 years, he established himself as a leading liberal, supporting
legislation to create agricultural and antipoverty programs and Medicare. He
supported ratification of the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty in the early 60's and
later became a strong opponent of the Vietnam War, calling for a complete
withdrawal of American troops.

In 1968, after the assassination of Senator Robert M. Kennedy, Mr. McGovern made
a brief and unsuccessful run for the Democratic nomination. In 1972, pledging to
get the troops out of Vietnam within two months, he won the nomination.

But shortly after the Democratic Convention in July, published reports disclosed
that Mr. McGovern's running mate, Senator Thomas Eagleton of Missouri, had
undergone shock treatment for depression. The disclosures forced the
Presidential candidate to replace Mr. Eagleton several weeks later with Sargent
Shriver.

Richard M. Nixon, the Republican incumbent, depicted his opponent as indecisive
and out of touch with the mainstream. Mr. Nixon was elected to a second term in
a landslide, but the Watergate scandal would soon consume his Presidency.

In the 1980 elections, Mr. McGovern became a prime target of conservatives and
lost his Senate seat to James Abdnor, a Republican. He formed a political action
committee, Americans for Common Sense, which challenged the religious right that
had helped oust him from office. The committee raised $1.2 million for liberal
candidates in the 1982 Congressional elections.

Mr. McGovern disbanded the committee after announcing his bid for the Democratic
nomination in 1984. Though he realized the odds were overwhelmingly against him,
he said he felt compelled to raise some issues.

''I was concerned about our involvement in Nicaragua, the size of the military
budget, the waste at the Pentagon, and the farm problem,'' he said. ''These were
things I felt deeply were being ignored. But as soon as we got into the campaign
and I was assured that those issues were going to be debated throughout, I made
the statement that if I didn't come in first or second in the Massachusetts
primary that I'd leave. I came in third and pulled out that night.''

Maintaining a High Profile

Since he left the Senate nine years ago, Mr. McGovern has continued to maintain
a high profile. He has lectured widely at universities in the United States and
in Europe and served until recently as a fellow at the Institute of Policy
Studies in Washington.

''Even though I enjoyed every day I spent in the Senate, I'm probably stronger
and in better health now then when I ran for President in 1972,'' he said. ''I
led such a hectic life for 25 years. I never even had the time to read novels.''
Mr. McGovern said he now enjoys the novels of John Le Carre and Pat Conroy.
''It's nice not to have to worry about constituents,'' he added. ''Now, I simply
do what I want.''

He said he considers Barry Goldwater, the former Republican Senator from Arizona
and unsuccessful Presidential nominee in 1964, a close friend, and even keeps in
touch with Richard Nixon. ''We only talk about current events,'' Mr. McGovern
said. ''We never talk about the past.''

One of his major projects for the Stratford Inn will include the ''Stratford
Lectures,'' a series of talks and round table discussions by prominent Americans
on the state of world politics. A topic of great interest to Mr. McGovern is
American foreign policy in the Gorbachev era. The series is being planned for
late fall.

''Eventually I would like to see the inn become an informal arts and conference
center,'' he said. ''I think those elements should be an integral part of every
community, particularly a community like Stratford, which has such a marvelous
heritage.''

Now that the inn's renovations are nearly complete, the McGoverns plan to
explore other parts of the state, something they have not had the time to do.
But for now, Mr. McGovern, who occupies a suite at the inn, is content welcoming
visitors, swimming in the pool, and taking long morning walks through the hills
of Oranoque Village, which borders the property.

Though his new role may seem like a dramatic change for some, to Mr. McGovern
there is many similarities between the life of a politician and that of an
innkeeper.

''I'm constanting meeting people who said that they cast their first vote for
me, or that they cut their eye teeth on the 1972 campaign, or that they didn't
vote for me but admire my positions,'' he said. ''I get all sorts of interesting
reactions. There is always a running political commentary around here.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of George McGovern relaxing by the pool of his Stratford Inn
(NYT/Stephen Castagneto)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 3, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER REVIEW;
'Shenandoah': Musical Focuses on Civil War

BYLINE: By LEAH D. FRANK

SECTION: Section 12LI; Page 18, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 731 words


IT is extremely rare that a small local theater will manage to acquire the
performance rights to a show that is simultaneously running on Broadway.

Yet, the BayWay Arts Center in East Islip is now offering a production of
''Shenandoah,'' the 1975 musical that also happens to be in revival on Broadway,
where John Cullum is the star.

''Shenandoah'' is a show that focuses on one character, a Southern farmer named
Charlie Anderson. Mr. Cullum is unquestionably a powerful force in the Broadway
revival.

However, Jack Green, who plays Charlie Anderson in BayWay's production, is more
than competent in the role. What Mr. Green lacks in acting technique he makes up
for with his sweet-toned tenor.

Charlie Anderson is a widower, the father of six sons and one daughter. When the
Civil War breaks out, he is a successful, hard-working Virginia farmer. He
refuses to join the war effort himself, nor will he allow his sons to fight.

Charlie Anderson considers war ''open season on strangers,'' and he will not
have anything to do with it. He is not, however, a pacifist. Not by any means.
Part of the problem with ''Shenandoah'' is its moral ambiguity. Itseems to want
to be a musical appealing to all sides of any political spectrum.

It is said that both hawks and doves can claim kinship with Charlie Anderson. If
that is so, then it is because Charlie Anderson simply avoids getting involved
in anything sticky, like morals, ethics or questions concerning a person's
responsibility to his neighbors, his state and his country.

The play's authors, James Lee Barrett, Peter Udell and Philip Rose, have given
us a character who will not fight, but out of self-interest rather than
idealism. Let anyone threaten his family or his property, and his fists are up
and his gun is out. He even commits murder in vengeance and justifies it.

It is selfishness rather than idealism that motivates Charlie Anderson. In the
end, he is sorry not for his actions, but for his losses.

When this musical had its premiere in 1975, parallels were drawn between the
division of the North and South as portrayed in ''Shenandoah'' and the problems
faced by post-Vietnam America.

But Charlie Anderson, with his ''me first'' attitude and his obsession with all
that belongs to him, seems to be more a precursor of the current yuppie
phenomenon than anything more substantial.

The problem with ambiguity is that it is boring. In the Broadway production,
some of this is mitigated simply by having a large orchestra and professional
performers.

BayWay suffers from all the usual plagues of small theaters, such as budget
restrictions and semi-professional or amateur performers. Nonetheless, its
production will give you as much of a sense of what this show is about as will
the Broadway one. And what works well here works very well indeed.

A third of the show's musical numbers are sung by Charlie Anderson; as noted,
Jack Green's singing voice is a pleasure to listen to.

Another pleasing surprise is the theatrical debut of young David Harris Jr., who
plays Gabriel, the slave boy. Mr. Harris's uncle, Tony Holmes, played the same
role for two years in the original Broadway production.

Mr. Harris has a respectable singing voice and, in spite of some apparent
nervousness, displays an engaging stage personality.

Frank Russo gives a strong performance as James, the intense, married brother.

This cast is capable of delivering everything from the foot-stomping,
hand-clapping songs to the softer ballads, although dancing does not appear to
come easily to anyone on stage.

Jon Grodeski, the director, choreographer and musical director, seems to fit
that proverbial description of being a jack of all trades and a master of none.

Although the physical staging is adequate, the director has ignored all the
possibilities for developing any subtlety or nuance that the story might yield.

What should be the big show-stopping dance number, when the five grown Anderson
sons sing and dance ''Next to Lovin' (I Like Fightin'),'' is an awkward mess.
Too often, the music and the singers seem to be engaged in their own civil war
to test which will command the audience's attention.

BayWay's ''Shenandoah'' balances its flaws and its strengths equally. If you
want to find out what all of the shooting's about over this show, it will be
running at the BayWay Arts Center through Sept. 13.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of David Harris Jr. and Rory Pollinger in 'Shenandoah'

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Colombia's Leaders Take Drug Fight Seriously;
Heading for Invasion?

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 461 words


To the Editor:

In ''Bogota Says It Plans to Extradite Major Drug Financier to the U.S.'' (front
page, Aug. 23), you report on property confiscated in drug raids by the
Colombian authorities, including some 80 planes and helicopters. In this
country, these would eventually be auctioned by the Government to raise revenue.
If agents of the drug cartels repurchased these, it would solve two problems for
them with one dollar; they will have replenished their supplies and laundered a
portion of their drug profits. Perhaps the vehicles should be fitted (in an
acceptable proffer of American technological help) with disguised tracking
devices.

You publish a photograph of a ranch seized near Bogota, prominently showing a
10-meter satellite communications antenna. The photo seems to buttress the Bush
Administration's contention that its opponents in this matter are well organized
and technologically sophisticated.

However, Bogota is only 5 degrees north of the Equator, a latitude at which any
dish using the common commercial communications satellites would be oriented
almost vertically, toward a satellite in geosynchronous orbit above the Equator.
A possible, but less likely, explanation would be a link to a satellite far to
the east or west. Are their communications not working, and by implication, is
their technology and organization not after all so formidable?

The Administration's policy seems to be to beat the war drums in preparation for
possible direct intervention. On the surface, Colombia presents far simpler
logistical problems than Lebanon, with its language and time differential. An
intervention in Colombia could be managed by a day-shift Pentagon and a
Spanish-speaking President.

Fortunately, Congressional and Colombian repugnance for a cooperative invasion
remains strong. Eventual public support might be built on a perceived threat to
a whole generation of American children. While not deriding the dangers of
organized drug running, I suggest the press and the public not overestimate the
power and organization of the drug cartels.

Nevertheless, on their own turf, the cartels are probably unbeatable on any
scale that leaves the integrity of Colombian society and the structure of its
ecology intact. Too many people in Colombia and the surrounding countries have
allowed coca cultivation to become their economic mainstay. The American
struggle against cocaine can only be won by restructuring the fabric of American
culture to make drugs an undesirable alternative to its citizens. It can never
be won by attempting to root out every shrub of an entire continent's major cash
crop. That was a painful lesson learned in Vietnam, Cambodia and Thailand.

STEVEN GODERSKY
  Walnut Creek, Calif., Aug. 23, 1989

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Accounting Talks Go On

SECTION: Section D; Page 18, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 221 words


Arthur Andersen and Price Waterhouse announced yesterday that their exploratory
merger discussions were continuing, as the two former competitors seek to tackle
the 1990's jointly.

The two accounting firms started formal talks in early July with the expectation
that they would hammer out an agreement or abandon the idea no later than this
week. But an Andersen-Price merger, which would produce the world's largest
accounting firm, is proving more difficult to hammer out than expected when the
initial 60-day deadline was imposed.

In a prepared statement, Joseph E. Connor, chairman of Price's international
firm, and Lawrence A. Weinbach, chief executive of Andersen, described the
initial discussion period as ''beneficial.'' Task forces for the firms have been
''exchanging and analyzing information on a wide variety of global business
issues and are making recommendations related to the proposed merger,'' they
said.

People in the industry say the two firms have been having trouble resolving
sensitive conflicts of interest and ironing out differences in their partners's
retirement plans.

The first issue presents the biggest hurdle. Under Securities and Exchange
Commission rules that govern auditors, the firms would have to forfeit certain
important business relationships to consummate their merger.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Short of the Mark;
Bush Talked, Studied and Rehearsed, But Didn't Dazzle in His Drug Address

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 838 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 6


The White House had hoped that President Bush's speech Tuesday night would be
one of those defining moments that occur in every successful Presidency, a kind
of domestic policy version of the highly acclaimed addresses he made in May in
Belgium and West Germany.

This was, after all, the first televised Oval Office speech in a Presidency that
is more than seven months old, and it had been extensively promoted by the
Administration. Mr. Bush had talked and pondered, studied and rehearsed.

But whatever else he may have accomplished, the President did not dazzle
political Washington the way he galvanized the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization with his Brussels and Mainz speeches. He did not make the war on
drugs a bipartisan crusade, and he did not stamp himself as the unchallenged
leader of that crusade.

He tried. Near the end of the speech, he asserted that ''our citizens deserve
cooperation, not competition - a national effort, not a bidding war.''

But the tough response by Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. later Tuesday evening, and
critical comments today by other leading Democrats like the Rev. Jesse Jackson
and Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, served notice that their party
is not prepared to cede leadership to the President on this dominant domestic
question. Mr. Bush got the message, and he responded this afternoon by telling
the Democrats to stop ''carping'' and give his program a try.

Partisan Gains Uncertain

It remains to be seen whether the Democrats will gain any meaningful partisan
advantage from the drug war, which does not seem to have moved voters toward one
party or the other in the past, but they are clearly going to try. It may be
that voters will resent the politicization of drugs and punish the Democrats for
it. Or they may conclude that the President has indeed, as the Democrats charge,
provided too little money for the effort.

The Democrats in Congress will have to meet several tests. They will have to
demonstrate that they have a systematic strategy that withstands comparison to
the one Mr. Bush presented. They will have to convince the American people that
they actually believe more spending and more government activity will solve the
problem. And they will have to show where they would get the additional money
they want to spend.

From the Democrats' point of view, the danger is that Mr. Bush will succeed in
tarring them again as the high-tax party, something the Democrats have been
maneuvering to avoid for six months.

An early test of the politics of the war on drugs could come in just 14 months,
when the issue could figure heavily in the Congressional elections. As things
now stand, relatively slight changes are expected in either the Senate or the
House, but a fierce battle over drug policy could be a factor in changing that.

Goals to Measure Success

In any event, the partisan competition puts increased pressure on William J.
Bennett to produce results. The President's director of drug control policy has
been one of Washington's semi-untouchables so far, but now there are specific
goals, established in large part by himself, against which he and his boss can
be judged. Before the next election, the country, and the Democrats, will be
asking whether drug use has actually dropped by 10 percent, as the President
pledged.

By the year 2000, of course, few people from the current Administration will be
here to answer if the Government fails to attain the second goal, a 50 percent
reduction in the next decade.

Mr. Bush has protected himself to a degree by setting such a modest short-term
goal, much more modest than some of those he discussed in the 1988 campaign.
That limits his vulnerability; in fact, some experts say he cannot lose on those
terms. But it also robbed his speech of much of its potential drama, and it gave
Senator Biden the opening to charge that the United States was about to refight
Vietnam instead of World War II.

The President's speech was marked by a flatness of tone, with none of the
soaring language that distinguished his acceptance speech in New Orleans last
year. There were few readily quotable phrases in the whole thing.

Magic TV Touch Not Apparent

He was ill-served by his producers as well, who provided inept lighting that
made Mr. Bush look pasty faced and two-dimensional and who gave him as a prop a
bag of crack cocaine that he had trouble manipulating. If, as reported, the
television wizard Roger Ailes coached the President before the broadcast, his
magic touch was not readily evident on the home screen.

If it has been fair to compare Mr. Bush favorably with his predecessor, Ronald
Reagan, on such matters as knowledge of foreign affairs, mastery of detailed
policy and high ethical standards, it must also be fair to compare him
unfavorably to Mr. Reagan on television impact. Many people in Washington could
not resist doing that today.

''Reagan would have had a worse program,'' a leading Republican said, ''but he
would have made a better speech.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 8, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1063 words



INTERNATIONAL    A3-9

South Africa's Acting President, F. W. de Klerk, said that Wednesday's elections
gave his party a mandate to push ahead with its plan for evolutionary change in
its system of racial separation.    Page A1



U.S. says South African rulers won support for change    A8


Elections confirm arrival of regrouped liberal parties    A8


Ethiopian factions meet with former President Carter    A9



A Polish Cabinet list was presented to the Assembly. It had 22 members, with
Solidarity receiving nine seats and the Communist Party four, officials said.
    A1



Three Soviet generals were hostages controlled by a group of Azerbaijanis for
five hours last week in the disputed territory of Nagorno-Karabakh, officials
disclosed.    A3



Serbia's President does not desire to establish Serbian dominance in Yugoslavia,
he said. But many non-Serbs think he seeks to raise his nationality, the
country's largest ethnic group, over other Yugoslavs.    A7



Moscow accepted the ''challenge'' from the West to conclude a conventional-arms
treaty in 1990 as talks resumed after a summer pause.    A5



The Israeli plan for elections in the occupied territories seems almost dead.
The Palestinians along with the Arab nations have grown more hostile toward it,
and violence has been picking up in the territories.    A6



Lebanon's Christian army leader denied that he had threatened U.S. diplomats,
who were evacuated from their embassy on Wednesday. Meanwhile, Beirut faced its
worst night of fighting in a week.    A6



Argentina's President will amend a plan for a broad pardon for political
killings committed during the last military Government, officials said. He was
pressured by human rights groups and others.    A3



NATIONAL    A10-13, B5, B20

President Bush's anti-drug plan would cost state and local governments billions
of dollars, William Bennett, the drug policy chief, acknowledged at a Senate
hearing.    A1



A suspected Colombian drug leader made his first court appearance under tight
security, and his lawyer questioned whether he could get a fair trial in the
United States.    B20



The rights of disabled Americans received a boost as the Senate passed
legislation that prohibits discrimination in employment and assures access to
public accommodations.    A1



Farmers who do not use chemicals on their crops are often as productive as those
who do, a study by the National Academy of Sciences found. The organization
recommended changing Federal programs that encourage overuse of agricultural
chemicals.    A1



An environmental code of conduct for corporations was introduced by a coalition
that included the pension funds of New York City and California and other
investors controlling more than $100 billion.    D1



The explosion on the battleship Iowa was ''most probably'' sabotage, and the
ship had a mismanagement problem, the Navy said. Disciplinary action against the
captain and senior officers was recommended.    A11



To develop faster supercomputers, the President's science adviser will introduce
a plan that would double spending on computer research. The President has
endorsed the plan, but has yet to request more funds.    D1



The crash of a United Airlines DC-10 in July may have been caused by a
microscopic metallurgical flaw in an engine disk that spins the fan blades,
Government and industry officials said.    B5



It is unlikely that George Bush was briefed by the national security adviser,
John Poindexter, about all the meetings he missed on the Iran-contra affair when
he was the Vice President, a former aide said.    A10



A plan to restart a crippled reactor late next year was approved by the Energy
Department. The reactor is the only source of a perishable gas vital to nuclear
weapons.    A11



Efforts to repeal the Medicare laws that protect older Americans against
catastrophic medical expenses will be fought by the Bush Administration,
officials said.    A13



Panel votes to ban smoking on all flights in U.S.    A10


Train will revive an elegant era    A10


Olds offers full credit to unhappy buyers    D1



WASHINGTON TALK    A12



Who will lead the N.I.H. if job lasts only till next election?
Pentagon: Military role in drug war evokes visions of Vietnam

REGIONAL    B1-4

The war on drugs is still being lost on the battlefield of the South Bronx
streets. Beleaguered police and residents take little comfort from the
President's address, and drug dealers show only scorn.    A1



AIDS has brought more death to a Manhattan apartment complex than any other
block in New York City, experts said. But residents there have rallied, forming
support groups and donating rooms and money.    A1



Hospital policy is said to hurt AIDS patients    B2



The Koch and Dinkins campaigns are preparing negative radio and television
advertisements. But both sides insist that they would use the ads only if the
other side uses them first.    B1



Mayor Koch has come back in the primary race, and he takes satisfaction in that
fact. ''Six months ago, people counted us out,'' he told voters in Queens. ''But
I always had faith.''    B1



Governor Cuomo has not endorsed anyone in the Democratic mayoral primary, but
with a few prominent remarks, he has made his ''un-preference'' one of the more
highly publicized features of the campaign.    B3



Holtzman ad angers rivals    B1


Campaign Trail: Philosophy on the soup line    B3



Con Ed is under investigation by the Federal Government for six incidents since
1987 in which workers have accused the utility of failing to test properly for
the presence of asbestos at work sites.    B2



A man who may have embezzled as much as $50 million in several schemes
disappeared after a gambling weekend in Atlantic City, just as Federal and
private investigators started sifting through his tangled finances.    B1



Law restricts carriage horses    B4


Two youths survive 10 days adrift    B4


Florio accuses rival of impropriety in land deal    B4


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 8, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Long Beach Journal;
Eyes That Saw Horrors Now See Only Shadows

BYLINE: By ALEXANDRA SMITH, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 731 words

DATELINE: LONG BEACH, Calif.


One Cambodian woman saw Khmer Rouge soldiers tie up her parents, cut their
throats and throw them into a river. Another saw her child bashed to death
against a tree.

Ten years later, in Long Beach, Calif., the eyes that witnessed these horrors
cannot see. These women and dozens of others here in the largest Cambodian
community in the United States have problems with their vision that keep them in
their homes, in some cases unable to care for themselves.

But advanced brain wave tests show that they should have perfect, 20/20
eyesight. Doctors and specialists say that there is no physical explanation and
that what they have is functional blindness, a vision loss caused by
psychological factors.

''They just don't want to see anymore,'' said Gretchen Van Boemel, an
electrophysiologist at the Doheny Eye Institute in Los Angeles.

Five years ago Ms. Van Boemel, who is writing her doctoral dissertation on the
subject, noticed that many patients with unexplained vision loss were
middle-aged Cambodian women with strikingly similar backgrounds.

While functional blindness is a known psychological disorder, there has been
virtually no documentation of the condition in specific population groups.

In her seven and a half years at the Doheny Institute, Ms. Van Boemel has seen
only three American-born patients with the condition. More than 50 years of
research has turned up 30 reported cases nationwide, she said. She has
identified at least 150 Cambodian women with unexplained vision loss in Southern
California.

''I kept seeing women from Cambodia that came to me with basically the same
ocular history,'' she said. ''Usually it was something like, they saw their
husbands murdered in front of them and cried and cried and when they stopped
crying they couldn't see.''

She said all lost their vision sometime after Pol Pot became prime minister of
Cambodia.

More than a million Cambodians were executed or died of starvation under his
Communist Government, which lasted from 1975 until the 1978 invasion of Cambodia
by the Vietnamese, in which he and the Khmer Rouge were ousted; millions more
Cambodians were slave laborers. About 179,000 Cambodian refugees now live in the
United States.

Ms. Van Boemel joined with Patricia Rosee-Koker, a professor of psychology at
California State University-Long Beach, to study 30 of the more than 150
Cambodians Ms. Rosee-Koker had found functionally blind.

Their responses to a questionnaire determined that almost all the women, 51 to
70 years of age, were constantly depressed. All had starved and spent five to
eleven and a half in refugee camps and forced labor camps. Many told Ms. Van
Boemel that their vision began going shortly after they saw a traumatic event.

''I was working in the rice fields when the Communists attacked,'' said Chhean
Im, now 61, who lives in Long Beach with her teen-age daughter and nephew.
''They were chasing and shooting people, so I ran and hid in the jungle.''

Mrs. Im, the widow of a Cambodian Army soldier, stayed in the jungle three days.
''I was just crying, crying, crying and when I stopped crying my eyes were
swollen and I couldn't see,'' she said.

For the next four years, she said, she worked under slave-like conditions,
carrying buckets of water from early morning until dusk. She stood by helplessly
as her three youngest children starved to death. Her eyesight today should be
excellent, but she sees only blurred shadows.

The researchers sampled only women: they found few Cambodian men who had the
affliction, possibly because more men than women died under the Pol Pot regime.

''Our main finding,'' Dr. Rozee-Koker said, ''was that the longer the time spent
in the camps, the worse their psychological condition in terms of psychosomatic
blindness.

''It's almost like a see-no-evil kind of thing.''

When she and Ms. Van Boemel began their research, the scientific literature
involved offered up only one other study of psychosomatic blindness in a
specific population group: World War I veterans in England. Dr. Rosee-Koker said
anecdotal evidence suggests a significant rate of functional blindness among
survivors of the Holocaust and Vietnam War veterans.

The researchers are convinced that intensive therapy would improve the women's
eyesight.

Mrs. Im said, ''When I'm scared, I don't see well and get headaches. When I feel
better, I can see better.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Chhean Im (NYT/Bart Bartholemew)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 8, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

WASHINGTON TALK;
Pentagon

BYLINE: By Bernard E. Trainor, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 677 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 7


A new feature of President Bush's more-of-the-same drug war is the increased use
of the military. But what his promise - to ''make available the appropriate
resources of America's armed forces'' to governments that ask for them -
ultimately means is a mystery even to the Pentagon.

Senior military officers interpret it as providing training, equipment and
intelligence to assist the local police and security forces of the Andean
nations to do the dirty work of tracking down and breaking up the drug cartels.

But these officers share memories of chasing guerrillas in Vietnam. They are not
at all certain that at some point American soldiers will not be thrown into the
fight.

To be sure, the Colombians are now claiming great success in the all-out
campaign begun in the aftermath of last month's murder of a presidential
candidate, Luis Carlos Galan.

But only about 20,000 members of Colombia's army and national police force of
nearly 300,000 men are directly involved, and few of the units are as well
trained or equipped as the private armies of the drug barons. And many of the
officers and men in the Colombian armed forces, as well as those of Peru and
Bolivia, are said to be intimidated by the cartels or on their payrolls.

Recent pictures of C-130 transport planes landing in Colombia and American
helicopters there being prepared for flight by American mechanics evoke
disturbing memories of 1962.

Then as now, the game plan was to let the locals do the fighting while Americans
contributed organizational and technical know-how. The question senior officers
in the Pentagon are asking is why a strategy that did not work in Vietnam will
work in Latin America. Vietnamese leaders also said American advisers and
equipment were all they needed to win the war and showed statistics to prove it;
in Colombia this week, officials produced statistics to show success against the
forces of the drug barons.

''Gringos must not shoot Latins,'' said one general, who insisted that the best
United States contribution to the region's states would be technical
intelligence, training and command and control. It is a sentiment the Pentagon
is sensitive to: senior officers fear that Americans in a combat role would be
resented by Latins more than the drug lords in their midst.

But the United States already has a program with the code name Operation
Snowcap, which uses Special Forces and Rangers to train agents of the Drug
Enforcement Administration in the military skills needed to find cocaine
laboratories. Presumably, in light of the Prtesident's strategy, the agents, who
were withdrawn from the Andean countries because they were at extreme risk, will
now be returned to the jungles.

Many peasants in Columbia, Peru and Bolivia who grew coffee or other crops in
the highlands are cultivating coca leaves as a cash crop. So Americans
accompanying indigenous forces trying to cut off cocaine production by
destroying the primitive drug laboratories in remote and heavily forested
regions like the Upper Huallaga Valley of Peru will find themselves among people
as hostile as ever existed in Vietcong-controlled regions of Vietnam.

In many ways the drug war is not the same as the Vietnam War. For one thing, the
United States is part of the drug war, because of the seemingly insatiable
appetite for drugs here. It is a point the Andean nations seem fond of making.
For another, recent polls show a majority of Americans would approve sending in
American troops if it would help solve the drug problem.

Senior military officers say they saw the first trial balloon in Attorney
General Dick Thornburgh's hint last month that combat soldiers might go to
Colombia if President Virgilio Barco Vargas requested them.

Their view was reinforced by the recent remarks of the White House chief of
staff, John H. Sununu: ''I'm sure the President would recognize that the
American public thinks that the drug problem is so tough and so important that
there is a great feeling amongst American citizens that we probably would take
even that risk.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 8, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Lattimore a Pragmatist Among Ideologues

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 160 words


To the Editor:

Contrary to the impression of Harrison E. Salisbury (letter, Aug. 27), Owen
Lattimore was one of the first United States citizens invited to China after the
1972 door opening. In 1973, with the blessings of Zhou Enlai, he toured the
Inner Mongolia and Sinkiang frontiers and returned in 1976. He visited the
Mongols, Uzbeks and others for whom his sympathies had got him blacklisted on
both the Russian and Chinese sides of the frontier.

To other Westerners, those peoples were all ''Chinese.'' But not to Owen
Lattimore, who could tell various kinds of Communists apart, as well. In his
''Solution in Asia'' (1945), he set out the conflicts that divided Ho Chi Minh
from Mao Zedong and Mao from Stalin, and the openings these offered United
States foreign policy. No ideologist, as Prof. Mel A. Topf (letter, same date)
implies, Owen Lattimore rooted his views in native American pragmatism.

GERARD PIEL
  New York, Aug. 30, 1989

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 10, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ALASKA OIL CLEANUP NEAR END, BUT BEACHES REMAIN FOULED

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY EGAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1574 words

DATELINE: VALDEZ, Alaska, Sept. 9


After spending $1 billion trying to clean up less oil than Americans consume in
a day, the Exxon Corporation's army of 10,000 workers is disbanding, leaving
miles of beaches still coated in thick black goo.

The state environmental department monitoring the cleanup of the 11 million
gallons that spilled from the Exxon Valdez in March says that as much as 7
million gallons of North Slope crude remains in Prince William Sound, oil that
coated rocks, hardened into asphalt lumps or welled deep under pebbled beaches.

Federal wildlife biologists asked Exxon this week to extend a portion of the
cleanup beyond Sept. 15, the date the company set to beat the start of the long
Alaskan winter.

Worst Spill of All

The biologists said the toll among animals was the worst of any oil spill around
the globe. The spill could affect as many as 400,000 birds, otters, bald eagles
and other creatures in this corner of the last great American wilderness.

Officially, 146 eagles, of the estimated 5,000 that live in and around the
sound, have been found dead. But that number, as with 33,000 dead seabirds and
980 sea otters, may represent only 10 to 30 percent of the amount poisoned by
the spill as the oil has made its way up the food chain, Federal biologists say.

Salmon fishermen, kept from much of their fishing grounds by oil this summer,
netted only half of what was supposed to be a record salmon run.

In the days following the spill, Exxon officials promised to clean the 1,100
miles of beach that were stained with oil as much as possible, but over the
summer they said they would make sure the beaches were ''environmentally
stabilized'' in that they posed no further threat to fish and wildflife.

Will Not Be the Same

Vice Adm. Clyde E. Robbins of the Coast Guard, the highest-ranking Federal
official in Valdez, said in an interview Friday that the sound would never be as
it was before the spill. But he said he doubted if any company, or government,
could have done better than Exxon did.

The Coast Guard, which has been responsible for keeping Exxon to its promises
about the cleanup, has allowed the company to wrap up its effort here. Admiral
Robbins said the beaches that Exxon considered stabilized were in many cases
''not clean at all.''

''But we've lowered the environmental risk,'' he said. ''Frankly, we've been in
a time vise.''

Company officials said that if they could be sure the good weather would last
longer, workers would be able to do more to clean the worst-hit areas.

Even Exxon said 50 of the 1,100 miles of beach remained covered with heavy
layers of oil, and the State Department of Environmental Conservation said more
than 300 miles of treated shoreline still was coated with muck that in some
cases is three feet deep.

The harshest official criticism has come from the state. Steve Provant, an
environmental official who is monitoring the cleanup efforts, said Friday,
''This term 'environmentally stabilized' is an Exxon term, and as far as we're
concerned it's meaningless.''

The toughest critics, however, have been the fishermen. Today, about 50 of them
clogged the pipeline terminal in Valdez harbor with their boats to protest use
of the port by foreign-owned tankers. The fishermen say foreign tankers have
little liability in case of an accident.

More Bird Deaths Expected

In the worst-hit areas, the shift of tides washes more oil from deep reservoirs
in remote beaches, posing fresh threats to birds and mammals that will spend the
winter in the sound, one of the most northern saltwater bodies in the world that
remains open in cold weather.

Pointing to new findings on bird deaths, biologists with the United States Fish
and Wildlife Service wrote to Exxon on Wednesday, asking the company to keep
bird-rescue boats and some cleanup crews on the job.

The biologists said they had found a sudden rise this week in the rate of bird
deaths around Kodiak Island, 400 miles from the reef where the Exxon Valdez went
aground March 24. Millions of birds migrating south through the sound over the
next few weeks will be at particular risk, they said.

But Exxon officials say they have no plans to keep cleanup crews on the job
through the long Alaskan winter, which usually lasts through April, because of
storms that could jeopardize the workers' safety.

This morning, the seas were calm, with temperatures in the 50's and the sun
lighting the glaciers that cling to mountains surrounding the sound, but Exxon
and Coast Guard officials point to historical weather patterns that show winter
storms could arrive any day. One storm, with winds of 70 miles an hour,
disrupted the cleanup this week.

Should problems arise, Exxon officials said, they could recall workers from
nearby villages in emergencies.

In ending the cleanup operation, Exxon is closing down the biggest single
payroll this state has seen since construction of the Trans-Alaska pipeline in
the 1970's, dismantling the floating dormitories, reeling in miles of hot water
hoses and scattering a flotilla of more than 1,200 vessels that were assembled
to scoop oil from salt water.

Maine to North Carolina

By Friday, the paychecks that brought cleanup workers an average of $1,800 a
week, in a state where typical wage-earners bring home less than a third that
amount, will be gone.

Prince William Sound will be left to the fishermen and to the native people, who
have lived off the bounty of this northern wilderness for centuries.

Alaska officials like to note that the spill, if spread along the Atlantic
Coast, would run from Maine to North Carolina. On some stretches of beach only a
few hundred yards of shoreline were fouled by oil, but a wider area was
disturbed by cleanup crews.

Admiral Robbins said that by disturbing nesting eagles or running equipment on
beaches that had never felt a bootprint of man, some crews caused more harm than
good.

''When you put hundreds of people on a beach you can chase a lot of eagles away
from their nests and leave a lot of garbage,'' he said.

The bald eagle, America's national symbol, has been one the more visible victims
of the nation's worst oil spill.

'It Was Like Vietnam'

One recent Federal study found that nearly 70 percent of mothering eagles in the
contaminated area of Prince William Sound abandoned their nests, leaving behind
oiled eggs or dead chicks.

Gary Sonnevil, chief Federal biologist in Valdez with the Fish and Wildlife
Service, said the presence of the cleanup machinery and the crowds on the beach
were probably a major cause of eagles' leaving their nests.

''When I first got here there were so many helicopters it was like Vietnam,''
Mr. Sonnevil said. Ernie Piper, special assistant to Gov. Steve Cowper of
Alaska, said, ''What Exxon did very well was procure things, write checks and
get stuff.'' But that does not always mean that a lot of oil was removed, he
said.

Exxon officials said they had done the best they could; the Coast Guard agreed.

K. Terry Koonce, a senior vice president with Exxon in Valdez, said company
officials had ''no regrets, no apologies for the intensity of our response.''

''We have spent in excess of a billion dollars,'' Mr. Koonce said. ''I honestly
don't know how much oil is still out there, but I'm not sure that's what
counts.'' Most important, he said, is that beaches have been treated and
stabilized.

Responding to Congressional critics who say the cleanup should have been put in
the hands of the Federal Government, Admiral Robbins said the Government would
have done a far worse job than Exxon because bureaucracies work slower than
corporations.

''This has been a type of war we've never fought before,'' he said. ''I don't
think anybody was prepared for it.''

He said he would not insist that Exxon return with a full cleanup force in the
spring unless evidence of significant new environmental damage appeared.

Admiral Robbins, citing the country's voracious appetite for oil, 18 million
gallons a day, said, ''Everybody can share a little bit of the blame for this
spill.''

A veteran of numerous oil recovery operations off the Texas coast in the 197O's,
Admiral Robbins said he was shocked when he first came to Alaska this year and
realized that cleanup technology had not advanced since then. $65 Million Paid
to Fishermen More than 50,000 tons of debris and tar balls, picked up by crews
crawling over beaches, were placed in plastic bags and shipped by barge to
Oregon. Other oil was scooped up by floating skimmers or washed off rocks by
steam or slurped up by floating skimmers.

Exxon has paid about $65 million to fishermen who could prove a loss from the
spill.

Although no price tag has been placed on the piles of dead birds and mammals
collected around Prince William Sound, Exxon eventually will be billed by the
Fish and Wildlife Service for a precise amount for wildlife toll, Federal
biologists say. The money will go to the Government.

Some of the fishermen, who have tried all summer to protect their fish
hatcheries from oil contamination, say they are glad to see the cleanup crew
leave the sound.

''Honestly, we would have been better off without a cleanup,'' said David
Grimes, a gill-net fisherman based in Cordova, home port for most of the Prince
William Sound salmon fleet. ''This whole operation was good public relations and
a good jobs program. But I don't think anybody thought they could actually clean
it up.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: workers spraying water on a beach that is still coated with oil from
the Exxon Valdez spill in March (NYT/Jim Wilson); a containment boom being
washed as it is loaded onto a barge in Prince William Sound (NYT) (pg. 26)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 10, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

It May Be Art, but Cuomo's Aides Don't Like It

BYLINE: By SAM HOWE VERHOVEK, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 38, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 333 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, Sept. 9


The painting shows Gov. Mario M. Cuomo as a puppeteer, pulling the strings to
decide where nuclear waste will be dumped.

State officials said Friday they were taken by surprise by the unflattering
portrait, which is hanging at the state-run Vietnam Veterans' Memorial Gallery
across the street from the Capitol. But they won't remove the work. The
officials say the artist did not tell them about the piece when he described
what would be in his show, which runs through Oct. 12.

From now on, they say, they will require written agreements with artists before
their work is displayed in state-owned buildings.

In the painting, Mr. Cuomo is holding the strings attached to a former State
Assemblyman who heads the committee trying to find a site for a low-level
nuclear waste dump.

Artist a Vietnam Veteran

The artist, Norman Roth, is a Vietnam veteran who lives in a town on Lake
Ontario near one of 10 potential sites the committee has selected. The exhibit
of Mr. Roth's works, which also concern the Vietnam War, South Africa, El
Salvador and the plight of mine workers, opened here Sept. 1.

''He showed up here with everything we had looked at, and then he had this other
piece,'' said Tom Tubbs, a spokesman for the Office of General Services.

The work, titled ''When the Albany Deity Sends His Messenger to the Host
Community,'' shows the Governor and Angelo F. Orazio, the chairman of the
commission to select a dump site, over a raised scene that Mr. Roth has
described as ''the burned-out landscape of Central New York.'' A scale holding
dead fish on one side and money on the other is tipped toward the money.

Mr. Cuomo's spokesman, Gary Fryer, said the painting's message -that the
commission is controlled by the Governor - is inaccurate. The Legislature
created the commission.

But, he added, ''The Governor is a great believer in openness and in
Government's obligation to be open to people. Therefore he would not suggest
that this alleged work of art be removed.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 10, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MUSIC;
Anthems and Troubadours That Stirred Crowds to Protest

BYLINE: By HEIDI WALESON; Heidi Waleson writes frequently about music.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 37, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2299 words


On May Day 1934, in concert with laborers from around the country and the world,
hundreds of workers and their supporters demonstrated in Union Square in New
York. Their marching song was a tune just published in the left-wing weekly New
Masses, ''Into the Streets May First'' - by Aaron Copland.

Mr. Copland was but one of several conservatory-trained composers who threw
their talents into the movement for social change in the 1930's. Their efforts
form part of a continuum of protest music that dates back to the earliest years
of American history and encompasses folk, popular and art idioms. Merkin Concert
Hall is about to celebrate this music with ''Voices of Change,'' a five-concert
series that opens Monday evening and continues on Sept. 14, 20, 23 and 24.

Numerous causes - battles on behalf of abolition, women's suffrage, unionism,
civil rights and nuclear disarmament, and against war, poverty and hunger - have
had their anthems and troubadours. ''Protest music builds a sense of solidarity,
of togetherness, of 'I'm not alone - other people are dreaming these things,' ''
says Eric Gordon, a consultant to the Merkin festival and the author of ''Mark
the Music, '' a recent biography of Marc Blitzstein (St. Martin's Press). Neely
Bruce, a professor at Wesleyan University and also a festival consultant, adds,
''Look at the effect of 'We Shall Overcome' on the civil-rights movement. Who
was it who said, 'I don't care who writes a country's laws as long as I can
write its songs' ?''

''Voices of Change'' will survey protest music historically and in terms of
subject and musical genre. The first three concerts will be preceded by panel
discussions on such subjects as ''Roots of Musical Activism'' and ''The Composer
and Musician as Political Advocate.''

The opening concert, dubbed ''Free, Equal and Sober,'' presents paeans to
abolition, suffrage, temperance and civil rights, and features the folk singer
Odetta and the Hutchinson Family Singers, who re-create a 19th-century traveling
musical group with period dress, staging and musical arrangements. Thursday's
''War and Peace,'' with the Western Wind Vocal Ensemble and the St. Luke's
Chamber Ensemble conducted by Rhonda Kess, documents musical responses to war,
from the Revolution to recent decades. Included are patriotic songs like ''When
Johnny Comes Marching Home'' and Ives's ''He Is There''; Ron Gold and Allen
Ginsberg's antiwar ''Amerika,'' and a concert version of Kurt Weill's first
American musical, ''Johnny Johnson.''

The semistaged ''Workers of the World'' on Sept. 20 focuses on 20th-century
labor movements. Though mostly from the 30's, the music includes visions of
those movements by the contemporary composers Frederic Rzewski and Christian
Wolff. On Sept. 23, in a ''Folk Music Showcase,'' the Washington Sisters and
Bright Morning Star perform traditional folk music as well as their own songs.

The festival concludes on Sept. 24 with ''An American Songfest,'' which will
feature choral songs about labor and civil rights and conclude with Earl
Robinson's patriotic cantata ''Ballad for Americans.''

The Hutchinson Family Singers, a Minnesota-based quintet that will present some
of the earliest American protest music, take their name from a clan of
rabble-rousing New Hampshire Yankees that flourished in the latter half of the
19th century. In various combinations that sometimes included outsiders, family
members claimed to have given more than 12,000 performances around the country.

Jesse and Mary Hutchinson first presented their 13 children in concert in 1840.
The family's musical activities came to center around a quartet of the children,
John, Judson, Asa and Abby (baritone, tenor, bass and alto). Successive
generations formed their own versions of the group, and one descendant who
performed until 1896 is, at age 104, still living.

The Hutchinsons were fervent abolitionists, great favorites with political
candidates and close friends of such activists as Susan B. Anthony and Frederick
Douglass. Their songs, many of which they wrote themselves, stirred up crowds.
They performed abolitionist songs for General McClellan's troops on the Potomac
during the Civil War and caused a riot, according to George Berglund, who leads
the Minnesota Hutchinsons and has done extensive research on the family;
thereafter they were banned from performing for soldiers. ''They narrowly
escaped being killed by anti-abolitionists on several occasions,'' Neely Bruce
adds. ''They were often run out of town.''

Mr. Berglund believes that the Hutchinsons had a profound effect on the
political causes of their day - abolition, women's suffrage, sweatshops, even
women's dress reform. ''They brought focus and public attention to the causes
much faster,'' he says. ''Also, this was a period when national pride was really
high. People were starting to turn away from European influences, and they went
into ecstasies over this home-grown phenomenon.'' Mr. Bruce describes the
Hutchinsons' music as ''light classical.'' ''They didn't do big hits,'' he
explains. ''They considered themselves morally superior.''

The close harmony of the Hutchinsons gave way to the less complicated, more
participatory songs of the labor movements early in this century. The activist
Joe Hill (1879-1915) of the Industrial Workers of the World (the ''Wobblies'')
was their troubadour, but his songs usually set new words to old tunes. Workers'
choruses sprang up, many established along ethnic lines, which rehearsed
regularly and rallied the workers. Some still endure: The Workmen's Circle
Chorus, which performs in the final Merkin concert, celebrates its 75th
anniversary this year.

Then came the Depression, and the heyday of the American Communist Party.
Intellectuals - conservatory-trained composers among them - were caught up in
the ideals of social reform. Composers such as Charles Seeger, Elie Siegmeister,
Alex North, Marc Blitzstein and Aaron Copland, says Mr. Gordon, ''thought that
it was criminal, given Depression conditions and the rise of Fascism, to devote
their lives to art for art's sake, and turned to more proletarian-type
audiences. But they went on using the avant-garde techniques they had learned -
12-tone music, Sprechstimme, advanced harmonies.

''They saw no reason to throw out modernism, but rather sought to retrain the
ear of the mass audience. It was a reaction to the folk-type music of Joe
Hill.''

The Composers' Collective of New York grew out of such sentiments, as did its
1934-35 ''Worker's Songbook,'' which includes such creations as ''The Scottsboro
Boys Will Not Die'' by Elie Siegmeister and ''Song of the Builders'' by Charles
Seeger, both of which will be performed in the ''Workers of the World'' concert
by Marni Nixon and Mr. Bruce's American Music/Theater Group. Mr. Copland's
''Into the Streets May First'' was the outcome of a New Masses competition, in
which Blitzstein also submitted a song.

''If you look at the texts of some of those ''Worker's Songbook'' songs now,
they seem naive, even laughable,'' Mr. Gordon says, ''particularly the ones that
celebrate Lenin and Stalin. But if you listen to the music, a lot of it sounds
very fresh, and it was quite sophisticated. 'Into the Streets' was not an easy
song - imagine hundreds of people today singing a contemporary work like that.''

The power of the left permeated high art in the 30's. Marc Blitzstein was
teaching ''Social Aspects of Music'' and other courses at the Downtown Music
School, intended to be a school for workers, and his scathing pro-labor work,
''The Cradle Will Rock,'' was closed down before its opening by the Works
Progress Administration, which had paid for its development. Lan Adomian, whose
songs appear in ''The Worker's Songbook,'' went off to fight in Spain. Plays and
musicals depended on good notices in the Communist press for business.

Kurt Weill's 1936 ''Johnny Johnson'' excoriated the role of industry and the
press in promoting World War I, a switch from the usual patriotic explanations.
And in 1939, the socialist composer Earl Robinson played ''Ballad for
Americans'' for CBS executives, who hired Paul Robeson for the solo part and
broadcast the work across the country. Mr. Robinson recalls, ''I wanted to make
the point that the United States had revolutionary traditions. No one objected
to the revolutionary context; the only criticism was connected with Robeson,
because he was black.'' ''Ballad for Americans'' became extremely popular, and
had a healthy 20-year career among choirs throughout the country.

The 1930's saw the last great outpouring of socially conscious work by
''serious'' composers in the United States, and folk musicians took over as the
voices of change. ''A lot of the artistic world moved in a more populist
direction,'' Mr. Gordon says. ''World conditions were getting more serious, and
people started to wonder, 'Can we afford the luxury of teaching the workers
12-tone music?' ''

Mr. Bruce points out that ''concert music has always been establishment music,
and the patrons of that music are the church, the aristocracy and the rich, who
are not the main proponents of social change. 'Serious' music composers tend not
to get into these issues. Think of the Dreyfus affair: All of the French
intellectuals - but none of the major French composers - signed the manifesto in
support of him.'' Those who do tackle social issues are often ridiculed: Leonard
Bernstein's ''Mass'' (1971), which - inspired by the protests of the 60's -
dealt with rebellion against authority, was abused in some critical quarters as
being sentimental and trendy.

A few living composers have continued to become socially involved, however.
Christian Wolff, whose choral ''Wobbly Music,'' based on texts relating to
Massachusetts mill strikes in 1912, will be presented in the ''Workers of the
World'' program, calls political and social issues ''a major preoccupation'' in
his work. ''I feel a responsibility to deal with these issues in my work, since
I don't do it in other ways,'' he says. ''Music is the way I relate to large
groups of people.''

Mr. Wolff started to bring politics into his music in the early 1970's. He based
his ''Changing the System'' on a speech by the antiwar activist Tom Hayden, set
songs to texts by Rosa Luxemburg and dedicated a trio to the memory of Emma
Goldman. ''It's not direct agitprop,'' Mr. Wolfe says, ''but an occasion to
remind people about political issues.''

Not all concert music uses a text, of course, and the extent to which
instrumental music can be made overtly political is limited. Frederic Rzewski
gets around this problem with melodic references to songs of protest. His
''North American Ballads,'' selections from which will be performed by Ursula
Oppens in the ''Workers'' concert, are based on popular songs: ''The Winnsboro
Cotton Mill Blues'' is a labor song; ''Down by the Riverside'' is an antiwar
gospel tune. Mr. Rzewski's piano work ''The People United Cannot Be Defeated''
comprises 36 variations on a song that was a well-known symbol of democratic
resistance in Chile.

Like Mr. Wolff, Miss Oppens sees her performances of these works more as
education than as a call to action. ''Memories are very short,'' she says. ''I
hope that someday 'The People United' will be merely historical.''

The folk and popular musicians who dominated the social protest scene of the
civil-rights and anti-Vietnam movements, however, like the Hutchinsons and the
Communists and socialists of the 30's, saw their contributions as something
more. Mr. Gordon thinks that today's gay and lesbian choruses, which go beyond
civil rights and AIDS-related material to include other calls for social change,
are the contemporary heirs of those writers and performers.

Then there is the 79-year-old Earl Robinson, who has written about everything
from the founding of the United Nations and civil rights (his songs ''Black and
White'' and ''Hurry Sundown'' were made famous by Three Dog Night and Peter,
Paul and Mary, respectively), to a recent musical about a mythical continent
destroyed by ''misuse of nuclear power.''

After musically chronicling a half-century of movements and upheavals and
observing the apathy that confronts the wrenching problems of today, Mr.
Robinson says he is still undiscouraged. ''I started off in the 30's writing for
the strikers, and I'm still available. I believe we're on the edge of a new age
of love.''

'ONCE I BUILT A TOWER TO THE SUN . . . '

So effectively did the song ''Brother, Can You Spare a Dime?'' capture its era
that its title became one of the lasting symbols of the Great Depression. It
will be sung by Marni Nixon in the concert ''Workers of the World'' on Sept. 24
at Merkin Hall. Here are the lyrics.

They used to tell me I was building a dream,
And so I followed the mob.
When there was earth to plough or guns to bear,
I was always there, right there on the job,
They used to tell me I was building a dream, with peace and glory ahead.
Why should I be standing in line just waiting for bread?

Once I built a railroad, made it run,
Made it race against time.
Once I built a railroad. Now it's done.
Brother, can you spare a dime?
Once I built a tower, to the sun,
Brick and rivet and lime.
Once I built a tower. Now it's done.
Brother, can you spare a dime?

Once in khaki suits, gee, we looked swell,
Full of that Yankee Doodle-de-dum.
Half a million boots went sloggin' thru Hell,
I was the kid with the drum.
Say, don't you remember, they called me Al.
It was Al all the time.
Say, don't you remember, I'm your pal!
Buddy, can you spare a dime?

Words by E. Y. Harburg, music by Jay Gorney (1932); printed with permission of
the E. Y. Harburg Foundation

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of unemployed and striking miners marching on the county
courthouse in Washington, Pa., 1931 (Wide World Photos); ''Johnny Johnson'' song
sheet cover (pg. 37); Odetta (Jack Mitchell) (pg. 40)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 10, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THEATER;
Tim Robbins, Hanging Out With the Gang

BYLINE: By RICHARD B. WOODWARD; Richard B. Woodward writes frequently about the
arts.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 9, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1907 words


At about 6 feet 4, walking with a loose, shambling gait, his face dimpled and
wrinkle-free, Tim Robbins looks like the overgrown kid he portrayed in the 1988
movie ''Bull Durham'' - the baby-faced pitcher with unknown potential.

In a lower Manhattan restaurant he is dressed in sweat pants and T-shirt as
though he had just come from the gym. A pair of spectacles adds another touch:
the bookish jock. But his speech, soft and earnest, and his determination to
talk about theater, and not Hollywood business, dispels his popular image as a
large, charming goofball. He may look like the pitcher Nuke LaLoosh, but he
comes across more like the character he played in last year's ''Five Corners,''
the confident, committed, slightly naive idealist who wants to better the world.

''I try not to do exploitive films,'' he says.when forced to comment on movies.
''I try to avoid those that insult certain kinds of people or that feature roles
with gratuitously stupid women. I want to say something positive.''

At the age of 31, Mr. Robbins may be on the verge of becoming a genuine movie
star. In his new film ''Erik the Viking,'' a comedy directed by Terry Jones and
scheduled for release next month, he co-stars with John Cleese, late of Monty
Python. He has just finished work on ''Cadillac Man'' with Robin Williams, and
this fall shooting will begin for ''Jacob's Ladder,'' a psychological drama
about a Vietnam veteran overcome by personal demons, directed by Adrian Lyne .
It will be the first film that Mr. Robbins will have to carry by himself without
strong co-stars.

But he doesn't want to talk about any of this. For the occasion, he has asked
that he be interviewed with Adam Simon, his colleague in the Actors' Gang, a Los
Angeles-based theater troupe to which both devote a fair measure of their time.
Together they have written three plays, the latest of which, ''Carnage: A
Comedy,'' Mr. Robbins is directing for a run that opens next Sunday at the
Public Theater; it is now in previews. The Gang is rehearsing a block away, and
Mr. Robbins leaves briefly once to check on their progress.

''Taken in the context of L.A., the Gang was an extremely radical thing to do,''
says Mr. Simon, a Harvard graduate who has collaborated with Mr. Robbins since
1985. Founded in 1981 by a group of U.C.L.A. students who met through a softball
game, the Actors' Gang was an unlikely venture: an avant-garde theater ensemble
in a city not known at the time for either adjective. With the direction and
support of Mr. Robbins, who finances the group with money earned from his movie
roles, they have performed standard works from the European Dada and
Expressionist tradition (Alfred Jarry's ''Ubu Roi'' and Ivan Goll's
''Methusalem: The Eternal Bourgeois'') and, since Mr. Robbins and Mr. Simon
teamed up, original plays with a satirical, surreal, political slant.

''What Tim and I want to do is not so much apply European elements to American
theater, but find those parts of our culture that are related to them,'' says
Mr. Simon. Small, as fast-talking as Mr. Robbins is slow, and wise beyond his 27
years in the lore of pop culture, Mr. Simon functions as, in his words, ''team
egghead,'' the partner responsible for hip, historical references. ''We found
those elements not in the American avant-garde but in vaudeville, burlesque, the
medicine show: forms that have always been mixed, dirty, chaotic. We wanted to
ground ourselves in Dada and American popular culture.'' Their first play,
''Slick Slack Griff Graff,'' sponsored by the Los Angeles Museum of Contemporary
Art in 1985, used the confidence game, as practiced by a grifter and his carny,
to discuss contemporary life. The next year they wrote and performed ''Violence:
The Misadventures of Spike Spangle Farmer'' and adopted material directly from
the news: The Challenger shuttle disaster, the plight of Midwest farmers,
American hostages in Lebanon and the news media's reporting of these events. The
lead role was played by John Cusack, a Gang member and Mr. Robbins's co-star in
last year's movie ''Tapeheads.''

In ''Carnage'' the authors have co-opted the language and attitudes of
televangelism, where theater, economics, religion and politics intersect. The
plot traces the descent into madness of a charismatic minister. The various
subsidiary characters, as they seek redemption for themselves or their loved
ones, take any number of deluded or dangerous paths.

The play is about the spirit unbound, corrupted, out of control. Written and
first performed in 1987, before the PTL scandal, Jimmy Swaggart's confessions
and Jerry Falwell's disbandment of the Moral Majority, the play also features
para-military characters who sound like Oliver North, and a family of
suburbanites obsessed by their credit cards and car phone. With much of this
material already cycled through the light-satire mill by stand-up comics, the
play may run the risk of seeming dated, even if it anticipated current events.

''We weren't writing about Jim and Tammy Bakker,'' Mr. Robbins insists. ''Both
Adam and I had read this book ''Blessed Assurance'' by A. G. Mojtabai. ''She
found that a high percentage of the people in charge of assembling nuclear
weapons at a plant in Texas were rapturous about the end of the world. That
really got under our skin. And then the statements that were coming out of the
White House at the time: Reagan talking matter-of-factly about the prophecy of
the Final Days. And Oliver North thanking God that people put money into bank
accounts. We wanted to talk about the connections between right-wing politics
and apocalyptic religion.''

Mr. Simon seems more concerned that liberal, urban theatergoers will sneer at
the play's characters. ''It's way too easy to get a sophisticated audience to
laugh at a bunch of yahoos,'' he says. ''That's not our point. We're saying that
a zealot can be much more dangerous than a confidence man.''

Both authors have impeccable bohemian credentials as the offspring of left-wing
parents, a background about which they are proud and slightly sheepish. Mr.
Simon's parents were black-listed academics who ended up at the University of
Chicago; Mr. Robbins grew up in Greenwich Village, son of the folk singer Gil
Robbins.

''Yeah, we were a singing family,'' says Mr. Robbins. ''Car trips, after dinner,
we were always singing. My first time on stage I joined Dad in a version of 'Ink
Is Black but the Page Is White,' '' a standard of the civil rights movement.
Before U.C.L.A. Mr. Robbins trained in New York as a teen-age member of Theater
for the New City. ''I was in their street theater program for about seven years.
We had a street vaudeville act during Watergate with Ehrlichman, Haldeman and
Dean. I did a sort of song and dance as Haldeman. There was something very raw
about that training that made me want to take chances in the theater.'' Further
deepening his interest in an avant-garde, anti-realist tradition, he also
studied in Paris with Georges Bigot and his Theatre de Soleil.

The plays by the team of Robbins and Simon develop out of a first draft that Mr.
Robbins takes into a workshop where actors try it out. Improvisations are then
incorporated into the script, with Mr. Simon hurriedly writing new scenes that
are immediately subjected to a performance test. The rehearsals in New York have
forced more rewriting. ''When we first started running through it, I was seeing
the same play we had done before'' says Mr. Robbins. ''I said, 'No, no, you've
got to rip it apart and get to the blank page. I don't want to re-create what we
did in Los Angeles.' ''

Film and theater work have fed each other in both their careers. Mr. Simon, who
has written and directed a forthcoming film for Roger Corman (to be callled
either ''Paranoia'' or ''Brain Dead''), used as many members of the Gang as the
production allowed. Mr. Robbins says he would find it harmful if he ceased work
in the theater. ''When I started in L.A. on television shows, I would take four
or five months off each year to work with the Gang,'' he says. ''Everyone said I
was crazy, how was I going to build momentum, et cetera. As the notoriety
increases, I long for this even more. I need this, not only to express certain
things in the writing and directing, but to work with friends of mine who helped
me. They've helped my acting.''

In his politics, loyalty to his friends and triple-threat career as
actor-writer-director, Mr. Robbins resembles a younger John Sayles, another
baseball fan who has figured out how to make Hollywood serve his personal needs.
Mr. Robbins next wants to write a play about the American labor movement in the
1880's; and he is on his second rewrite of a film script, ''a fake documentary
about a neofascist folk singer on the rise in America.''

The team of Robbins and Simon acknowledges the problem of writing populist plays
that will be performed for a small, elitist audience in the theater. ''If there
is a master plan,'' says Mr. Robbins, ''it's to do one more play and take them
all on the road. I would love to play 'Carnage' in the Bible Belt.''

''Tent style,'' says Mr. Simon, excited. ''Set it up, tear it down.'' He
enthusiastically describes a television project for a ''post-apocalyptic
'Gunsmoke.' '' He looks at Mr. Robbins, who winces. ''Tim and I have this fight
whether or not it's politically correct to do post-apocalyptic stories,'' he
says, smiling. ''I say 'yes,' he says 'no.' ''

Both Tim Robbins and Susan Sarandon, who won his heart in the script for ''Bull
Durham'' and later off the set, feel strongly about women's issues. They marched
together at the abortion rights rally in Washington in April, one month before
she gave birth to their son. Mr. Robbins has moved east from Los Angeles and the
couple have lived in New York for the last year and a half, inevitably weakening
his daily ties to the Gang.

His recent film work with Robin Williams and John Cleese has allowed him to
explore on film the anarchic impulses that find outlet in his work for the
theater. In ''Erik the Viking'' he plays a Norseman disillusioned with a style
of life that emphasizes raping and pillaging. ''He's a Viking seeking a better
way,'' says Mr. Robbins. The Monty Python troupe decisively shaped the style of
the Actors' Gang. ''Those guys were major influences on my work,'' he says, an
opinion seconded by Mr. Simon, who adds, ''If you went back in a time machine
and subtracted Monty Python and Mad magazine from history, the sensibility of
our generation would be crippled.''

At the rehearsal loft, a guitarist is leading the 11 members of the Actors' Gang
in a folk sing-along from the play. Mr. Robbins sits down with his metal
briefcase and goes over notes from a previous run-through. Most of his
instructions are the usual directorial maxims: ''Go further with your anger
there,'' he tells one actor; ''try to inspire as well as admonish in that
speech,'' he says to another. But a few phrases sound somewhat unusual. ''Don't
dance with the television until the second chorus,'' he says casually to a young
actor, who notates her script as if this were normal stage direction.

''Dare to be stupid'' is the motto of the Actors' Gang. As wholesome as he may
appear, Tim Robbins is really more of an All-American Radical. What he is
attempting to do in his life and work can't be called, by the standards of film
or theater, either very normal or too stupid.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 12, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

Because of a production error, some copies of the Arts and Leisure section on
Sunday omitted page 9 and carried a page from the Travel section in its place.
The omitted page included the beginning of an article about the actor and
playwright Tim Robbins and the continuation of a front-page article about
''Sweeney Todd.'' Readers wishing copies may write to Production Quality
Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.

GRAPHIC: Photos of Tim Robbins (NYT/Fred R. Conrad) (pg. 9); Tim Robbins and his
co-writer Adam Simon; members of the Actors' Gang (NYT/Fred R. Conrad) (pg. 34)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 10, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

On Campus, How Free Should Free Speech Be?

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 994 words


JUSTICE HOLMES once said that ''every idea is an incitement.'' The phrase has
been used ever since by legal experts who argue that just about any speech
should be protected by the First Amendment no matter how much it offends certain
listeners. This very notion, however, has come under attack as universities
consider whether they should draw the line at racial slurs, ethnic insults or
other speech that is clearly meant to cause mental harm.

At Stanford, Smith, the University of Michigan and other schools, efforts are
under way to combat what has been seen as an alarming rise in racist slurs,
anti-gay taunts and anti-Semitic remarks. At the University of Michigan last
spring, anti-Semitic comments and racist jokes broadcast on a university radio
station contributed to a faculty decision to punish any conduct that
''stigmatizes or victimizes'' people on the basis of not only race, ethnicity,
religion, sexual orientation and national origin but also marital status,
handicap and ''Vietnam-era veteran status.'' At Stanford, a black-faced
caricature of Beethoven was placed outside a largely black students' dormitory.
Stanford, the University of Wisconsin and other schools have reacted to such
incidents by drafting codes - most of them not yet formally adopted - along the
lines of the one at Michigan.

These moves have been defended as necessary to preserve respect for all people
and to protect the increasing racial and ethnic diversity of the universities.
Still, efforts to impose free speech restrictions have opened up a complex moral
and legal debate over whether a university, the very symbol of free inquiry and
unrestricted debate, should respond to the excesses of a handful of bigots by
imposing what amounts to prior limits on expression.

As campuses prepare for the new academic year, civil libertarians are joining
with conservatives to argue that putting limits on some speech sets schools and
colleges on the slippery slope leading to the suppression of unpopular or
unfashionable ideas. In the current issue of Commentary, for example, Chester E.
Finn Jr., a former Assistant Secretary of Education who is now a professor of
education and public policy at Vanderbilt University, hurled a conservative
salvo in an article suggestively titled ''The Campus: 'An Island of Repression
in a Sea of Freedom.' ''

''American colleges and universities are now muzzling themselves,'' Mr. Finn
wrote. ''The anti-discrimination and anti-harassment rules being adopted will
delimit what can be said and done on campus.'' Mr. Finn argued that the charge
of racism, loosely and inaccurately made, has already intimidated scholars.

He cited several examples, including an incident at Harvard Law School last year
in which the leader of a women's group attacked Prof. Ian Macneil for what she
felt was sexism. Among his offenses was quoting a line from Byron (''And
whispering, 'I will ne'er consent,' - consented''), which has a sexual innuendo.
Also at Harvard, a student accused Prof. Stephan Thernstrom of racial
insensitivity after he read to a history class from white plantation owners'
journals without giving the slaves' point of view.

Sensitivity Training

The American Civil Liberties Union has long taken an absolutist view of the
First Amendment and has opposed efforts to punish those who utter ethnic slurs.
For conservatives the concern over free speech is tied to another worry: that
the tide of what might be called minority assertiveness has become so powerful
on many campuses that the traditional academic enterprise is in danger. The
often cited example is the case at Stanford last year, where the faculty
responded to pressure from black students by jettisoning a popular freshmen
requirement on Western culture and substituted another emphasizing what was
called ''works by minorities, women and people of color.'' In his article, Mr.
Finn criticized moves at schools like the University of Connecticut to require
courses aimed at, as the universities sometimes put it, ''sensitizing'' students
to questions of race, sex and sexual preference.

Many conservatives feel that demands for changes like these are being made for
political, not intellectual, reasons. ''The object,'' Thomas Short, an associate
professor of philosophy at Kenyon College, wrote recently, ''is to teach that
minorities have been victimized by American society and are still oppressed by
their fellow citizens.'' Once this idea becomes part of a new orthodoxy, debate
and even scholarship on issues like affirmative action, the status of the
underclass and the origins of homosexuality could be restricted, the
conservatives argue, for the simple reason that some conclusions might be
considered offensive to some students.

While it is difficult to gauge whether campus racism is really on the rise, the
problem of racial and ethnic slurs poses difficult constitutional problems. The
Supreme Court has in the past upheld limits on some forms of offensive speech.
The doctrine is called ''fighting words.'' Lawrence Tribe, a constitutional
lawyer at Harvard, has written that the court has generally been wary of giving
powers to government to ''purge public dialogue of unwelcome words or symbols.''
But in 1942 in upholding the ''fighting words'' doctrine,'' it ruled that
restrictions could be put on words ''which by their very utterance inflict
injury or tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace.'' To be called
''nigger'' might well leave more enduring scars than a physical assault.

Some countries regarded as free and democratic - France and Canada among them -
have strict laws against uttering racist or religious epithets. American
universities could follow their example by punishing those who egregiously
depart from the standards of civilized behavior. Whether that can be done
without paying a cost in the openness of the intellectual world to all ideas is
the difficult question that many faculties will be facing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 10, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

From Caesar To MacArthur, On the Hudson

BYLINE: By HAROLD FABER; HAROLD FABER contributes to The Times from the Hudson
Valley.

SECTION: Section 5; Page 21, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1854 words


IT would be a hard heart indeed that did not beat a little faster at the sight
of the Army's Corps of Cadets, 4,361 strong, in their dress uniforms, marching
in precision on the plain at the core of the United States Military Academy at
West Point. It is a site that reverberates in American history. In 1778, during
the Revolutionary War, Col. Thaddeus Kosciuszko supervised construction of
fortifications on the strategic bluff overlooking the Hudson River. A year later
Baron Frederick von Steuben began to train infantrymen of the Continental Army
there. Shortly after, its commander, Gen. Benedict Arnold, the hero of the
battles of Quebec and Saratoga, turned traitor and tried to betray West Point to
the British.

From its beginning, West Point played a key role in early American history.
After the American Revolution it became even more important as the home of the
United States Military Academy, founded in 1802, and has trained the officers
who have commanded American armies in war and peace since then. The history of
the academy, of the United States Army and indeed of warfare is told in capsule
form in West Point's museum. The museum, established in 1854, has been
remodeled, and reopened Sept. 1 as part of a visitors' complex in the academy's
new South Post.

Although the museum, with an ever-growing collection of weapons, uniforms, maps,
pictures, paintings, dioramas and flags, serves mainly as a teaching tool for
cadets, it is also open to the public. It is one of the key points of interest
for visitors to West Point, which itself is a major tourist attraction. Of the
more than two million people who visit West Point each year, more than 300,000
take time to tour the museum.

It will be a little easier now because the visitors' center, in the village of
Highland Falls, about 50 miles north of New York, has ample parking. The center
is a few hundred yards south of the main gate to West Point on what was formerly
the campus of Ladycliff College. Sitting on the floor of what used to be the
college's gymnasium is a World War II jeep, a World War I tank and a replica of
the first atomic bomb.

After an expenditure of about $10 million, the college's Gothic-style Rosary
Hall, which was built in 1934, has become Olmsted Hall, named for Maj. Gen.
George H. Olmsted, class of 1922, who contributed almost half of the cost. Many
of its interior walls were torn down to make additional open space for the new
museum's galleries.

The building overlooks the Hudson River, but many of its windows are boarded up
to prevent sunlight damaging the fragile uniforms and papers on display. As
another precautionary step, the museum will rotate historic flags, uniforms,
maps and other papers every three years..

The museum director, Michael E. Moss, and his staff oversee a collection of
about 45,000 artifacts, including 7,800 weapons, but only about 5 percent are on
display at any one time. The earliest examples include an Egyptian battle-ax
from about 900 B.C. and Persian swords, axes, daggers and spearheads of the same
period. The first item from American history is a 12-pound cannon, part of the
booty captured from the British at the Battle of Saratoga in 1777 and sent to
West Point for storage and distribution to the Continental Army.

''There has to be some magic in the displays, something that will bring people
into the past and make it living for them,'' Mr. Moss said, explaining that the
museum tries to achieve this by showing personal articles of famous generals and
other leaders. Among them are a pair of George Washington's flintlock pistols,
Adolf Hitler's pistol, Hermann Goering's marshal's baton, Napoleon Bonaparte's
First Consul sword, which was presented by France to Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower
after World War II and the bathrobe worn by Gen. Douglas MacArthur when he was a
cadet (not now on exhibition).

The museum is divided into six major galleries: the history of West Point, the
history of warfare, American wars, the history of the United States Army, small
weapons and large weapons. In addition, the museum displays artifacts in many
places on the grounds. At Trophy Point, for example, where a shaft of pink
marble juts into the sky as a memorial to the 2,230 officers and men of the
regular Army (contrasted to volunteers) who died in the Civil War, 131 cannon,
from the Revolutionary War through the Korean War, are on display. There is also
a segment of the great chain stretched across the Hudson River in the
Revolutionary War to prevent the British from sailing up it.

At the entrance to the West Point gallery is a fine painting of the S-shaped
bend in the river (which is why it was a strategic fortification in the
Revolutionary War) as seen from Trophy Point by Robert Weir, who was a professor
of drawing at the academy for 42 years. There are paintings, drawings and
uniforms of famous graduates throughout the museum.

But there are no portraits, because none are available, of West Point's first
two graduates, Joseph Swift and Simon Levy, who entered on July 4, 1802, and
graduated in the same year. Among the other exhibits in the West Point gallery
are paintings of graduates who made their mark in the Mexican War and the Civil
War, among them Jefferson Davis, Robert E. Lee and Ulysses S. Grant. Much
attention is devoted to Col. Sylvanus Thayer, who is often called ''the father
of the military academy'' because he transformed it into a first-class
engineering school when he took command in 1817.

His sword and chess set are on display, and that chess set unintentionally
symbolizes the academic approach of most military historians, with their
emphasis on strategy and tactics.

But inscribed on the bottom of a large mural depicting the history of weapons
from the slings and javelins of ancient man to the mushroom cloud of the atom
bomb is inscribed this quotation from Gen. George S. Patton, ''Weapons change,
but the man who uses them changes not at all.''

BELOW the mural is a display of cannon, including the first gun, a French
75-millimeter cannon, fired by American soldiers in World War I, an ornate
bronze Chinese cannon captured by Americans during the Boxer Rebellion, and many
artillery pieces of other wars. Prominent in the center of the mural is an
ordinary stirrup. ''It was very important, because it changed mounted warfare,''
Mr. Moss explained. ''It meant that riders on horseback had something to use as
a base for their legs as they rode and could use their weapons more
efficiently.''

The emphasis on weapons of the past and how they were used is illustrated
graphically in two large dioramas of decisive battles in the gallery dedicated
to the history of warfare. One depicts the Battle of Cynoscephalae, in 197 B.C.,
when a Roman legion, using short swords, spears and elephants defeated a
Macedonian phalanx in northern Greece, establishing the supremacy of Roman rule
in that part of the ancient world. Another diorama shows a Roman army under the
command of Julius Caesar laying siege to Avaricum in southern France in 52 B.C.,
with details of the towers, ramps, catapaults and ballistas, the large-scale
crossbows that fired flaming projectiles. It seemed to me, as I toured the
galleries, that the distant past was treated more graphically than more recent
developments, certainly more so than Korea or Vietnam.

AS a World War II veteran and a former war correspondent in Korea, I was
especially interested in the museum's treatment of those two conflicts. Given
that the museum is relatively small, I thought the World War II displays in
various galleries were substantial. Particularly interesting were two large
murals by Linzee Prescott. One showed the invasion of Omaha Beach on D-Day, June
6, 1944, in impressive detail. In the other, Mr. Prescott, himself a
paratrooper, depicts the air drop of Americans into Normandy at the same time.

But the treatment of Korea was scant. It is mentioned in one of three panels on
limited war (in the gallery on the history of warfare) along with the Vietnam
War and the Arab-Israeli conflicts. It is also included in one other panel (in
the gallery on the history of the Army) showing troops in Vietnam, the Dominican
Republic and Vietnam and as occupying forces in Germany, Japan and Korea.

''We have very little on Korea in our collection,'' Mr. Moss conceded, noting,
however, a rising interest in that war, possibly as a result of pressure from
Korean veterans after the recent emphasis on Vietnam memorials. ''But we have
put out an appeal for things brought back from Korea because we want to put
together a display on military equipment and arms used in that conflict.''

Although the exhibit on the Vietnam War seemed to be sparse too, Mr. Moss said
that, like other American wars, it was represented proportionately, although its
artifacts were scattered among several sections of the museum.

''No matter how much we have on display, a veteran of some war is going to come
in and say that we should have more,'' he said. ''It is a concern to us. Our
answer is that we will rotate our exhibits.''

But that won't happen in any major way until 1992.

TOURING THE MILITARY ACADEMY

What to See

The West Point Museum (914-938-2203) is open from 10:30 A.M. to 4:15 P.M. every
day except Christmas and New Year's; free admission.

However, academy officials request the public not to visit on the crowded
Saturdays of Army home football games, this year on Sept. 23 and 30, Oct. 21 and
28 and Nov. 11 and 18.

The Visitors' Center (914-938-2638) is next to the museum. A 50-minute guided
bus tour of the academy grounds leaves from the center every 20 minutes between
9:30 A.M. and 3:30 P.M. from Monday to Saturday and from 11:30 A.M. on Sunday.
Tickets are $3, $2 for children under 12 years.

The grounds are open without charge for walking, except in the Central Post
Area, which is closed to the public.

But the public is invited to see the colorful full-dress retreat parades, which
will be held, weather permitting, at 5 P.M. next Wednesday and Thursday and on
Sept. 20, 27 and 28 and Oct. 18 and 19.

The parades will also be held at 4 P.M. on Oct. 25 and 26 and Nov. 8, 9, 15 and
16.

Dining

The Hotel Thayer (914-446-4731) on the academy grounds is open every day for
breakfast, lunch and dinner. The view is better than the food, but the
atmosphere is pleasant. Dinner for two with prime ribs or steak is about $35,
excluding wine.

Schades, 54 Main Street, Highland Falls (914-446-2626), is one of the newest and
nicest of several restaurants in the village. It has sandwiches from $3.50 and
pizza.

Lodging

The Hotel Thayer is a good choice; reservations are necessary on the weekend.
Double rooms with a Hudson River view start at $59 a day.

West Point Motel (914-446-4180) is one of many motels along Routes 9W and 218
from the Bear Mountain Bridge north to Highland Falls. Double rooms are $50 on
weekdays and $65 on weekends.

Bear Mountain Inn (914-786-2731) is in the Bear Mountain State Park, about five
miles south of West Point. Double rooms are $79 a night.    - H. F.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Fusilier's uniform from British 23d Foot Regiment, in use during the
Revolution; some of the 131 cannon at Trophy Point; the exterior of museum,
which was established in 1854 (pg. 21); Civil War memorial at Trophy Point (pg.
28) (Kit Kittle); map of New York showing location of U.S. Military Academy at
West Point (pg. 21)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 10, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM: SEASON PREVIEW;
In the fall, Hollywood's high-powered stars come out

BYLINE: By Caryn James

SECTION: Section 6; Part 2, Page 27, Column 1; The New Season Magazine

LENGTH: 2386 words


HOLLYWOOD reserves its most serious films for fall and winter, when the darker,
chillier atmosphere encourages moviegoers to hunker down in theaters for
something more solid than the action films and cartoon characters that dash
across the screen in summer. But Hollywood's version of fall will never be, in
Melville's phrase, ''a damp, drizzly November in my soul.'' This season's
follow-up to a summer of splashy special effects and sequels is the presence of
high-powered, high-priced stars in numbers that recall Hollywood's golden studio
days, when box-office names turned out one film after another.

There are two films apiece from Paul Newman, Robert De Niro, Jane Fonda and
Michael Douglas, not to mention Jack Nicholson's ''Two Jakes'' and even two
films titled ''Black Rain'' (one a Michael Douglas thriller, the other a
cataclysmic drama from Japan).

There is even a glimmer of similarity in each actor's roles. Mr. Newman goes for
authority figures, as Governor Earl Long in ''Blaze'' and as the Manhattan
Project's military director in ''Fat Man and Little Boy.'' Mr. De Niro couldn't
be less in tune with authority and power, as an escaped convict in ''We're No
Angels'' and an illiterate factory worker in ''Stanley and Iris.'' Ms. Fonda
takes on educational roles, as the woman who helps Mr. De Niro learn to read in
''Stanley and Iris'' and as a schoolteacher in ''The Old Gringo.'' By
comparison, Mr. Douglas seems perversely versatile, moving from the drama of
''Black Rain'' to the black comedy of ''The War of the Roses.''

Star directors this season include Steven Spielberg, with the adult romance
''Always,'' Woody Allen, with a new comedy-drama, and Eddie Murphy directing his
first film, ''Harlem Nights.''

Whatever all this razzle-dazzle yields, the best surprises are likely to come
from the unusual suspects, those unknown directors and actors Hollywood never
dreamed of banking on.

For a Selective Guide, See Page 30

FILM: A SELECTIVE GUIDE

September

''Black Rain.'' Expect ominous atmosphere and a sharp style in this thriller
from Ridley Scott (''Blade Runner''), shot partly in Japan. Michael Douglas is a
New York City detective hunting a murderer. Kate Capshaw is a sultry bar
hostess.

''Blue Steel.'' Kathryn Bigelow, whose 1987 modern vampire film, ''Near Dark,''
has become a minor cult hit, has written and directed this story of a New York
City police officer (Jamie Lee Curtis) who finds she's in love with a killer
(Ron Silver).

''A Dry White Season.'' Possibly the fall's most amazing cast. Though Donald
Sutherland stars as an anti-apartheid schoolteacher during the 1976 Soweto
uprising, Marlon Brando may get most of the attention in a smaller role as a
lawyer. Also starring Zakes Mokae, Susan Sarandon and Janet Suzman. Director
Euzhan Palcy (''Sugar Cane Alley'') adapted Andre Brink's novel, once banned in
his native South Africa.

''In Country.'' Bruce Willis in his first dramatic film, adapted from Bobbie Ann
Mason's novel about a Vietnam veteran and his niece, who struggle to come to
terms with the war's effects. Emily Lloyd plays the niece, and Joan Allen her
mother. Norman Jewison (''Moonstruck'') directs.

New York Film Festival. This year's schedule opens with Bertrand Blier's ''Trop
belle pour toi'' (''Too Beautiful for You''), starring Gerard Depardieu. Other
films include the Japanese director Shohei Imamura's ''Black Rain,'' a
tough-minded film about Hiroshima survivors; the Australian director Jane
Campion's first feature film, ''Sweetie,'' a black comedy; and a restored, 3
1/2-hour-long print of D. W. Griffith's 1916 classic, ''Intolerance,'' with the
original score played by a live orchestra.

''Sea of Love.'' Another suspense story with heavy breathing and heavyweight
credentials. Al Pacino is a New York City detective who falls for Ellen Barkin,
suspected of being a murderer who finds victims by advertising in a singles
column. Written by Richard Price (''The Color of Money'').

October

''The Fabulous Baker Boys.'' The Bridges brothers, Jeff and Beau, in a
contemporary comedy-drama about two brothers, small-time piano players. They add
a female singer to the act and acquire romantic troubles. As the woman, Michelle
Pfeiffer sings. From first-time director Steven Kloves.

''Breaking In.'' Burt Reynolds, as a safecracker, plays mentor to up-and-coming
thief Casey Siemaszko. Directed by Bill Forsyth (''Housekeeping''), from John
Sayles's script, it will be the last event in the New York Film Festival, before
commercial release.

''Fat Man and Little Boy.'' Paul Newman stars as Gen. Leslie R. Groves, the
military director of the Manhattan Project, in a making-of-the-bomb story
directed by Roland Joffe (''The Killing Fields''). A newcomer, Dwight Schultz,
is J. Robert Oppenheimer; Bonnie Bedelia is his wife and Natasha Richardson his
girlfriend. Also with Laura Dern, John Cusack and John C. McGinley.

''Immediate Family.'' From Jonathan Kaplan, an underrated director whose films
include ''The Accused'' and ''Heart Like a Wheel.'' Glenn Close and James Woods
star as a fortyish couple who adopt a child.

''The Lemon Sisters.'' Diane Keaton, Carol Kane and Kathryn Grody are long-time
friends and a sometime singing team in a female-friendship movie set in the
changing Atlantic City of the early 1980's. Directed by Joyce Chopra (''Smooth
Talk''), featuring Aidan Quinn, Elliot Gould and Ruben Blades.

''The Old Gringo.'' Held back for a year, ''The Old Gringo'' was booed at a
press screening at this year's Cannes Film Festival; but no film starring
Gregory Peck can be all bad. This fictional version of Ambrose Bierce during the
Mexican Revolution, from Carlos Fuentes's novel, also stars Jane Fonda and Jimmy
Smits (''L.A. Law'').

Woody Allen's new film. No title until he's ready, but advance word is that it's
a comedy-drama set in New York - what Allen does best - in the style of ''Hannah
and Her Sisters.'' The working title was ''Brothers,'' and the cast includes Mr.
Allen, Alan Alda, Claire Bloom, Mia Farrow, Joanna Gleason, Daryl Hannah,
Anjelica Huston, Martin Landau, Sam Waterston and Sean Young.

November

''Dad.'' Gary David Goldberg, famed as the creator of television's ''Family
Ties,'' directs another family story in his first film. Jack Lemmon is an
elderly father and Ted Danson his son in this version of William Wharton's
novel. Olympia Dukakis is Mom.

''Back to the Future Part II.'' Everyone was so sure of themselves that this
sequel to the blockbuster time-travel comedy was filmed at the same time as
''Back to the Future Part III.'' Michael J. Fox returns as Marty McFly and
Christopher Lloyd as the absent-minded professor who sends Marty forward to the
future this time. Directed again by Robert Zemeckis (''Who Framed Roger
Rabbit'').

''Harlem Nights.'' In this action-comedy set in Harlem in 1938, Eddie Murphy
produces, stars and, for the first time, directs. Richard Pryor, as the owner of
Club Sugar Ray's, and Mr. Murphy, as his adopted son, are in trouble with the
mob.

''Henry V.'' Comparisons to Olivier's 1945 film are inevitable. Kenneth Branagh
-the acclaimed young British actor who adapted, directed and and stars in this
version of Shakespeare's play - promises that his Henry will be more
guilt-ridden than Olivier's. Paul Scofield plays the King of France.

''Mystery Train.'' Jim Jarmusch's first color film is, typically, understated
comedy (so were ''Stranger Than Paradise'' and ''Down by Law''). Three separate,
overlapping stories take place in Memphis during 24 hours; the stars include
Yonki Kudoh and Screamin' Jay Hawkins. ''Mystery Train'' will be shown at the
New York Film Festival before its commercial opening.

''Steel Magnolias.'' Or, divas and junior divas on parade. Sally Field, Dolly
Parton, Shirley MacLaine, Daryl Hannah, Julia Roberts and - in the token male
role -Sam Shepard star in the film version of the Off Broadway comedy-drama, in
which Southern women chat about life and death. Directed by Herbert Ross.

''Valmont.'' Milos Forman's version of ''Les Liaisons Dangereuses'' goes
straight back to Choderlos de Laclos's novel, with a script by Jean-Claude
Carriere and Mr. Forman. Here, the grand 18th-century seducers are Colin Firth
as the Vicomte de Valmont and Annette Bening as the Marquise de Meurteuil. Their
victims include Meg Tilly as the innocent Mme. de Tourvel and Henry Thomas (yes,
E. T.'s little pal) as Danceny.

December

''Always.'' It sounds as if Steven Spielberg is combining all his favorite
styles here, in a sentimental adventure story with a ghost. This romantic comedy
for adults is loosely based on the 1943 Spencer Tracy-Irene Dunne film, ''A Guy
Named Joe.'' Richard Dreyfuss and Holly Hunter are the lovers; he's a pilot who
fights forest fires by air, dies, and returns from the other side.

''Blaze.'' The writer-director Ron Shelton's first film, ''Bull Durham,'' was an
offbeat romance, but not as offbeat as this, the story of Louisiana Governor
Earl Long's notorious affair with the stripper Blaze Starr. Paul Newman plays
Long; Blaze is played by an actress called Lolita Davidovich.

''Born on the Fourth of July.'' Oliver Stone directs Tom Cruise in his most
challenging role to date, as a quadraplegic Vietnam veteran who becomes an
antiwar activist. From Ron Kovic's memoir.

''Camille Claudel.'' Isabelle Adjani stars as the sculptor Camille Claudel, one
of France's favorite rediscovered feminist heroines. She was Rodin's mistress,
had her own share of talent, and died an old woman in the mental hospital where
she had lived for 30 years. Gerard Depardieu is Rodin. Directed by Bruno
Nuytten, the cinematographer of ''Jean de Florette'' and ''Manon of the
Spring,'' the film won Cesars (French Oscars) for best film and actress.

''Driving Miss Daisy.'' Jessica Tandy and Morgan Freeman in the film version of
Alfred Uhry's Pulitzer Prize-winning play about a 25-year-long friendship. She's
an elderly Southern Jewish lady, and he's her chauffeur. Directed by Bruce
Beresford (''Tender Mercies'' and ''Crimes of the Heart''), and featuring Dan
Ackroyd as Tandy's son, Boolie.

''Enemies, A Love Story.'' Ron Silver and Anjelica Huston star as Holocaust
survivors living on Manhattan's Lower East Side in 1949. Paul Mazursky's film is
adapted from a story by I. B. Singer.

''Family Business.'' Do you believe these three men are related? Sean Connery is
the family patriarch, Dustin Hoffman is his son, and Matthew Broderick is Mr.
Hoffman's son. The film was adapted by Vincent Patrick from his New York-based
crime novel. Director Sidney Lumet (''Prince of the City'' and ''Dog Day
Afternoon'') has an infallible sense of New York City atmosphere.

''Glory.'' This large-scale Civil War film is based on the true story of the
first black regiment in the United States Army, the 54th Massachusetts
Volunteers. Morgan Freeman and Denzel Washington are among the Union soldiers,
and Matthew Broderick plays Capt. Robert Gould Shaw, the regiment's abolitionist
commander. Jane Alexander plays Shaw's mother.

''The Handmaid's Tale.'' From Margaret Atwood's novel about a future world where
religious conservatism rules and all women are handmaids of one man or another.
Harold Pinter wrote the screenplay; Volker Schlondorff (''The Tin Drum'')
directed. Natasha Richardson is the rebellious heroine, Kate, also called
Offred, and Robert Duvall is the Commander, Fred. With Faye Dunaway, Elizabeth
McGovern and Aidan Quinn.

''I Love You to Death.'' A husband (Kevin Kline) and wife (Tracey Ullman) become
closer after she tries to have him murdered. William Hurt is the hit man she
hires, and Joan Plowright is her Mum in this dark romantic comedy directed by
Lawrence Kasdan (''The Big Chill'').

''Music Box.'' Costa-Gavras combines political and family drama. Jessica Lange
is a Middle Western attorney who must defend her father, a Hungarian immigrant,
when he is accused of war crimes committed during World War II. Lucas Haas is
her young son.

''She-Devil.'' Roseanne Barr meets Meryl Streep in this version of Fay Weldon's
wickedly comic novel, ''The Life and Loves of a She-Devil.'' Ms. Barr is the
oversized, underloved wife who takes revenge on her husband and his svelte,
pretty mistress. Directed by Susan Seidelman (''Desperately Seeking Susan,''
''Cookie'').

''Stanley and Iris.'' This is truly what actors call a stretch. Jane Fonda is a
widowed mother who works in a factory, and Robert De Niro is the illiterate
co-worker who learns to read with her help. Director Martin Ritt, of ''Norma
Rae,'' returns to the mill, this one in New England. With Swoosie Kurtz and
Martha Plimpton.

''Stella.'' Bette Midler in a revision of the 1937 Barbara Stanwyck tearjerker,
''Stella Dallas.'' Here Stella is a single mother, but she is still a
working-class woman who sacrifices everything so her daughter can be a social
climber. With Stephen Collins as Steven Dallas and Trini Alvarado as their
daughter.

''Triumph of the Spirit.'' Willem Dafoe as a Birkenau inmate, a boxer forced to
win his survival in the ring. With Robert Loggia as his father, Wendy Gazelle as
his lover and Edward James Olmos as a gypsy prisoner.

''The Two Jakes.'' Fifteen years after starring in Roman Polanski's
''Chinatown,'' Jack Nicholson stars in and directs this sequel. Mr. Nicholson is
the original Jake, private eye, and Harvey Keitel is the other Jake in a
thriller set in 1940's Los Angeles. The screenplay is once again by Robert
Towne.

''The War of the Roses.'' Danny DeVito (whose first film was ''Throw Momma From
the Train'') directs himself, Michael Douglas and Kathleen Turner in a black
comedy about a knockdown, drag-out divorce. Mr. Douglas and Ms. Turner are the
battling professional couple, Oliver and Barbara Rose; Mr. DeVito is a lawyer.

''We're No Angels.'' Robert De Niro and Sean Penn are the non-angels. They're
convicts who escape to Canada in 1935 in a story loosely based on the 1955
Humphrey Bogart-Aldo Ray-Peter Ustinov film. Directed by Neil Jordan (''Mona
Lisa'') from a screenplay by David Mamet. How tough can you get?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Schedule

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 10, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

TELEVISION;
Prime Time Puts On A Happy Face

BYLINE: By Bill Carter; Bill Carter reports on television for The New York
Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Part 2, Page 48, Column 2; The New Season Magazine

LENGTH: 1655 words


TELEVISION PROGRAMMERS ALL HAVE a certain predilection for sociology. They try
to take the pulse of the nation, looking for a key that will translate into
habit-forming television viewing. This year, it's the family. Nuclear and
non-nuclear, blended and extended, families of one sort or another are the focus
of most of the major networks' new shows. Nobody argues that it's a breakthrough
concept. But the network programming departments seem to feel the time for
breakthrough concepts is over anyway.

Kim LeMasters, who has suffered in third place for two straight seasons as
president of CBS Entertainment, offers a rationale for the swing to the family
motif. ''George Bush was right,'' he says. ''America is seeking a kinder,
gentler nation. I think the nation wants to be much more nuclear than it is.
Whatever the reason - crime, drugs, the greenhouse effect, AIDS - people are
clustering together.''

The idea is to get them to cluster in front of network channels. ''If we provide
a safe haven,'' Mr. LeMasters says, ''if we re-establish American values - not
to sound too corny about it - they'll come to us.''

With the notable exception of an NBC series called ''Hardball,'' which hopes to
elevate an actor named Richard Tyson to sex symbol of the season, the fall
schedule follows the family philosophy with remarkable consistency.

ABC has given its best time period (after ''Roseanne'' on Tuesday night at 9:30)
to a comedy called ''Chicken Soup,'' starring Jackie Mason as a former pajama
salesman falling for an Irish widow with three children who works in an
inner-city community center. ''Chicken Soup'' is the fourth comedy series from
the production team of Marcy Carsey and Tom Werner, who have already provided
network television with ''The Cosby Show,'' ''A Different World'' and
''Roseanne.'' Given those production credits and the unusual casting of the
suddenly hot Mason with Lynn Redgrave, who plays the widow, ''Chicken Soup'' was
the easiest program selection ABC had to make.

CBS has much riding on ''Major Dad'' (Monday night at 8), a comedy starring
Gerald McRaney as a Marine about to settle down with a new wife and her three
daughters. NBC, searching to replace ''Family Ties'' on Sunday night at 8, has a
comedy called ''Sister Kate,'' which features Stephanie Beacham as a hard-edged
but funny nun taking care of a crop of inner-city orphans. Another ABC comedy,
''Free Spirit'' (Sunday at 8), concerns a divorced father of three who doesn't
realize his attractive housekeeper, played by Corrine Bohrer, is actually a
witch. A CBS comedy, ''The People Next Door'' (Monday at 8:30), centers on a
cartoonist (Jeffrey Jones) with a wife, two children and supernatural
imaginative powers. ABC even has a new comedy called ''Family Matters'' (Friday
at 8:30), which takes Jo Marie Payton-France's character from ''Perfect
Strangers'' and surrounds her with a husband, three children, a sister, a baby
nephew and a mother-in-law.

The drama side is also heavily populated with families, including Lindsay
Wagner, the single-parent zookeeper on CBS's ''Peaceable Kingdom'' (Wednesday at
8) with the requisite three children and a brother who works with her (Tom
Wopat). In ABC's ''Life Goes On'' (Sunday at 7), Patti LuPone stars as the head
of a working-class family with an 18-year-old son who has Down's syndrome,
played by Chris Burke, a young actor who actually has the condition.

The point of all this emphasis on family is to induce all family members to tune
in - an approach that has turned recent programming strategy on its head. For
the last several years, the networks have felt compelled to follow a ''niche''
strategy, trying to grab key pockets of viewers rather than the great mass of
them, as networks did in their golden, pre-cable, era.

Niche programming resulted in an increase in programs for specialized tastes.
''In the past couple of years, we did a lot of experimental things,'' Mr.
LeMasters says. ''Dramadies, shows that were yuppified. We tackled areas like
Vietnam, even tried romantic fantasy. Then you see a show like 'Matlock' become
a hit on NBC. The audience is telling us something. What they're saying they
want is something I call 'pure TV.' They can get that fractionalized,
target-specific stuff on cable, or movies on tape. We decided to try to give
them pure TV, shows you can only get on network television.''

That translates to family-centered shows, the comeback of familiar stars (CBS is
bringing back Richard Chamberlain, the former Dr. Kildare, in ''Island Son'' as
a doctor who works in a hospital in Hawaii; NBC is bringing back Harvey Korman
and Cloris Leachman in a comedy called ''Nutt House'') and, particularly, the
heaviest proportion of comedies in television history. ABC, adding six new
comedies, will have a record 16 on its schedule. ''Of course there's a comedy
glut,'' Mr. LeMasters says. ''The sitcom is by definition pure TV. It was
invented by television.''

ROBERT A. IGER, ABC'S new president of entertainment, was only two months into
the job this spring when he had to make the prime-time decisions. He didn't
think much about pure TV. He thought more about survival TV. The audience for
network television, down to 67.2 percent of the available viewers and probably
falling, has made trying to put together a schedule an ever more uncertain
business. NBC's dominance of the thinning audience in prime time (the network
pitched a perfect season in 1988-89, finishing first every week) has greatly
complicated the job. Do you take on NBC aggressively, or do you play to be
second? The new reality of prime time is that third place is no place. In most
time periods, there are not enough people watching the networks to sustain three
shows.

ABC has loaded up on comedy, Mr. Iger says, because it had such a wretched
record trying to launch hour-long shows last year. ''It's become a two-network
business,'' Mr. Iger says. ''You have to try never to put a program in a given
area that has a chance to be third.''

This line of thinking did not lead to a batch of innovative new shows on ABC.
''The whole process of sampling a TV series has changed radically,'' Mr. Iger
says. ''The audience may never try a show; or, if they do once and don't
instantly like it, they may never come back to it again. Comedy at least doesn't
ask much of the audience. It's like a quick hit. Drama is much heavier; it
requires more commitment.''

Mr. LeMasters cites a series CBS had great hopes for last fall, ''TV 101,'' a
show set in a video class in high school that covered such teen-age problems as
drugs and abortion. The test viewers generally liked the show, but when they
were asked whether they would choose to watch it again, they almost invariably
said no. ''It challenged the audience,'' he says. ''It was one of the best
dramas we've done. But, well, it got in your face. You won't be seeing many new
shows get in your face on TV this season.''

While the programmers at CBS and ABC take to the defensive, leaning toward safe
formulas rather than risky experiments, Brandon Tartikoff, president of NBC
Entertainment, has the luxury of contemplating the big picture, calculating what
it might take, not just to win, but to win back some of those network viewers
lost to cable wanderlust.

If anyone asks ''Where's the heat?'' in this kinder and gentler new season, NBC
intends to supply the answer: Richard Tyson, one of the stars of ''Hardball,'' a
police action drama that Mr. Tartikoff has scheduled on Friday night at 9.

Mr. Tyson plays an unorthodox young cop, with long hair and an ostentatious
earring, paired with a gruff, balding veteran cop played by John Ashton.
Baseball is a running theme. Mr. Ashton still plays it, seriously and
ferociously; Mr. Tyson plays it as a lark. Given the policework format, there
inevitably will be plenty of typical television action, but the series will
surely depend more on character chemistry.

The show's premise is, as Mr. Tartikoff himself admits, ''strictly meat and
potatoes,'' but he expects Mr. Tyson to break through as the season's new sexy
male idol. ''If you look at what's been missing from television,'' Mr. Tartikoff
says, ''there has been a vacuum in personalities. There really wasn't anybody
from last season's crop of new people I even wanted to put in a TV movie. But if
this guy Tyson supplies some heat, when Don Johnson and Bruce Willis - the two
hottest guys in the past five years, guys who have been all over every magazine
cover, from GQ to Rolling Stone - are both gone in the same season, he could
fill that void.'' And NBC could solve a problem on the only night it has one.

MR. TARTIKOFF'S AP-proach has changed several times in the 10 years he has been
putting prime-time schedules together. He went through the niche strategy and
now has come to believe it is the wrong game for the networks to play. ''It's
real dangerous,'' he says. ''When you have a show so specific in terms of who it
appeals to, if you miss you have a total disaster.''

''I try to think of the ideal television viewer,'' he explains, ''the one
attracted to the shows that the advertisers, the critics, the affiliates all
love - the 'L.A. Law' and 'Cheers' kind of shows. You'd guess that the key
viewer is in his late 30's or early 40's; his wife is college educated, probably
works; they have two or three kids and one is a teen-ager. This household
probably has a set with 20 or 30 channels and a VCR. What I'm trying to put into
place is something that gives those viewers two to three hours each night, in
order to get them back into network television.''

But not even Mr. Tartikoff thinks he is going to get viewers back en masse this
fall. ''People don't sit around with their TV magazine checking off the new
series as they roll past. Those days are long gone. Is it important that people
perceive the fall season as being special and great? Probably not.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 10, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

Because of a production error, an article today on page 48 of The New Season,
part 2 of The Times Magazine, misstates the role of Tom Wopat in the CBS series
''Peaceable Kingdom.'' He plays Lindsay Wagner's brother.

GRAPHIC: photos of scenes from new television programs

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 12, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Japan to Deport Chinese 'Economic Refugees'

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 545 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Sept. 11


Trying to stem the tide of boat people landing on its shores, Japan said today
that it would deport more than 600 Chinese who reportedly misrepresented
themselves as refugees from Vietnam, and who seem certain to face punishment
once they return to China.

The deportation plan marks the first application of a new policy for screening
immigrants that began this week.

Under the plan, supported by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Japan will not accept ''economic refugees'' who are solely drawn by the
country's wealth.

The Japanese Government said it would continue accepting refugees from Vietnam
and elsewhere in Indochina. The emigres have been arriving here in increasing
numbers as Asian ports like Hong Kong have taken a harder line against accepting
boat people. The Government also said it would evaluate claims for political
asylum from mainland Chinese and others.

Japanese officials said the Chinese being deported were either mainland Chinese
or natives of Indochina who took asylum in China in recent years. It is possible
that some of the deportees are ethnic Chinese from Vietnam. The Chinese who
arrived by boat over the last few weeks appear not to be fleeing for political
reasons. They have told interviewers that they ''came to Japan because they
wanted to make money,'' said Toshio Tsunozaki, the director of the human rights
and refugees division of the Foreign Ministry.

It is not clear how many of the 2,300 refugees who have landed in Japan in
recent months will be deported. The Foreign Ministry said today that 657 have
already been identified as Chinese or as the nationals of neighboring countries
who first sought asylum in China, usually from Vietnam.

''If we keep that window open, there will be a 'pull factor' that will draw
other refugees out'' purely for economic reasons, Mr. Tsunozaki said.

Under Chinese law, those who flee can face a variety of criminal charges. At a
news briefing today, Mr. Tsunozaki said that in talks with Chinese diplomats,
Japan received no guarantee of leniency for the Chinese, who appear to have paid
boat operators large amounts for the trip. He said Japan was appealing to China
for punishments that ''are not harsh.''

An Unexpected Problem

The influx of boat people this year has confronted Japan with a huge and
unexpected problem. In 1985, Japan took the extraordinary step of agreeing to
absorb 10,000 Indochinese refugees, and more than 6,200 Vietnamese, Cambodians
and Laotians have resettled here. Mr. Tsunozaki said today that to continue
accepting Indochinese, ''we will exclude pseudo-refugees and distinguish genuine
refugees.''

The screening system to separate Indochinese from other refugees is essentially
the procedure agreed to at a refugee conference in Geneva in June. It has been
used in Hong Kong, the Philippines, Malaysia and Indonesia.

Japan is the richest nation in Asia, and officials are worried that the
deportations will seem hard-hearted and lead to bad publicity for a country that
strongly resists immigration.

On the other hand, a senior Japanese officials said today, if word gets out that
Japan is accepting refugees from all nations who are simply seeking economic
opportunity, ''we would have all of Asia on our doorstep.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 12, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Thai Leader Trying to Break Cambodian Impasse

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 531 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 11


The Thai Prime Minister began a form of shuttle diplomacy among the four rival
Cambodian factions today, hoping to break the impasse blocking a settlement
before Vietnamese troops complete their withdrawal from Cambodia this month.

The talks involving the Thai Prime Minister, Chatichai Choonhavan, will bring
the Vietnamese-backed Cambodian Prime Minister, Hun Sen, to Bangkok for the
third time this year, Thai officials said, this time on a Kampuchea Airlines
direct flight to Bangkok expected this week.

Mr. Chatichai's meetings here in January and May with Mr. Hun Sen were sharply
criticized by the other nations of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
which regard the Hun Sen Government as illegitimate, and caused a rift between
the Prime Minister and his Foreign Minister and coalition partner, Siddhi
Savetsila.

But Mr. Chatichai says Thailand, which has been a conduit for Chinese arms to
the Cambodian opposition coalition and does not recognize the Phnom Penh
Government, must feel free to talk to all the Cambodian factions. His advisers
say diplomatic progress achieved so far would have been impossible without the
Thais.

Since January, informal ties have improved between Bangkok and Phnom Penh, and
many Thai business executives are traveling to the Cambodian capital.

Thai officials stress that Mr. Chatichai wants his efforts to be seen as
informal. They say he hopes to arrange a cease-fire before the remaining
Vietnamese troops leave Cambodia, which Hanoi says will happen by Sept. 27.

The failure in Paris this month of an international conference on Cambodia has
renewed concern that the civil war will worsen once Vietnamese troops go and
that the Khmer Rouge will seize territory and position themselves for a return
to power.

The Paris conference broke down over a formula for sharing power in Cambodia,
with Mr. Hun Sen refusing to allow the Khmer Rouge any participation in an
interim government. Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the leader of the opposition
coalition, which is dominated militarily by the Khmer Rouge, insists that they
be included.

Under Khmer Rouge rule from 1975 to 1979, more than a million Cambodians died
from killings, malnutrition and overwork. The Khmer Rouge were expelled after
the Vietnamese invasion in December 1978. Vietnam installed Mr. Hun Sen and
other colleagues who had fled Khmer Rouge purges as a new Government in Phnom
Penh.

Mr. Chatichai first suggested a cease-fire after his second meeting here with
Mr. Hun Sen in May, but only Phnom Penh responded positively. The opposition
said a cease-fire could come only as part of a comprehensive solution that
embodied a power-sharing government including the Khmer Rouge. Western diplomats
said today that they thought Mr. Chatichai's efforts to arrange a cease-fire
before the end of the month were likely to be too late.

Accompanied by the army commander in chief, Gen. Chavalit Yongchaiyudh, Mr.
Chatichai met this morning with Prince Norodom Ranariddh, Prince Sihanouk's son
and secretary general of the Sihanouk faction, and tonight with Khieu Samphan of
the Khmer Rouge.

Thai officials said there would be no official comment about the meetings.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 12, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Bush Seeks Slight Increase in Number of Refugees

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 865 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 11


President Bush asked Congress today for a small increase in the number of
refugees who could be admitted to the United States in the coming year, but his
proposed ceiling of 125,000 would exclude tens of thousands of refugees who have
applied to come here.

Mr. Bush proposed no increase in the number of Eastern Europeans, despite the
large number of people leaving countries in that part of the world.

The Administration is requesting money to pay for the admission of only 84,000
refugees in the fiscal year 1990, which begins in three weeks. Mr. Bush did not
say who, if anyone, would pay for transportation and resettlement of the others.


Questioning Bush's Intent

Representative Bruce A. Morrison, chairman of the House Judiciary subcommittee
on immigration, said the disparity between the proposed number of refugee
admissions and the Administration's budget request made him wonder if Mr. Bush
was ''really serious'' about admitting 125,000 refugees.

In addition, Mr. Morrison, a Connecticut Democrat, said: ''The world has changed
dramatically in Eastern Europe. But this proposal for refugee admissions
reflects an attitude of business as usual.''

Mr. Bush's plans are set forth in a report titled ''Proposed Refugee Admissions
for Fiscal Year 1990,'' which will be the subject of at least four Congressional
hearings later this week.

The report comes at a time when the number of refugees around the world has
reached a record level of 14 million and many countries have adopted more
restrictive admissions policies.

The Administration said it planned to admit 6,500 refugees from Eastern Europe,
the same number allowed to come this year. A coalition of private voluntary
organizations involved in refugee resettlement work has recommended the
admission of 20,000 Eastern European refugees in the coming year.

The ceiling for Soviet refugee admissions, 43,500 this year, would rise to
50,000 under Mr. Bush's proposal. But the United States Government would pay for
only 40,000, leaving private groups to pay for the rest.

Congress has appropriated money to pay for all 43,500 this year, so the Federal
financial commitment would actually decline in 1990 under the Administration
proposal.

Under the Refugee Act of 1980, the President, in consultation with Congress,
sets an annual limit on the number of refugees who will be admitted to the
United States. The number for the current fiscal year is 116,500.

Administration officials confirmed today that the State Department and the
Justice Department were planning major changes in the review of refugee
applications from Soviet Jews and evangelical Christians. Most Jews and
Pentecostals leaving the Soviet Union have done so on Israeli visas; until
recently, there was no alternative for those wishing to leave. Many traveled to
Vienna and Rome, where their applications were reviewed by American immigration
officers.

Under the Administration plan, the United States would, for the first time, rule
on most Soviet refugee applications in Moscow. It would not review applications
outside Moscow for any people who left the Soviet Union on Israeli visas issued
after a certain date. The date could be as early as Sept. 30.  After that date,
Soviet applicants for Israeli visas would be told that they should apply to the
American Embassy in Moscow if their ultimate destination was the United States.
American officials would assume that Soviet citizens holding Israeli visas
issued after Sept. 30 wanted to go to Israel.

Administration officials said that Soviet refugees waiting in Moscow, Vienna or
Rome with visas issued on or before Sept. 30 could still come to the United
States if they met other requirements.

In its report to Congress, the Administration said the Near East and South Asia
had ''the largest concentrations of refugees and displaced persons in the world:
five million Afghans, four million Palestinians, one million Iranians, nearly
100,000 Iraqis.''

But the Administration proposed to reduce the number of refugees from this
region to 6,500 in 1990. The number this year was 7,000.

The Administration wants to increase admissions of African refugees, to 3,000 in
1990 from 2,000 this year.

For Latin America and the Caribbean, Mr. Bush proposed to keep the refugee
ceiling at its current level, 3,500. Three thousand places are meant for Cuban
political prisoners and their relatives. That leaves 500 places for the
thousands who have fled Nicaragua and El Salvador.

Mr. Bush's plan continues to emphasize the resettlement of Indochinese refugees.
Since 1975, the United States has admitted 857,000 Indochinese, accounting for
two-thirds of all refugees admitted to this country in that period.

The Administration proposes to admit 51,500 refugees from East Asia in the
coming year, up from the 50,000 authorized this year. Twenty-five thousand
Indochinese, mostly Vietnamese and Laotians, would come to the United States
from Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia, Hong Kong and other places where they have
found temporary asylum. The other 26,500 would come directly from Vietnam,
including Vietnamese jailed for political offenses because they once worked for
the United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 12, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

On Oily Beach, Life Amid the Muck

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY EGAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 855 words

DATELINE: LATOUCHE ISLAND, Alaska, Sept. 9


Here on Sleepy Bay, in the last days of one of the world's largest environmental
restoration projects, the natural and industrial worlds of Prince William Sound
have intersected.

Two dozen workers are busy scrubbing oily rocks on the last beach that the Exxon
Corporation says it will clean this summer in the $1 billion effort to restore
Prince William Sound; a few hundred feet from the tangle of hoses and machinery,
salmon are swimming up a glacial stream at the end of a life cycle of spawning
and dying that was not interrupted by the oil spill that stained so much of this
wilderness's beaches last March.

Much of Prince William Sound, an inland sea, appears untouched by man or oil.
But it is places like here on Latouche, or Knight Island, or Quayle Beach on
Smith Island - named for the May visit of Vice President Dan Quayle - that
illustrate why there is still so much of the 11 million gallons of oil left in
parts of the sound.

With only a few days left before the Friday deadline when Exxon will end its
cleanup because of the coming cold season, the workers, pummeled by heavy rain,
are frustrated and tired from two months of 12-hour days.

'Oil Still Keeps Coming Up'

''We've been working this spot three days this week and the oil still keeps
coming up,'' Freddie Carter said, rubbing oil-blackened rocks with what looked
like a cheerleader's pompon.

Sleepy Bay, here on this island about 80 miles from where the oil tanker Exxon
Valdez went aground, was scrubbed and hosed for a solid month in early summer,
logs kept by the state of Alaska show. Yet today, on those sections of beach
that were treated as recently as the day before, the beach is carpeted with oil.

''This time of year it just won't come off,'' said Elizabeth Dahl, who has
earned $11,000 working the Exxon cleanup this summer.

''The thing that hit me when I first came up here was how much money and
equipment and manpower they were using to get so little oil,'' she said. ''It's
insane. On a good day our whole crew may be able to remove no more than a barrel
of oil. But you can't fault Exxon for trying.''

Asked if any of the beaches they worked on were clean, both workers had the same
answer: ''Cleaner than yesterday.''

Arduous Efforts to Clean Up

Most of the cleanup effort has been a primitive, hand-and-knees scrubbing and
hosing operation. A kerosene-based chemical developed by Exxon, called Corexit
9580, was used on parts of Quayle Beach, with mixed results.

''If we had this 9580 mix in May, it would have made a big difference,'' said K.
Terry Koonce, a senior vice president with Exxon in Valdez.

But both the Coast Guard and Alaska's Department of Environmental Conservation
said Corexit 9580 was neither environmentally safe nor very effective.

The best hope appears to be through a process in which bacteria are used to
consume and partly break down the oil. In the process, the bacteria are fed
fertilizer that is sprinkled on the beach. This activates the bacteria, which
then begin consuming the oil as well.

The process, bioremediation, has been used on about 70 miles of the 1,100 miles
of beach that been given some cleanup attention. Mr. Koonce called
bioremediation a ''a real blessing.''

But the bacteria approach is only good to a depth of several inches on the
beach, scientists say, which makes it ineffective on the areas where the oil is
deeper.

Sense of Frustration

''Exxon is using the best technology we've been able to find,'' said David
Kennedy, a Government oil spill expert with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration. ''Unfortunately, the state of the art is not all that good.''

Vice Adm. Clyde E. Robbins of the Coast Guard, the chief Federal official
overseeing the cleanup, said, ''We were developing as we went along, and we
still have a long way to go.'' Given the state of oil cleanup technology, and
the magnitude of the spill, Admiral Robbins said, he had little choice but to
give approval to beaches that were treated but are still less than clean.

The process of Exxon's treating miles of beaches, and then having the Coast
Guard sign off on the effort, developed into a sort of cleanup-by-numbers that
some officials compare to body counts in the Vietnam War.

''Just as in the Vietnam War, the colonels had no way to quantify how well they
were doing except by the number of dead Viet Cong, here it's been a daily round
of numbers, numbers and numbers,'' said Ernie Piper, a special assistant to Gov.
Steve Cowper. ''The numbers never really told the story, and they still don't.''

Mr. Koonce points proudly to hundreds of miles of beach that now show few
effects of the oil. However, some of those beaches, particularly on hard-hit
Knight Island, look clean but are devoid of the rich tidal life apparent on
islands untouched by the oil.

Here at Sleepy Bay, it seems unlikely that the word ''clean'' will be used to
describe this beach for some time.

Nevertheless, the creek nearby is crowded with salmon determined to make sure
that next spring, whether or not there is a cleanup here, Latouche Island will
be pulsing with new life.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of workers cleaning oil on Latouche Island, Alaska (NYT/Jim
Wilson); map of Latouche Island, Alaska

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Need Should Determine Student Financial Aid;
Vets Benefits Ending

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 260 words


To the Editor:

Vietnam era G.I. Bill benefits end in December, according to Army Echoes, the
official bulletin for the Army retiree, for July-August.

Many G.I.'s who have moved since leaving the service and left no forwarding
address with the Department of Veterans Affairs will not know about the
educational benefits they are entitled to, and about to lose.

Army Echoes states that educational benefits will expire for some 750,000
veterans, who it is estimated are still potentially eligible, some of whom are
enrolled in schools and receiving assistance. Under the law, the Veterans
Administration will stop sending G.I. Bill payments to veterans attending school
or in training programs resulting from qualifying active-duty service between
Jan. 31, 1955, and Jan. 1, 1977.

Some 60,000 enrolled veterans will receive reminders of the deadline with their
Veterans Affairs educational checks this year. The department encourages
veterans to take advantage of their remaining eligibility by enrolling in
classes before the end of the year. However, all Veterans Affairs assistance
will end Dec. 31.

Not affected by the expiration date are veterans enrolled in the V.A.'s other
education programs - the Veterans' Educational Assistance Program and the
Montgomery G.I. Bill, which covers those who served after June 30, 1985,
including members of the Reserve and National Guard.

Veterans in doubt about eligibility for education benefits should contact their
nearest Veterans Affairs regional office.

ALBERT PACELLO
Staten Island, Aug. 21, 1989

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 14, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Teacher Union Faults History Books

BYLINE: By JULIE JOHNSON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 974 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 13


The five most commonly used high school history textbooks barely touch on such
major figures as Washington and Lincoln and they largely ignore the passion and
political significance of religion and economics in American history, according
to a new study by the American Federation of Teachers.

The study, released here today, said the books are bland and sacrifice details
for graphics and color pictures. It also said that despite attempts to integrate
the roles of women and minorities in history, the texts too often leave those
groups ''cordoned off into special boxes and features.''

''It's not a condemnation of the texts,'' said Paul Gagnon, a history professor
at the University of Massachusetts at Boston, who spent two years compiling the
report on the five history textbooks. ''They're not awful. They're not wrong.
But they just don't offer enough help to teachers when we're facing increasingly
complex problems in a diverse world.''

Teaching Being Criticized

The report comes amid debate over how social studies should be taught. The
teaching of social studies has been criticized because high school students
today generally know little about American and world history and geography. In
May, the New York-Based Council on Interracial Books for Children, a smaller and
more narrowly focused organization than the 710,000-member teachers' union,
released a study on bias or ommissions in commonly used history books that
reached conclusions similar to those in the A.F.T. report.

Professor Gagnon's report studied five textbooks: ''Triumph of the American
Nation'' by Lewis Paul Todd and Merle Curtie, published by Harcourt, Brace,
Jovanovich in 1986; ''People and Our Country'' by Norman K. Risjord and Terry L.
Haywoode, published by Holt, Rinehart & Winston in 1982; ''The United States: A
History of the Republic'' by James West Davidson and Mark H. Lytle, published by
Prentice-Hall, a division of Gulf and Western, in 1981; ''History of a Free
People'' by Henry W. Bragdon and Samuel P. McCutchen, published in 1981 by the
Macmillan Publishing Company; and ''A History of the United States'' by Daniel
J. Boorstin and Brooks M. Kelley, published by Ginn & Company in 1986.

Professor Gagnon said the books, generally used in the 11th grade, are read by
two-thirds of the approximately five million students in American high schools.

Sympathy for Writers

While Professor Gagnon took the books to task, he expressed sympathy for
textbook writers, who he said were often forced to condense details to fit the
space allocated by the publishers.

Robert A. Richards, executive vice president of Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, who
is director of the publisher's elementary and secondary programs, acknowledged
that publishers were ''bound by space limitations.'' But he said they assume
that many of the historical details left out of the high school texts have been
covered in fifth grade textbooks as well as in textbooks for the eighth or ninth
grades.

''The challenge to the publisher is to have as much coverage and be able to go
into as much depth as possible and still offer a manageable textbook,'' Mr.
Richards said. He noted that ''Triumph of the American Nation'' is 1,000 pages.
''Also part of this challenge is to provide a textbook that will satisfy a wide
variety of state or city curriculum requirements and a wide variety of
teachers.''

But Professor Gagnon's report asserted that the ''primary purpose of the
American history course and its textbooks must be to help students understand
what undergirds democracy.'' These were among the reports other conclusions:

* One textbook that offers no biography of Lincoln devotes 24 of 43 pages about
the Civil War to pictures, maps and special features. The longest profile of the
16th President in any of the volumes is six paragraphs.

* Religious ideology from the Puritans to contemporary fundamentalist Christians
is not dealt with adequately as a political influence.

* Little attention is paid to military strategy and practice from the Civil War
to Vietnam.

''They have a format which reminds you of USA Today,'' the professor said.
''It's all graphics and colors and special features and little boxes inserted
here and there.''

Rather than provide historical details that would augment intellectual
discussion, he said the books ''are over-stuffed with features'' that help
publishers sell the books to school districts, like the maps and charts.

Two-Year Courses Suggested

He recommended American history be taught over two years rather than one and
that the subject be more tightly focused on the themes of democracy, economics
and the nation's multicultural population.

The study was the third major report of the A.F.T.'s Education for Democracy
Project, a joint venture between the union, the Educational Excellence Network,
a private group of educators, parents and former goverment officials, and
Freedom House, a human rights organization.

Mr. Gagnon's analysis raised questions about publishers who omit details on
Lincoln or Washington while printing boxed ''mini-biographies'' of the Spanish
explorer Cabeza de Vaca, Blackbeard the Pirate, Noah Webster and Tecumseh, the
Shawnee chief who tried to unite the Indian tribes of the West.

Mr. Richards defended the approach. ''We feel that at the 11th grade most
students know who Abraham Lincoln and George Washington is,'' he said. ''It's a
matter of space in some cases. It's a matter of emphasis in others.''

Albert Shanker, the A.F.T. president, said the report brings to the light what
may be a larger problem.

''That is that within the community there is not agreement on the issue of
teaching history and democracy,'' Mr. Shanker said. ''There are still a lot of
people who take the view that we're being too chauvinistic if we say democracy
is superior.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 14, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Colombia Debates Role Of U.S. Armed Forces

BYLINE: By JAMES BROOKE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 22, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 565 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, Sept. 13


As Colombia continues its war on cocaine traffickers, a debate broke out here
today over an age-old specter in Latin America: North American troops on South
American soil.

''Let's not let Colombia be converted into a Vietnam of the war against drugs,''
Senator Ernesto Samper Pizano, a Liberal Party presidential candidate, said at a
news conference.

From Colombia's other major political party, the Conservatives, two former
Presidents today made public an open letter they had written to Colombia's
current President, Virgilio Barco Vargas, warning about ''foreign military
advisers.''

''The history of peoples since the end of this century's second war shows that
one knows how the use of foreign 'advisers' starts, but not how it ends,'' wrote
the two former Presidents, Misael Pastrana and Belisario Betancur.

Combat Role Disavowed

In Washington, President Bush said on Monday: ''Let me state clearly, none of
the Andean countries have asked for U.S. troops. And there is no contemplation
of the use of American armed forces in any combat role there.''

But on Tuesday, a Pentagon spokesman, Pete Williams, said the United States is
prepared ''to expand the training role'' of American advisers sent to Bolivia,
Colombia and Peru.

The Colombian Government today appeared to play down the possibility of an
extended stay for American military advisers.

''No troops, no advisers, no trainers,'' an aide to President Barco said in an
interview. ''The troops will stay only long enough to assemble equipment -two or
three days.'' The aide, who asked not to be identified, did not elaborate.

In Washington, Pentagon officials said tonight that the United States had never
planned long stays for American advisers. The schedule for aid calls for
individual trainers to fly into Colombia on specific missions of short duration
in which they would help unload and assemble equipment and then train Colombian
soldiers in how to use it.

''Basically, we are there at their request and we'll stay as long as the
Colombians want, but extended visits were not planned,'' one official said.

Nearly four weeks after Colombia's military started the crackdown on the drug
traffickers, Defense Minister Oscar Botero Restrepo said today, ''There is no
human power to make the armed forces stop in their struggle against the drug
traffickers.''

Arms Cache Displayed

Today the 13th Army Brigade displayed weapons captured Tuesday in a raid on a
farm near here owned by a major trafficker, Gonzalo Rodriguez Gacha.

Five people were arrested in the raid, in which boxes of grenades and about 20
semiautomatic and automatic arms were seized.

In another front on the drug war, police guards in Medellin, where a major
cocaine cartel is based, reportedly fought off gunmen who attacked the house of
a federal judge on Tuesday night. One guard was wounded, but the judge,
Laurentino Gallego Gil, was unharmed.

The traffickers have threatened to kill 10 judges for every Colombian suspect
extradited to the United States. So far, one Colombian has been extradited and
two others are waiting extradition.

Despite the violence in Medellin, the city's mayor lifted a two-week old curfew
today.

On Tuesday, the mayor, Juan Gomez Martinez, attended the funeral of his
predecessor, Pablo Pelaez Gonzalez. Mr. Pelaez, a foe of the drug traffickers,
was killed Monday on a Medellin street.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Colombian adviser searching the handbag of a shopper at a
downtown mall (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 15, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

House Panel Assails U.S. Policy on Khmer Rouge

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 672 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 14


The Administration's policy of supporting a settlement in Cambodia that would
bring the Khmer Rouge guerrillas into a transitional government came under
stinging attack today in Congress.

The Administration's position on the Khmer Rouge was known before, but it has
become a more contentious issue with the approach of a Vietnamese withdrawal
from the country, which is to be completed this month. The Vietnamese have
backed Cambodia's Communist Government for the last decade in its fight against
the Khmer Rouge and its non-Communist allies, including Prince Norodom Sihanouk.

A peace conference of the competing factions ended last month in Paris without
agreement on a power-sharing arrangement, and continued fighting appears likely.
Doubts are being raised among lawmakers about whether the United States should
continue backing Prince Sihanouk, with either lethal or nonlethal aid,
especially considering his alliance with the Khmer Rouge.

Resistance to Pol Pot

''The United States of America does not have the luxury of recusing itself from
moral judgments,'' said Representative Jim Leach, Republican of Iowa. ''In this
regard there is a view of many, including this member, that Pol Pot should be
brought before an international tribunal for war crimes.''

The Khmer Rouge, led by Pol Pot, is blamed for the death of more than a million
Cambodians under their rule between 1975 and 1978, when Vietnam invaded.

In the Administration's first Congressional testimony on Cambodia since the
Paris talks, the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific
Affairs, Richard H. Solomon, appeared today before the House Subcommittee on
Asian and Pacific Affairs.

Mr. Solomon said that while on the surface the Administration's position in
Paris of allowing the Khmer Rouge to be part of a transitional power-sharing
arrangement in Cambodia might not seem ''particularly morally impressive,'' it
was the only policy that was realistic and held out a possibility of ultimately
undermining the Khmer Rouge through political means.

The major question before the Administration as it considers Cambodia policy
today, Mr. Solomon said in prepared remarks, is this: ''Should the Khmer Rouge,
responsible for genocidal violence of the 1970's, be totally excluded from the
political process with only a military option? Or, should it -less its top
leadership - be given a limited stake in a transitional political coalition that
would, under international supervision,'' face the test of Cambodian elections?

''From an American perspective,'' he said, ''we want no role for the Khmer Rouge
in a future Cambodian government.'' But he said Prince Sihanouk, China and the
six members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations felt that the chances
of peace would be better if the Khmer Rouge took part in an interim coalition.
Such a coalition would also include Prince Sihanouk, the Hanoi-backed Hun Sen
regime, and followers of former Prime Minister Son Sann.

''We are not schoolchildren in this business,'' said Mr. Solomon, alluding to
the history of Khmer Rouge brutality. ''The chances of avoiding continuing
conflict are not very good. But we firmly believe that the chances are much
better to get this problem under control if you have a structured political
settlement than if you just leave a situation that is totally unstructured or
unconstrained, where civil conflict is almost a certainty.''

Representative Chester G. Atkins, Democrat of Massachusetts, told Mr. Solomon
there was ''every indication from people that the Khmer Rouge will continue to
fight whether they are part of a settlement or not.''

''It would seem to me that there is no reason we would want to insist that the
Khmer Rouge be part of a settlement other than the fact that Sihanouk wants
it,'' Mr. Atkins said. ''It would seem that in light of the outcome in Paris
that Sihanouk is increasingly playing a personal agenda which relates to his own
political aggrandizement and less and less of a nationalist Cambodian agenda.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 15, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Is Backing the Wrong Horse in Cambodia

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 499 words


To the Editor:

''Bleeding Cambodia'' (editorial, Sept. 1), which concludes that American policy
toward that beleaguered nation ''no longer makes sense,'' hits the bull's-eye.

I lived in Southeast Asia for the summer and with my companion spent the last
three weeks in Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia. In Cambodia, we walked the streets of
Phnom Penh and talked to Cambodians. The first thing on their minds is peace,
and they are mildly hopeful that it can be continued under Prime Minister Hun
Sen. Unlike the United States Government, no one mentioned or seemed to care if
the prime minister was a ''Communist'' or had been put in office by the
Vietnamese. After all, they never have had an election or a democracy, and Hun
Sen has stopped the killing fields.

They are leery of Prince Sihanouk and remember little about him, and they hate
Pol Pot and the Khmer Rouge. Everyone we talked to in English or French told of
a relative who had died at the hands of Pol Pot.

Their concerns are basic. They are happy that their daily life has improved
considerably under Hun Sen. There is rice in the fields, food on tables, new
Honda motorbikes on the streets, and the market is filled with consumer goods,
everything from American whisky to magnificent Cambodian silk (two yards for
$13). Employment opportunities have improved, and engineers from Singapore are
building a luxury hotel; they have stated that future hotel workers will have to
know English, and those classes are filled.

Unfortunately, the United States is backing the wrong horse - Sihanouk and the
Khmer Rouge. We should be reminded that the prince was not a good enough ally
for us in 1970, so the Nixon Administration had the Central Intelligence Agency
assist in his ouster. We are supporting him and his Khmer Rouge allies for one
reason: Vietnam invaded Cambodia and put Hun Sen in office. We lost the Vietnam
War and have since supported anybody opposed to Vietnam, even a capricious
prince and his allies who butchered a million Cambodians. We are poor losers.

As a Vietnam veteran, I think it is time for the Bush Administration to
formulate a new policy toward Southeast Asia. During the last two years the
Vietnamese Government has met the two major American demands -cooperating on the
missing in action issue while withdrawing from Cambodia. Vietnamese on the
streets and beaches are eager for closer ties with Americans; they should be
rewarded with full recognition. Hun Sen has worked to bring peace and prosperity
to Cambodia, which usually are aims of American foreign policy.

The President now has a unique opportunity; like Richard Nixon who dramatically
changed United States policy and ''opened China,'' Mr. Bush could become the
conservative who expanded American interests and influence in two Southeast
Asian nations that want to be our friends. It's time for leadership.

TERRY ANDERSON
Bryan, Tex., Sept. 1, 1989
  The writer is an associate professor of history at Texas A & M University.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 15, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Abba Schwartz, Refugee Expert, Dies at Age 73

BYLINE: By GLENN FOWLER

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 494 words


Abba P. Schwartz, a lawyer and former high-ranking State Department official,
died of a heart attack Tuesday on a street in Brussels while going to the United
States Embassy on business. He was 73 years old.

Mr. Schwartz, a specialist in immigration law, was a proponent of liberalized
policies for the admission of refugees and visitors to the United States.

During the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations, when he was an Assistant
Secretary of State heading the Bureau of Security and Consular Affairs, he
opposed restrictive laws that excluded many people from entering the country
because of their beliefs.

He resigned abruptly in 1966 when his office was about to be eliminated in a
budgetary reorganization. His supporters contended that he had been hounded out
of office by conservatives in the State Department who opposed his efforts to
make it easier for people with unpopular political beliefs to visit this
country.

Negotiated With Cuba

Mr. Schwartz also worked extensively to ease the plight of refugees around the
world. In the mid-1960's he was a principal negotiator of an accord with Cuba
that permitted several thousand Cubans to come to the United States. During the
Vietnam War, he promoted programs to help refugees in South Vietnam and to
repatriate prisoners taken by the Vietcong and North Vietnamese.

Mr. Schwartz was born in Baltimore and received a bachelor's degree from
Georgetown University's School of Foreign Service and a law degree from Harvard.
During World War II, he served in the merchant marine, ferrying supplies to
Murmansk in the Soviet Union, and later as a lieutenant in the United States
Navy.

He began his work with refugees as an official of the Intergovernmental
Committee on Refugees in London in 1946. From 1947 to 1949, he was reparations
director of the United Nations International Refugee Organization in Geneva.

During the 1950's, Mr. Schwartz, as a lawyer in Washington, became a close
political associate of John F. Kennedy and his brother, Robert. He was also an
adviser to Eleanor Roosevelt, the widow of President Franklin D. Roosevelt.

In 1962 President Kennedy appointed Mr. Schwartz to the State Department post.
At the time, under the McCarran-Walter Act, people who were deemed ideologically
unsuitable for admission as visitors to this country could receive an exception
from the Attorney General. Mr. Schwartz worked closely with Attorney General
Kennedy to admit a number of East European and other visitors who would
otherwise have been barred.

In his book, ''The Open Society,'' published by William Morrow in 1968, Mr.
Schwartz wrote of his struggle to circumvent the McCarran-Walter Act's
restrictions and the State Department bureaucracy.

Mr. Schwartz, who lived in Manhattan and Washington, is survived by a sister,
Janet Chase of Snowmass Village, Colo.; two nephews, Eugene Schwartz of San
Diego and Neil Chase of San Francisco, and a niece, Joan Kunze of Reston, Va.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Abba P. Schwartz (Jim Mahan, 1967)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 15, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
'In Country,' Coping With Vietnam

BYLINE: By CARYN JAMES

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 896 words


His hairline recedes, his eyelids droop and there always seems to be stubble
around his Fu Manchu mustache. During his niece's high-school graduation, the
inspirational speeches and the band dressed in gold-braided uniforms set Emmett
Smith's mind wandering back nearly 20 years to his time in Vietnam. Bruce Willis
is scarcely recognizable as Emmett, an aimless man whose wartime memories make
him cower at the sound of thunder and climb a tree during a lightning storm,
shouting toward the sky - to God or the enemy or both - ''Show me your face!''

Emmett seems an odd soul-mate for his sister's 17-year-old daughter, Samantha
Hughes, a feisty, confused young woman played by Emily Lloyd with a convincing
Kentucky twang. But both Sam and Emmett have been damaged by the war. Their
attempt to come to terms with its destructive legacy forms the heart of ''In
Country,'' Norman Jewison's faithful, well-meaning and ultimately shallow screen
version of Bobbie Ann Mason's wise and deeply felt novel.

Sam's father died in Vietnam - ''in country,'' in the soldiers' slang - before
she was born. Now her mother has remarried and moved away, leaving Sam and
Emmett behind in Hopewell, a small town that Sam's best friend says is ''dead
without a mall.'' The effects of the war reach every ordinary area of the
country.

All the pieces of the novel are in place. But Mr. Jewison (''Moonstruck'' and
''A Soldier's Story'') and the scriptwriters, Frank Pierson and Cynthia Cidre,
seem so fearful of Emmett and his Vietnam-veteran friends that ''In Country''
becomes the lopsided story of a young woman's search for her father's memory, a
tale that circles back to the war much too late to justify its final emotional
pull.

Miss Lloyd, who has shown her remarkable range in ''Wish You Were Here'' and
''Cookie,'' captures all of Sam's intensity, though unfortunately she seems to
have been directed to keep her eyes wide and her gestures broad. She hangs out
at the coffee shop with Emmett's Vietnam-veteran buddies, persistently putting
out every cigarette Emmett lights and asking questions about the war, only to be
told, ''You weren't there so you can't understand it.'' She goes to a veterans'
dance; she read her father's letters home and the diary he kept during the war.

Yet Vietnam is often an empty reference because Emmett, who links Sam's search
to the war, is allowed to drift in and out of the film like an unwelcome ghost -
the ultimate irony in a story that is supposedly about embracing and healing
Vietnam veterans. Emmett very likely suffers from the effects of exposure to
Agent Orange, but we never get a sense of what he thinks or how he feels.
Instead, we see him enter a doctor's office and come out after his complaints
have been brushed aside. We hear Sam tell Emmett's former girlfriend about his
headaches and irritability and skin problems. But the film skitters by such
issues so gingerly that it is difficult to believe Sam worries obsessively about
her uncle's physical and emotional health.

Mr. Willis does all he can to make Emmett's quiet tragedy believable. There is
not a trace of his wise-cracking celebrity persona or his ''Moonlighting''
character. ''I'm just hanging on here with every bit of strength that I've
got,'' he tells Sam late in the film, in the calm voice of a man who has fought
back his emotions for years and who even now seems to fight the tears that fill
his eyes. ''God, it exhausts me,'' he says. Mr. Willis carries this scene
beautifully, but Mr. Jewison has not allowed anything preceding it to suggest
the deep emotional injury that has generated it. So when Emmett, Sam and her
father's mother travel to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, the scene is moving,
but its emotion is evoked by our own visions of the war and its aftermath as
much as by the people on screen.

The one complete character is Sam's grandmother, a hefty farm woman played by
Peggy Rea with warmth, humor and simplicity. Other small roles are also
marvelously acted. Joan Allen is Samantha's mother, who creates a future by
leaving the past behind in Hopewell. John Terry brings gentle sadness and
understandable bitterness to the role of a veteran who is attracted to Sam but
who, like Emmett, has been emotionally scarred by the war. Judith Ivey adds wit
as Emmett's former girlfriend.

But there are also cheap and easy touches in ''In Country,'' which opens today
at Cinema 1, that reduce it to the shallowness of a television movie. Among the
most offensive and distracting is James Horner's cloying music. ''In Country''
means to capture the deep tragedy at the center of pedestrian lives. Instead, it
becomes a pedestrian film.

THE SCARS OF WAR - IN COUNTRY, directed by Norman Jewison; screenplay by Frank
Pierson and Cynthia Cidre, based on the novel by Bobbie Ann Mason; director of
photography, Russell Boyd; film editors, Antony Gibbs and Lou Lombardo; music by
James Horner; production designer, Jackson DeGovia; produced by Mr. Jewison and
Richard Roth; released by Warner Brothers. At Cinema 1, Third Avenue and 60th
Street. Running time: 120 minutes. This film is rated R.

Emmett Smith...Bruce Willis
Samantha Hughes...Emily Lloyd
Irene...Joan Allen
Lonnie...Kevin Anderson
Tom...John Terry
Mamaw...Peggy Rea
Anita...Judith Ivey
Dwayne...Dan Jenkins
Pete...Stephen Tobolowsky
Earl...Jim Beaver

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Peggy Rea

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 15, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

AT THE MOVIES

BYLINE: By Lawrence Van Gelder

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1391 words



Back to Baltimore

Last winter and spring, when the cognoscenti were voting various accolades to
his film ''Rain Man,'' including the Academy Award for best director, Barry
Levinson was hard at work on a new screenplay.

And right after Labor Day, the cameras started turning on his new movie, an
untitled semi-autobiographical story that has brought him back to Baltimore, the
setting for two of his highly acclaimed films -''Diner'' and ''Tin Men.''

''I did 'Diner,' '' he said, ''two movies I didn't write - 'Good Morning,
Vietnam' and 'Rain Man' - and now another one I wrote. It seems I go away for a
couple of years and then do another Baltimore piece. I don't think there's any
rhyme or reason.''

Essentially, the new movie deals with the immigration of five Russian Jewish
brothers to Baltimore in 1914. ''They were wallpaper hangers, and they were
musicians on the weekend,'' Mr. Levinson said. ''That was sort of the genesis of
the piece. In a sense it deals with a lot of the stories I used to hear, when I
was much younger, about my grandparents, because I grew up with them and my
parents in one house.''

The brothers, four of whom survived, formed a large, tightly knit family circle
that held regular meetings; spanning the period from their arrival in the United
States to roughly 1968, the movie deals with the evolution of the clan and their
Americanization. ''You see the evolution of the family and the different types
of homes they lived in, from the row house to suburbia,'' Mr. Levinson said.

And that caused a bit of a problem in finding suitable locations. ''I think what
you struggle with in a period film,'' Mr. Levinson said, ''is the fact that
they're tearing down so much of the old. I went to scout locations and arrived
literally as the building is being torn down. That's the struggle you have,
because so much of the 20th century is disappearing.''

The cast for Mr. Levinson's film, and their real-life counterparts, includes
Armin Mueller-Stahl as Sam (Mr. Levinson's grandfather); Lou Jacobi as Gabriel,
Sam's brother; Leo Fuchs as Hymie, another brother; Israel Rubinek as Sam's
brother Nathan; Joan Plowright as Eva (Mr. Levinson's grandmother); Aidan Quinn
as Jules (Mr. Levinson's father); Elizabeth Perkins as Ann (Mr. Levinson's
mother), and Kevin Pollack as Issy, Mr. Levinson's cousin.

The project, for Tri-Star, reunites Mr. Levinson with Mark Johnson, the producer
of seven of his films, including ''Rain Man,'' winner of the Oscar for best
picture of 1988. If all goes well, filming will be completed Nov. 22, and
although Mr. Levinson said no release has been scheduled, he thinks that autumn
1990 is likely.

Mr. Levinson said he didn't know what drew him to his family saga at this time.
''You never know why you go to certain material,'' he said. ''It's something
that's been in my head for a while.''

As for his next movie, he said: ''I've got a couple of projects we're
developing. I guess we have to see what makes the most sense - what you start to
gravitate to.''

A Political Thriller

When it comes to busy directors, there's also John Mackenzie, who may be best
known to American moviegoers as the man who introduced them to Bob Hoskins, in
the role of the London gangster overlord in ''The Long Good Friday.''

With one movie scheduled for an October release and another on the horizon, Mr.
Mackenzie - whose films also include two Michael Caine vehicles, ''The Honorary
Consul'' and ''The Fourth Protocol'' - gazed over idyllic English countryside at
his cottage in Sussex and chatted about his work.

Until recently, the Orion film he made for release Oct. 20 was known as ''Street
Legal,'' he said. But conflict over rights to the title led to a change. Now
it's ''Point of Impact.'' In any event, the film stars Brian Dennehy as a
policeman who feels he has to turn in his badge in order to continue to do his
job properly.

Mr. Mackenzie said that when Orion first approached him about the film about a
year and a half ago, he felt it held the germ of an idea. After revisions, he
said, ''We turned it from what was really a basic cop-drug picture into
something deeper and a little less straightforward.

''It really now is a political thriller. It seemed to me it would be interesting
to make a film relevant to what's been happening in the States recently - the
element where the drugs-for-arms consideration could come into it, with a lot of
money as well. It's not so much drugs for money but an ideological thing about
arms for freedom fighters in various parts of the world, basically Central
America. It's got Iran-contra, echoes of that.''

Come next spring, in London and in Boston, Mr. Mackenzie expects to be filming
''Dead Ground,'' another project for Orion - this one dealing with the Irish
Republican Army, seen from an American perspective. Mr. Mackenzie said he was
approached about ''Dead Ground'' while he was preparing to film the property
then known as ''Street Legal.''

''I saw it had a great entertaining element in it,'' the Edinburgh-born Mr.
Mackenzie said. ''It was a very strong suspense film, almost Hitchcockian. That
interested me straightaway; and the fact that it was also connected with the
I.R.A. and would give one hopefully a perspective on the whole thing to see it
from their point of view as well as a British point of view seemed important.

''In Britain, you get soldiers being killed. It seems like mayhem and murder.
When you go into it, you see there's an awful lot more to it.''

After that, Mr. Mackenzie, who divides his time between London, Sussex, Los
Angeles and New York, says there are several scripts that interest him,
especially one titled ''Bikini.''

''And it doesn't refer to the bathing costume,'' he said. ''It refers to the
atoll. It's something which is a political satire, full of irony, which the
British do an awful lot and the Americans tend not to. It's a great story about
young people from the 50's, from totally different social backgrounds who meet.
Two men fall in love with a girl and mature from college to going into
government in those times of McCarthy, the bomb, the atoll and this very human
love story.''

If there seems a pattern to the films that attract Mr. Mackenzie, there is. ''I
think the idea of making pure entertainment films doesn't interest me,'' he
said. ''I think I always look for something that has a point to make, that has
humor and humanity. ''I like to have some form of central theme which is very
relevant to the time in which we live.''

'Tom Jones' Is Shorter

In Paris, past, present and future were under discussion by Tony Richardson.

The past was represented by Mr. Richardson's ''Tom Jones,'' the 1963 adaptation
of the Henry Fielding novel that won Academy Awards for best picture, director,
screenplay (John Osborne) and score (John Addison). The present was represented
by ''Phantom of the Opera,'' a new mini-series Mr. Richardson is making in Paris
with a cast that includes Charles Dance as the phantom, Burt Lancaster as the
phantom's father and Andrea Ferreol as the object of desire. And the future was
represented by the Joan Didion novel ''Democracy,'' which Mr. Richardson hopes
to begin filming in January. ''It's a wonderful love story I've wanted to make
for years,'' he said.

But most of the conversation focused on ''Tom Jones,'' which is being
re-released today in a slightly shortened version with a new stereophonic
soundtrack.

''I think many people always felt it was a film that hadn't dated at all,'' Mr.
Richardson said, noting that over the years, various people had wanted to
redistribute ''Tom Jones'' before he finally decided on the Samuel Goldwyn
Company.

Mr. Richardson noted that usually when great films are re-released, the director
restores footage that was cut from the original. He took the opposite tack. ''I
looked at the film and thought I'd sharpen it,'' he said, ''make it more today
and not include a lot of stuff that had been left out.'' The seven minutes of
cuts, he said, are ''minor, minor things.''

Mr. Richardson said no one had asked him to trim the movie. ''I think this is
better, to my taste,'' he said of the new version. ''The sound is better. The
music is better. And if I'd have had longer to edit it,'' he said of the
original, ''it would be like it is now -livelier and snappier.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 15, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Art;
Searching for Some Order In a Show Based on Chaos

BYLINE: By MICHAEL KIMMELMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1213 words


''Strange Attractors: Signs of Chaos'' is not a complete disaster. There are a
few memorable works among the several dozen paintings, sculptures, photographs,
installations and video presentations that have been crammed into the New Museum
of Contemporary Art, and there are, as well, a few good ideas floating around.
But the exhibition has in general been roughly conceived and disastrously
installed, and it seems very much like a show desperately in search of a trend.

It is occasioned by the emerging science of chaos and the search by chaos
scientists for order in such unpredictable phenomena as the weather. Some
artists in the show, like the group Artn, take their cues directly from the
visual models that chaos scientists have favored. Others have tried to adapt to
their own purposes the theories these scientists have evolved. But ''Strange
Attractors'' includes many works that can be said to address chaos in only the
vaguest way.

Curiously for an exhibition that purports to take as its starting point a new
science, there is a strong impression of old wine in new bottles. A visitor is
first greeted by Jon Kessler's ''1967,'' which consists of a turntable playing a
scratchy version of ''Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band.'' Around the corner
are Walter Robinson's spin paintings and Op Art-like canvases by Dana Duff and
Steve DiBenedetto. A drawing by John Cage hangs just inside the entranceway.
Nearby are works by David Smith inspired by the artist's experiences in Vietnam,
as well as a videotape of Malcolm X that is part of David Hammons's ''Fan.''

Some of these works share an interest in randomness. But the differences among
them, which are far more profound, have been all but obscured by the show's
overall presentation. The political overtones of Mr. Hammons's work, for
example, are utterly drowned out.

This is partly because M & Company, a design firm, was hired to do a fittingly
chaotic installation and came up with a scheme that could hardly be more
intrusive or more studiously chic. Roughly 100 black-and-white photographs of
purportedly chaotic scenes have been used as wallpaper, creating a backdrop
against which few works can hold their own.

It is telling that among the exhibition's more notable pieces are installations
that have been given spaces untouched by the designers. Ann Hamilton and Kathryn
Clark collaborated on the two-part ''Palimpsest,'' an elegiac meditation on the
loss of memory. For the work's principal section, the artists have pinned
hundreds of small sheets of paper to the walls of a room; fragments of
unidentified memoirs have been written on the sheets, which flutter in the
breeze generated by a small fan. The effect makes the walls seem to shimmer.

At the room's center is a glass tank full of snails and two heads of cabbage.
There is something random in the texts a visitor chooses to read and also in the
way the snails eat the cabbage and arrange themselves around the tank. And there
is something chaotic about the jumble of written memoirs, which obliquely
suggest the inner workings of a failing mind. But to its credit, ''Palimpsest''
otherwise shares little with the vast majority of works in this exhibition. Its
quietude comes as a relief.

Christian Marclay's ''Tape Fall'' has also been given a room of its own. Like
several pieces in the show, it deals with unpredictability and time. A
reel-to-reel tape player sits atop a ladder, playing what sounds like water
dripping from a faucet (a prime example for scientists of chaos). The tape rolls
off the machine and accumulates in a pile on the floor. Mr. Marclay seems to be
suggesting something about the overabundance of information in the world, but he
does so, paradoxically, in a peaceable, Zenlike fashion.

One other work that transforms itself over time is worthy of mention. Eve Andree
Laramee's ''River of Stone'' owes something to Robert Smithson. Atop a
zigzagging base made of copper and filled with water are shards of quartz. The
copper has already begun to turn green, and the resulting interplay of colors
and the mixing of materials may even put a viewer in mind of Christopher
Wilmarth's sculptures.

There is, on the other hand, David Nyzio's tank of water entitled ''Magnetic
Field and Algae Illustrating the Dexterity of Water,'' which at first glance may
resemble the work of Jeff Koons but which seems to deal more with the visually
altering effects of slow-growing algae. Mr. Nyzio's piece, like several others
in the exhibition, all too closely approximates a high school science project.

''Strange Attractors'' is accompanied by a catalogue designed by M & Company.
that could hardly be more obfuscating and pretentious.

''Strange Attractors: Signs of Chaos'' remains on view at the New Museum of
Contemporary Art, 583 Broadway, near Prince Street, through Nov. 26.

Duncan Hannah
Charles Cowles Gallery
420 West Broadway (near Spring Street)
Through Sept. 30

When Duncan Hannah's paintings have succeeded, they have managed to imply both
mystery and a certain kind of ironic distance from their subject. Mr. Hannah
painted scenes of what look like English villages of the 1930's yet these were
not strictly nostalgic images. Both in their otherworldly, saccharine
luminescence and in their quiet yet unfathomably portentous mood, they could put
a viewer off guard.

Mr. Hannah is still painting the same subjects, but his latest show, his first
at this gallery, suggests a disappointing change of tone. The artist seems now
to be playing it straight, which is to say that his works virtually mimic
traditional landscape and genre scenes. There are small canvases of horses and
of boats that would not look out of place on the walls of a country club. There
are, as well, Cubist-like collages that have a preciousness to them. Mr. Hannah
is a skilled painter and he knows how to construct a composition. But his latest
works seem altogether tame and without edge. They are like jokes that fall flat.


'Techno-Metaphysics'
Grace Borgenicht Gallery
724 Fifth Avenue (near 56th Street)
Through Sept. 30

''Techno-Metaphysics'' is the latest show of works by contemporary Japanese
artists and is most interesting as a companion to ''Against Nature: Japanese Art
in the 80's,'' a touring exhibition that is now at the Akron (Ohio) Museum and
that comes to New York in a year. Among other things, ''Against Nature'' makes
the point that young Japanese artists grapple constantly with competing issues
like tradition versus technological progress, isolation versus economic
internationalism. Works by one or two of the five artists in this small show
underscore the same theme, in particular the sculptures by Seiko Mikami, which
resemble inner workings of a bomb encased within transparent plastic pods.

''Techno-Metaphysics'' also intends to demonstrate the diversity of Japanese art
today, and so presents the Minimalistic constructions of Tadaaki Kuwayama and
the intricate photographs of quail eggs by Takashi Sekiguchi alongside Ushio
Shinohara's cacophonous paintings and sculpture. None of these pieces are
particularly memorable. But Hirotake Kurokawa's small and intricately shaped
bronze sculptures, which can remind a viewer of Joel Fisher's work, are worth a
look.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of exhibit at the New Museum of Contemporary Art (NYT/Jack
Manning)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 15, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Bad Debt Rose Sharply at I.M.F. Last Year

BYLINE: By CLYDE H. FARNSWORTH, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 6, Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 682 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 14


The International Monetary Fund reported Wednesday that the bad debts it holds
rose sharply in the last year and now total 10 percent of its outstanding loans.

A footnote in the annual report of the 151-nation lending agency showed that as
of last April 30 11 members had $3 billion of I.M.F. debts overdue longer than
six months, compared with nine members with overdue obligations of $2.2 billion
a year earlier.

The report, which in other sections analyzed the global economy and warned that
current prosperity was endangered by high debt and lagging investment in many
countries, offered no comment on the arrears picture.

But monetary officials said it was a matter of ''grave concern'' to the
institution because the resultant squeeze on its liquid cash reserves comes at a
time when the I.M.F. is being called upon to play an increasingly active role in
the formulation of a new strategy to deal with third world debt.

Special Creditor Status

The rise in arrears is considered unusual because the fund holds
preferred-creditor status, which means it must be paid ahead of other lenders to
the third world except for the World Bank.

In most cases, one analyst said, the nonpayment reflects the growing
difficulties of developing countries in trying to cope with crushing debt
burdens that have weighed on the global economy since 1982.

''Some of these countries have just run out of money,'' said John Williamson,
senior fellow of the Institute for International Economics, a Washington policy
research group.

The 11 countries mentioned in the report are Guyana, Kampuchea, Liberia, Panama,
Peru, Sierra Leone, Somalia, the Sudan, Vietnam, Zaire and Zambia.

Although the countries are mostly modest borrowers of fund resources, officials
said the organization was anxious about the slow but steady rise in the number
of countries in arrears over the decade.

Zaire Makes Payment

One official said Wednesday that he believed the situation had ''now
stabilized,'' citing payments by one country, Zaire, since April that have wiped
out that country's arrears. Still, none of the other countries in the report
have made payments since then.

The I.M.F. bars countries in arrears from taking out new loans. Although it
could expel a nonpayer, it has yet to go to such an extreme.

Even the World Bank, the biggest source of funds for the third world, is not
immune to the arrears problem. At the bank, however, the problem is not as
severe as at the I.M.F. Peru, for example, one of the countries in the I.M.F.'s
report, continues to honor its commitments to the bank.

Both institutions were created 45 years ago to support countries in financial
trouble and accelerate economic development.

Increasingly Stringent Conditions

The I.M.F. administers a $120 billion pool of currencies and gold contributed by
its members. The amount contributed by each nation is in relation to its
economic strength. Members borrow from the pool under conditions that become
increasingly stringent as more money is borrowed.

Currently, of the $120 billion pool of funds of the I.M.F., only $70 billion is
in hard currencies suitable for international lending. About $30 billion of that
has actually been lent out and an additional $10 billion committed.

The I.M.F., unlike the World Bank, does not rely on a credit standing in
international markets. While the World Bank borrows heavily in world financial
centers to make loans to poor countries, the I.M.F. gets its money entirely from
contributions from governments and is now in the process of trying to get an
additional infusion.

The Bush Administration is expected to decide shortly to support an increase in
the I.M.F. resources but will need Congressional approval, which may be
difficult. Some lawmakers see the higher arrears implying greater prospects for
taxpayer liability.

''Arrearage implies loans may be in jeopardy and taxpayer funds diverted,'' said
Represenative Jim Leach, Republican of Iowa. ''This promises to be one of the
most difficult issues when the quota increase comes before Congess next year.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 16, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

For Sri Lankans, Terror Strikes From All Sides

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 718 words

DATELINE: MORATUWA, Sri Lanka, Sept. 15


They cremated the slain vice chancellor of Moratuwa University on Thursday. He
was a strong-minded and popular academic who lived surrounded by terror and died
trying to keep higher education alive in a country where it is no longer safe to
be young.

That is how his students, colleagues and friends spoke of him as they walked
slowly behind his coffin, down the sandy lane to the crematorium near the
glistening sea in the resort town of Mount Lavinia, south of Colombo. They also
cautioned the outsider not to be too quick to accept official speculation that
anti-Government terrorists had killed the vice chancellor, Chandratne
Patuwathavithane.

The vice chancellor, the equivalent of an American college president, had
protested the arrests of students and the closing of universities, deemed to be
recruiting grounds for militants.

Destroying a Culture

In Sri Lanka, where unidentified youthful bodies float down rivers or wash up on
beaches by the dozen every day, people trying to analyze the carnage are
concerned by the long-term effects of losing those who seem to be specifically
targeted: intellectuals, independent-minded civil servants, human rights
monitors and politically active young men and women. Sri Lanka was traditionally
noted for its good schools, high levels of public service - despite a certain
amount of endemic corruption - and political sophistication.

In the last two years, since violence has shifted from the Tamil-dominated
northeast to the south, the home of the country's ethnic Sinhalese majority, the
brutality that has caused about 5,000 deaths cannot be explained by ethnic
conflict, Professor Patuwathavithane's colleagues said today.

Sri Lankans, and the diplomats who try to make sense of this, focus on
disturbing questions behind the death toll: Who wants to kill these people, and
to what end?

Many believe that both pro-Government and anti-Government forces are involved,
and that when this violent period ends, Sri Lankan society will have been
permanently altered.

One Carnage, Then Another

Sometime early Wednesday, also in Moratuwa, six young men had been
''necklaced,'' burned in rubber-tire collars that create a flame so powerful it
wipes out the face. But the unmistakable charred dents in the dirt road beside a
Government housing project were on view.

Government officials say they are puzzled by those who committed these acts of
murder.

Spread of Death Squads

At ground level, however, Sri Lankans are constructing their own explanations.
They speak cautiously of the spread of death squads loyal to the governing
United National Party and made up not of military men but of civilians,
including politicians' private armies and labor union officials, willing to do
the Government's work.

At the moment, that seems to include eliminating young people who have joined or
even been suspected of supporting the People's Liberation Front, a militant
organization fired by a mixture of ethnic Sinhalese nationalism, radical
Communism and an overriding hatred of Indians.

The Front, which has fluctuated between armed rebellion and legal political
activity for more than 20 years, took on new life with the arrival in 1987 of
Indian Army peacekeeping troops, charged with disarming Tamil rebels and
enforcing a peace accord designed to end the Tamil insurgency.

Sri Lanka's mainline Communists, who were among the first targets of the Front,
see it as a ''Pol-Potist'' brand of Marxism, a reference to the brutal ruler of
Cambodia from 1975 to 1979.

On the Front's Hit List

The Front has killed shopkeepers, taxi drivers and bus owners who defy its calls
for general strikes. It is also thought to be responsible for the deaths of the
vice chancellor of Colombo University, scores of Government officials, monks and
two television journalists.

On Tuesday, gunmen shot to death the chairman of the State Pharmaceutical
Corporation, Dr. Gladys Jayewardene, a sister-in-law of the former President, J.
R. Jayewardene. The drug company had stocked Indian-made pharmaceuticals in
defiance of a threat from the Front.

The Front's supporters say they are being assisted by Vietnam and Cuba. Most
diplomats believe that outside support, if it exists at all, is minimal and that
the group is too fragmented to seize power.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Colleagues and friends of Chandratne Patuwathavithane, a popular Sri
Lankan academic, are questioning the Government's reports that he was killed by
extremists. His daughter, Dilruksh Peiris, mourned on Thursday beside his coffin
in Panadura. (The New York Times/Barbara Crossette); map of Sri Lanka showing
location of Moratuwa

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 17, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

DANCE;
American Indian Dancers Rekindle Their Heritage

BYLINE: By JENNIFER DUNNING

SECTION: Section 2; Page 7, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1199 words


Most Americans have grown up with the image of American Indian culture as a
thing of war whoops and tom-tom beats. And that image has been perpetuated among
young children, according to Arlie Neskahi, a Navaho drummer and singer, and
Wade Baker, a Hidatsa-Cree dancer and singer. Both are members of the American
Indian Dance Theater, which makes its New York City debut with a two-week
engagement that begins on Tuesday at the Joyce Theater.

''We've done a lot of shows for little kids, and they do the whooping,'' Mr.
Neskahi said recently. ''But as soon as the show starts, everyone is quiet.''
Mr. Neskahi tapped out a heavy, regular rhythm that might have come from the
drums so often heard beating out messages in western movies. ''I've been on
reservations all over the country and never heard that,'' he said. ''Don't know
how they thought it up.''

Mr. Baker nodded, laughing. ''We do that when we goof around,'' he said.

The American Indian Dance Theater was formed two years ago, in an effort to undo
some of the stereotypical misconceptions that still surround the American
Indian's dance and music. It is also a product of a newly found cultural pride
within the Indian community.

The dances and music to be performed represent only 18 of the 430 tribes
recognized by American Indians in the United States today. Featured at the Joyce
will be the Zuni Rainbow Dance, which gives thanks for rain, the Zuni Buffalo
Dance, the San Carlos Apache Crown Dance, two versions of the Eagle Dance, the
intricate Hoop Dance and the Grass Dance, in which young men stomp down tall
grass to form a circle for dancing.

The Fancy Shawl Dance shows off the company's women in bounding, high-stepping
footwork. The Sneak Up, the Crow Hop and the Ruffle Dance will be performed in
the ''Traditional Dances'' section of the evening's presentation. And the
''Fancy Dancing'' section will display skills that have won prizes at powwows
throughout the country.

Barbara Schwei, the founder and producer of the company, and Hanay Geiogamah,
the director, spent a year auditioning American Indian dancers and musicians for
the 24-member troupe, which gave its first public performance in 1987. Since
then, the company has toured nationally and internationally.

The performers, who range in age from 20 to 61, wear a variety of highly
detailed costumes, from layers of beaded and feathered ceremonial dress to
simple buckskin dresses and leggings. The music is performed on traditional
instruments made by the performers from hollowed logs, clay pots, leather hides,
gourds, deer hooves and pieces of wood and bone.

Some of the same works are performed by many different tribes. They have been
selected by Mr. Geiogamah to give an overview of Indian culture. A
Kiowa-Delaware Indian, Mr. Geiogamah is also an adjunct professor in the
Department of Indian Studies and Theater Arts at the University of California at
Los Angeles.

The dances and music performed by the American Indian Theater represent a
renewal of traditional culture among Indians themselves, revolving around the
powwow, three-to four-day gatherings held annually by tribes, usually in the
summer. Some powwows have a long history, like the 48th annual Ponca tribal
gathering in White Eagle, Okla., in August. Others, like the huge United Tribes
International Powwow in Bismarck, N.D., earlier this month, attract as many as
15,000 people, with 300 to 400 performers participating.

The powwows are celebrations of old and new music and dance, with singing and
fancy-dancing competitions and ''specials,'' in which gifts are exchanged.
Gift-giving is an essential part of the culture. Singers do not perform other
composers' songs, just as they seldom sing sacred music at performances and
never present the sacred music of another tribe. If they do sing another
composer's song, even unknowingly, they may be made to pay a small fine, but
they may also get gifts from the composer for a good performance.

The present-day powwow began to develop three decades ago. ''I grew up on the
powwow trail,'' said Mr. Baker, a fourth-generation tribal singer. ''Many tribes
started powwowing together in the late 1950's and early 60's, when the auto
started to become a natural thing.''

Mr. Baker, who is 31 years old, and Mr. Neskahi, 32, are also composers and sing
with other groups - Mr. Baker with the Eagle Whistle Singers, based in Cortez,
Calif., and Mr. Neskahi, who works as a counselor specializing in adolescent and
family problems, with the White Eagle Singers, based in the Fort Totten Indian
Reservation in North Dakota.

The two men talk with quiet passion of Indian song, which often sounds to the
untutored ear like sobbing. Some songs use old Indian language. Others are sung
out in syllables, called vocables. ''The songs are not chants,'' Mr. Neskahi
said. ''They're songs with real, complete melodies, songs with a lot of emotion.
A lot evoke feelings of hard times and challenges. Others are happy songs that
call on dancers to come out, dance well and enjoy themselves.''

Indian songs draw on the natural and spirit worlds. They also pay tribute to the
contemporary warriors of the two World Wars and Korean and Vietnam Wars in
frequently performed ''veteran'' dances and music. Mr. Neskahi's father has even
composed an homage to the American military serving in the Persian Gulf. The
traditions handed down inform the music and serve as subtexts. There was a time,
however, when some Indians, more rooted in tradition, looked down upon and even
ostracized younger members of their tribes.

''As little as 20 years ago, you had to be a traditionalist or an 'apple' - red
on the outside, white on the inside,'' Mr. Neskahi said. ''Times have changed.''
But the two worlds have been hard to bridge.  ''A lot of Indian kids didn't
learn their language,'' Mr. Baker said. ''My parents chose not to teach me. They
had gone to boarding school, where they were punished for speaking their
language. So, I grew up with a feeling of shame and embarrassment around my
people, because I couldn't speak. All my friends were white. I excelled in the
public schools I went to. But I got lonely for my people. I had a grandfather
who always taught me the old legends. I loved them. But he had to tell me in
English. It was real hard. That old man struggled.''

In the 1940's, many Indians began moving into cities. ''The culture got lost,''
Mr. Baker said. ''But many are coming back to the reservations. Indians want to
go back to the culture.''

PUBLIC-TV POWWOW

In February, the American Indian Dance Theater will be seen on PBS as part of
Great Performances' ''Dance in America'' series. The hourlong program gives a
strong sense of the interrelationship for the Indian of nature, the spiritual
and music and dance.

Taped earlier this summer in a TV studio in Nashville and at the San Ildefonso
pueblo in New Mexico and an Oklahoma powwow, the show offers a wide-ranging look
at Indian dances, along with informative and often poignant commentary by Indian
performers.

The dances - many of which will be presented at the Joyce - are compact,
internalized and subtly complex, with an easy, soft-edged quality.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Eddie Swimmer performing the Hoop Dance (Jack Vartoogian)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 17, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THEATER;
FROM THE PARIS SEWERS TO VIETNAM'S STREETS

BYLINE: By HILARY DE VRIES; Hilary de Vries writes frequently about the theater.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1734 words

DATELINE: LONDON


On his hands and knees, Cameron Mackintosh was scrounging around under the
antique coffee table the other day in his Bedford Square office. The British
musical theater producer - ''Phantom of the Opera,'' ''Les Miserables,''
''Cats'' - was looking for some black-and-white glossies of his latest stage
extravaganza, ''Miss Saigon.''

''There is only one opening. There is only one future,'' said Mr. Mackintosh,
repeating this refrain like a mantra while flipping through the piles of scripts
and scores cluttering the Oriental rug. ''There is only one future, Sept. 20.''

Four years in the making, production costs over $5 million, with a 42-member
cast from 10 countries and a premiere on Wednesday at London's Theater Royal,
Drury Lane, ''Miss Saigon'' has a record advance of $8 million and has sold out
for its first six months. ''Miss Saigon'' is the much-anticipated second work by
the creators of ''Les Miserables,'' Alain Boublil and Claude-Michel Schonberg,
the French lyricist-and-composer team that adapted Victor Hugo's classic
19th-century novel into an international hit musical. More than a dozen
productions of ''Les Miz'' have played 72 cities (including the long-running
Broadway version), grossing more than a quarter of a billion dollars since the
London premiere four years ago.

''Miss Saigon,'' a reworking of Puccini's opera ''Madama Butterfly'' set during
the Vietnam war, is the biggest production - as well as the riskiest - of Mr.
Mackintosh's Midas-touch career. It is the first musical about the fall of
Vietnam and was written, directed and produced without any Asian or American
collaboration. (There is one Asian lead, Lea Salonga, an 18-year-old Filipino
actress and singer, a chorus with some Asians and an American co-lyricist,
Richard Maltby, creator of ''Ain't Misbehavin.' '') Previously associated with
the English composer Andrew Lloyd Webber (''Jesus Christ Superstar,'' ''Evita,''
''Cats''), Mr. Mackintosh has a reputation as a producer of high-tech
spectacular ''event'' musicals, most of which were preceded by the release of a
recording of the score. Now, he has followed along lines similar to those of Mr.
Lloyd Webber in his latest musical, ''Aspects of Love,'' which opened here in
April and is a modest love story told without special effects. Mr. Mackintosh is
presenting ''Miss Saigon'' without an advance record album, without many special
effects, without major stars and in London's largest theater during a season in
which a number of West End shows - ''Brigadoon,'' ''The Vortex'' and ''Steel
Magnolias'' - have closed after relatively short runs.

''It is dangerous subject matter and it is the only contemporary musical I've
done,'' says the producer, scrambling out from under the table and settling on
an overstuffed couch. ''But you can't decide to put on a show because you think
it's timely. In the end the only thing that matters is that I've heard it and
it's wonderfully original.''

Mr. Mackintosh and the composer and lyricist have worked on the project off and
on for nearly five years. They auditioned nearly 2,000 actors and singers on
five continents and virtually reassembled the award-winning ''Miserables''
creative team. In addition to Mr. Boublil and Mr. Schonberg, those involved
include the ''Les Miz'' set designer, John Napier; the costumer, Andreane
Neofitou, and the lighting designer, David Hersey.

There is one crucial difference - the absence of the ''Miserables'' director,
Trevor Nunn, the former artistic head of Britain's Royal Shakespeare Company,
who was instrumental in developing the original Paris version of ''Les
Miserables'' into the international hit. In place of Mr. Nunn, Mr. Mackintosh
has chosen Nicholas Hynter, a 33-year-old opera and theater director who is
considered one of the fastest-rising stars in the younger post-Trevor Nunn
generation of British directors.

''I had seen several of Nick's opera productions - Handel's 'Xerxes' and
Mozart's 'Magic Flute' - as well as some of his classical plays, and he has a
marvelously visual point of view,'' says Mr. Mackintosh. But he adds that the
show's ''real emotional strength is in the writing, so you don't care if the
production has a rough edge. We want it to seem torn from the heart.'' That
emotional quality, says the producer, will be the only discernible similarity to
''Les Miserables.''

For one thing, he says, the music is entirely different. ''And the story is
obviously more contemporary - Saigon in 1975 versus 19th-century France. So
every element of the production has to be more realistic. If, for one moment,
anybody says, 'Oh, they did very well with miserable peasants in the 19th
century and now they're just looking [to exploit] a 20th-century tragedy,' then
we deserve [to fail].''

''Miss Saigon'' had its genesis when Mr. Boublil and Mr. Schonberg, then a
nascent French musical theater writing team, who had just begun to work on ''Les
Miserables,'' came across a photograph in a news magazine of a Vietnamese woman
giving up her child to an American G.I. in the Saigon airport. ''I realized that
act was [not only the end of the relationship with the American] but also the
end of her relationship with her child,'' said Mr. Schonberg in an interview in
New York. ''It sounded to us like the ultimate sacrifice and a wonderful subject
for an operatic story,'' added Mr. Boublil. ''And we saw how this could be
related to 'Madama Butterfly.' But we wanted it to be as far away from that
opera as 'West Side Story' is from 'Romeo and Juliet.' ''

Using the basic ''Madama Butterfly'' story line - a young Japanese woman falls
in love with an American Navy man, bears his child, is abandoned and later gives
up the child to him and his American-born wife - the composer and lyricist
changed the location to Saigon and Bangkok.

The musical is set in Saigon just prior to the American withdrawal from South
Vietnam in April 1975. Kim, the female protagonist, is a young girl from the
countryside who is working in a Saigon bar after her parents have been killed.
Chris is a Marine guard at the American Embassy. The two meet and fall in love,
but the affair is doomed from the start. Any similarity to the opera ends there,
say the composer and lyricist.

''We don't use any of the psychology of 'Madame Butterfly,' '' says Mr. Boublil,
referring to the passivity of Puccini's female protagonist and the callousness
of his American serviceman. ''And we are trying to capture the shock of two
cultures - Asian and Western - in a more modern time.''

According to Mr. Schonberg, who used several musical motifs in ''Les
Miserables,'' the ''Miss Saigon'' score is less an attempt to mimic Eastern
tonal patterns than an effort to ''capture the feel of a hot, wet country.''
Similar to ''Les Miserables'' however, ''Miss Saigon'' is a bookless,
through-composed musical dotted with pop-music arias. Telling the story of a
portion of turbulent American history, says Mr. Boublil, was harder than
retelling a French classical novel. ''But really in a way it was easier,'' he
adds, ''because we were not so compelled by our own literary history, and this
is an expansion of a story, not a distillation.''

The disparity in source material gives the director, Nicholas Hytner, pause. ''I
am wary of a couple of French guys and an Englishman (myself) who is too young
to have experienced Vietnam except as a teen-ager watching it on television
trying to get all this right somehow,'' he said in an interview in his North
London apartment.

Indeed, except for Miss Salonga's Kim (who will alternate the role with Monica
Wilson, another Filipino actress) all the principal roles will be played by
English actors, including Simon Bowman as Chris, the American G.I.; Claire Moore
as his wife, Ellen, and Jonathan Pryce, who plays the Engineer, a half-French,
half-Vietnamese protector of Kim. Mr. Pryce is perhaps best-known to American
audiences for his roles in the films ''Brazil'' and ''The Adventures of Baron
Munchausen.''

In addition to exploring the themes common to ''Madama Butterfly,'' the musical
also deals with the plight of Amerasian children and war refugees. And,
according to Mr. Hytner, a main issue is ''how everyone wants to go to America
and become an American. One of the first big musical numbers is called 'The
Movie in My Mind' and it's all about the American dream. I think this is best
done by non-Americans. There is no attempt here to make any heavy political
analysis of the East-West situation or even America's involvement in Vietnam.
This is more of a look at that gulf of misunderstanding that exists between
people.''

Mr. Hytner says that the creators of ''Miss Saigon'' have progressed ''in their
ability to develop character,'' and that that is evident in the pacing and
production style, which are far different from the quick-cut cinematic
''Miserable'' production, which relied on a massive stage turntable to speed
along the musical's events.

''Miss Saigon,'' he says, has more to do ''with an endless shimmering
surrounding five people who we follow from start to finish. It's the classic
romantic opera structure.'' Mr. Hytner adds that this musical should evoke an
earlier Mackintosh work, ''Evita,'' which was based on the structure of
''personality and panorama, so that what happens in the front of the canvas
echoes what is happening at the back of the canvas - the conflict between East
and West, America and Vietnam, France and Vietnam.''

John Napier - the Tony Award-winning set designer who in addition to his work on
''Les Miz'' is perhaps best known for creating such theatrical fantasy worlds as
those found in ''Cats'' and ''Starlight Express'' - says, ''I suppose this is
the most naturalistic design I've ever done.'' His set designs range from
standard hotel and conference rooms to Army barracks to garish Bangkok streets
and the interiors of squalid bars.

Mr. Napier's design is a white boxlike tent that lines the proscenium, and
''looks like rice paper but is really gauze.'' Within that delicate shell, which
will be frequently lit from behind, are placed the more realistic scenes of Army
barracks, Bangkok streets and the like. ''It's really a straightforward job,''
says Mr. Napier, adding with a sly smile, ''Oh, yes, there is also a helicopter
that will take off from the Embassy roof. And as far as the audience is
concerned, it will fly.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: October 15, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

An article on Sept. 17 about the British theatrical producer Cameron Mackintosh
incorrectly stated that he was associated with ''Evita.'' The Andrew Lloyd
Webber-Tim Rice musical was directed by Harold Prince and produced by Robert
Stigwood.

GRAPHIC: Jonathan Pryce as the Engineer and Lea Salonga as the young Vietnamese
woman, Kim, rehearsing for ''Miss Saigon'' (Michael Le Poer Trench) (pg. 5);
Cameron Mackintosh, the producer of ''Miss Saigon'' (Michael Le Poer Trench)
(pg. 43)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 17, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Riches of Brunei

BYLINE: By D. J. R. BRUCKNER; D. J. R. BRUCKNER is an editor of The New York
Times Book Review.

SECTION: Section 5; Page 19, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 2143 words


IT isn't quite Wonderland, but Brunei has qualities that would delight Lewis
Carroll. It also has Western-style comforts that can be welcome to a traveler
ranging around Southeast Asia or the South Pacific who is tired of going native.
There is an air of unreality about this tiny kingdom rooted like a molar on the
north shore of the island of Borneo. It seems almost surreal if one goes
directly to it from a poor, crowded place like Vietnam.

Mention Brunei to most people and little will register except that its absolute
ruler, Sultan Haji Hassanal Bolkiah Muizzadin Waddaulah, is immensely rich from
oil revenues and has built himself a 1,788-room palace in the capital, Bandar
Seri Begawan (which everyone calls simply B.S.B.).

That, in fact, is one of the advantages of Brunei - not many other tourists get
in the way. After all, with a per capita income exceeding $18,000 a year, more
than that of the United States, what need has Brunei of tourism? Yet a tourist
will find enough to see - mosques, museums, water villages, jungles and beaches,
all of it in or near B.S.B. - to occupy a few days. On the hotel circuit there
is an abundance of Western food and drink and in the new shopping centers, or
plazas as the Bruneians call them, a growing number of restaurants specializing
in traditional spicy Malay food. While no effort is made to exploit the sale of
local arts and crafts, there are many places to shop for jewelry, especially
gold. For gun fanciers it is, of course, a kind of mecca, since Brunei is the
only place to find those small, elaborately carved bronze cannons. And the
language is familiar, since the free and compulsory education is conducted
entirely in English (the Malay language used in this part of the world is taught
in school as a subject).

As for that palace, the Istana Nurul Iman, there is no way in without an
invitation. But there are any number of places to see it from; it is hard to
avoid even though it is about a mile drive from downtown B.S.B. The most idyllic
view is from a park south of it, alongside a broad avenue, Jalan Tutong. The
park is filled with large sculptures and lined with herringbone stone walks and
shaded benches. The most awe-inspiring view is from a boat on the Brunei River;
the palace is seen sprawling across a 300-acre manicured palisade, its roofs
billowing out around two gold domes that dominate the place.

Actually, since one cannot get inside to see its gold-arched dining room that
seats thousands or all the high tech apparatus and the mountains of European art
said to fill it, it is not terribly impressive. Its architecture is
undistinguished and it lacks even the whimsy of some older Asian palaces
approaching this size.

Other members of the royal family have mansions spread all over the environs of
B.S.B. One of the sultan's sisters has built herself something that looks like a
red lacquer Chinese village. And Prince Mohamed Bolkiah, one of the sultan's
brothers, who is also the foreign minister, has a white stone and glass house
that is a fine piece of architecture by any standards. There will be more in the
future. Here and there hills are being flattened and cliffs gouged out to make
room for more mansions for the Bolkiah family.

It was not always so. Guides on boat tours around B.S.B. point out a very modest
two-story green house facing the river where the sultan's father, the previous
ruler, was born and to which he is said to have returned after he abdicated the
throne in 1967.

The most interesting homes are the long houses up country, reached by a long
boat ride from B.S.B. through the Bay of Brunei and up the vast Temburong River.
Local tour agents, who can be contacted through the hotels, will arrange two-day
trips, but a day trip (actually about six hours) gives one an adequate look at
the jungle and hilly interior of the country as it rises toward the central
mountain range of Borneo. The river is turbulent, lush and tropical, and the
vast forests that reach down into the waters harbor an enormous range of
wildlife from crocodiles and monitor lizards to such spectacular birds as black,
white, red and yellow hornbills. In the Temburong District there is an outdoor
zoo where some of the fauna - from various Bornean primates to banded kraits and
other unfriendly vipers to argus pheasants can be inspected close up, next to a
gorgeous riverside park around which the hills rise in waves of green and
purple.

Of course, in Brunei the ancient long houses made of bamboo and logs that can
still be found in neighboring states like Kalimantan or neighboring islands like
Sulawesi are rapidly being replaced by sturdier, modern structures the
government builds. But these still serve the same purposes and have much the
same spirit, in spite of the television sets, refrigerators, electric lights and
Western furniture.

The usual long house has an outer porch stretching down its considerable length
and then a parallel, inner, covered one from which doors lead into the separate
quarters of the many families occupying the structure, in apartments that can
have as many as four or five bedrooms. They are ingenious pieces of
architecture. Brunei is only a few degrees from the equator and stepping into
the shaded porch of a longhouse is cool refreshment (also much healthier,
probably, than the arctic air-conditioning that can turn B.S.B. hotels and shops
truly frigid).

The long houses are really small villages. Most of the people in them, as many
as 60 or 80, tend to be related in a maze of kinship and they are like villagers
everywhere, only friendlier. The tour agents in B.S.B. can arrange a visit to
one of them. After a couple of hours in one, talking with the adults and
watching the children playing, occasionally ordered around by an old woman who
seemed to have appointed herself the captain of the this little ark, I found
myself remembering the Middle Western village of my childhood. We were just a
broken-up long house on the great plains.

Anyway, the modern long house is very far from the homes of the legendary
headhunters who terrified visitors to Borneo not long ago. (Every government in
the region insists that in not one of the thousands of islands that stretch from
the northern Philippines through all of Indonesia and Malaysia is there a single
headhunter now.) In B.S.B. the majority live in houses built on stilts in the
river -something not easily perceived at first. The drive in from the airport
whisks one past a mammoth new soccer stadium, which the sultan has named for
himself and that looks like it could easily hold a fifth of Brunei's 250,000
people, into the streets of the capital, which looks like any provincial town
except that it is spanking clean.

Towering over it is the glistening gold dome of the Omar Ali Saifuddin Mosque,
the largest in South Asia, a temple of marble and bronze in the center of the
city (the sultan is building a much larger and more glittering one on the
outskirts) from which a muezzin with a very powerful loudspeaker calls the
Muslim faithful to prayer at sunrise and sunset. Approached from a ceremonial
park in front, the serene old mosque appears to be nowhere near water. But a
walk around it reveals first an imitation boat of stone in the middle of a
lagoon where the faithful can sit and read the Koran and, beyond that, a curving
walk that eventually carries one over a bridge and onto wooden walkways that
wind through warrens of wooden stilt houses.

From the Brunei River it becomes obvious that much of the city - virtually all
of the older, historical part of it - is on stilts in the water. It is made up
of groups of houses divided into perhaps three dozen villages side by side.
Houses run from the unnoticeable to the grand. Neighborhood mosques float on the
river. Schools rise out of the water and mothers row their children to class in
the morning. For 20 years the government, on the ground that many of these
river-borne houses are unsanitary, has been encouraging people to move into the
modern landside sprawl that now stretches out for miles in several directions
from the old city, but the stilt houses remain packed and somehow seem more
solid than the glitzy new Western-style houses on land. On the land side the
streets are jammed with new cars. The sultan, who is no civil libertarian and
who runs his country as autocratically as any of the legendary Asian potentates
of the past, has nonetheless created a welfare state so munificent no socialist
regime would dare dream of equaling it, and he has resolutely pushed his people
into modern times. Until recently the government had a vast loan program
financing new cars and another for color television sets. There are not many
roads throughout Brunei, but the cars have produced in B.S.B. a familiar
phenomenon: a growing network of lavish shopping centers and suburban
apartments. A car is a necessity.

One can foresee the eventual disappearance of the messy and enchanting little
open-air markets along a canal in downtown B.S.B. or the even messier and
mesmerizing shops run mostly by Chinese merchants that defy categorizing. Will
people in orderly suburban emporiums fling themselves with such abandon at the
gold counters that occupy corners of many of these shops (a few have their own
stores and one its own factory) as the Bruneians now do? No mere alloy will
satify these people. They want real gold - 24 karats, or 22 karats in heavier
items.

Even the fascinating Malay Technology Museum is a couple of miles from town.
Brunei has vaulted so rapidly into the modern, and Western, world and into
wealth that the museum was built largely to let the young know where they came
from. It is probably the only place in the country now where an old long house
can be seen, furnished with the implements of a life that lasted for centuries
(but no headhunting paraphernalia) and then disappeared overnight. Near this
museum one ancient artifact that has not disappeared is the tomb of the original
Sultan Bolkiah, who in the 16th century drove the Spanish fleet from Borneo. He
ruled all of Borneo (the word ''Borneo'' is apparently only a 17th-century
British corruption of Brunei) and many other islands nearby, extending his
mandate, and his war making, as far as Luzon in the Philippines.

None of the several museums in B.S.B. is more amusing than the Churchill
Memorial (near the great mosque and a building with a fantastic Chinese-style
gold roof that is called a legislative center although there is no legislature -
the outcome of the only known election of lawmakers having greatly displeased
the then-reigning sultan in the early 1960's). Winston Churchill had no personal
interest in this onetime British protectorate, but the present sultan's father
was fascinated with things British and so here is this vast collection of
Churchill memorabilia, including letters and other autographs, pieces of
furniture and personal items, little of it of historical importance.

Even stranger, just down the street, is a restaurant called the Grill Room,
which has an English menu of a past era and the complete trappings of an English
tack room fastened to the walls among old prints of English hunting scenes. It
is in a place like this that one feels Lewis Carroll smiling over one's
shoulder.

AROUND THE ISLAND KINGDOM

Getting There

Royal Brunei Airlines flies to Bandar Seri Begawan from many places in Asia, and
from Dubai and Australia. Thai Airways International has regular flights from
Bangkok. Singapore Airlines has daily flights from Singapore and Philippine
Airlines serves Brunei from Manila. A visa, which costs $7.50, is required. More
information is available from the Brunei Embassy to the United States, 2600
Virginia Avenue, N.W., Suite 300, Washington, D.C. 20037; telephone
202-342-0159.

Hotels

The Sheraton Utama is new and expensive, with rates from about $112 to $130 a
night. Next door to it is another large establishment, Ang's Hotel, with rooms
from about $60 to $70. Both are in the center of B.S.B. Across the river, in one
of the new business and apartment plazas, is the new National Inn, with rates
from about $40 to $55.

Restaurants

The best Western restaurant in town is the formal dining room in the Sheraton
Utama, much favored by B.S.B. society. In general, the hotel dining rooms are
Western, although Ang's has a Chinese restaurant as well. For traditional Malay
food try The Menara Inn or the paneled and rustic looking SD Cafe (what the SD
stands for is anyone's guess), both out in shopping center satellites.

Tours

There are several small tour companies you can contact through your hotel that
will arrange trips around B.S.B. on the river and by land, as well as longer
excursions up into the country to visit the long houses and country towns.    -
D. J. R. B.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: An elaborately carved river boat sits permanently before the Omar Ali
Saifuddin Mosque, the largest in South Asia (Diane Rawson/Photo Researchers);
Iban tribal chiefs holding their traditional feast in Bandar Seri Begawan, the
capital (Paolo Koch/Photo Researchers); outside Bandar Seri Begawan, one of many
villages of long houses built on stilts over the water (Sandro
Tucci/Gamma-Liaison) (pg. 19); the Istana Nural Iman, the sultan's gold-domed
palace, sprawls over 300 acres about a mile from downtown (Alain Evrard/Photo
Researchers)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 17, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SPIES & THRILLERS

BYLINE: By Newgate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 821 words


It seems that every third thriller these days has to do with flying, and here
are two ambitious specimens of the genre by Dale Brown and Mark Berent. Both men
were flying officers in the United States Air Force, so when they write about
flying they are to be read with respect. Whatever their abilities as writers -
and it should be said that each author can manage a word processor in a
professional manner -they know everything about advanced fighter aircraft and
the physical and emotional problems that go into flying them.

Thus, Mr. Brown's DAY OF THE CHEETAH (Fine, $18.95) and Mr. Berent's ROLLING
THUNDER (Putnam, $19.95) put us in the cockpits of those wonderful machines and
give us quite a ride. Mr. Brown even helps out by providing a 10-page glossary:
''AIM-120C AMRAAM - Advanced Medium-Range Air-to-Air Missile, a radar-guided
missile built by Hughes Aircraft and Raytheon. The AIM-120 has its own radar
seeker in its nosecone.'' Who says books like this are not educational?

''Day of the Cheetah'' is about aviation espionage, with elements of science
fiction. It takes place in the immediate future. In a long prologue we learn
about the way Soviet spymasters go about getting a brilliant young Russian into
the United States Air Force Academy.

Then we jump to 1994. The mole is now a captain in the Air Force, on his way to
big things. He is also providing the K.G.B. with sensitive information about
developments in America's military aircraft. The hottest secret he delivers to
his Russian masters is about a new fighter plane in which the pilot is hooked up
to a computer that reads his nervous system and takes over. Reflexes are thus
instantaneous. The pilot controls the plane through his thinking.

Russia wants that plane, and the spy - the only one who can fly it with any
success - steals it. The Air Force tries to shoot it down. No chance. But a
pilot who flies the Cheetah - the predecessor of the revolutionary plane - sets
out after the spy, who has landed in a Latin American country to make some
modifications before taking off for Russia.

The flying sequences are terrific. Authentic and gripping, they will have you
breathing a bit heavily. Fortunately, the book concentrates on these. Otherwise,
it is a more or less standard Big Book with a very large cast of stereotypes. At
least Mr. Brown writes cleanly and maintains a narrative flow.

''Rolling Thunder'' takes us back to Vietnam. This too is a Big Book, but it
attempts more than ''Day of the Cheetah.'' Though the heroes are larger than
life, the author has tried to convey the idiocy and sheer rottenness of the
Vietnam War. The novel is not entirely devoted to flying. There is plenty of
ground action, in addition to a few visits to the White House, where a desperate
Lyndon Johnson ends up believing what he wants to believe and makes all the
wrong decisions.

Mr. Berent does not stint. Without too much preaching he takes the reader
through the whole unlovely scene: the black market, drugs, prostitution, the
mental states of those Americans who come to realize that the war cannot be won
because of the crazy ground rules set up by Washington. We see men put to the
ultimate test. Some survive. Some are broken.

With all this, the primary concern of the author is flying. He thinks, breathes
and lives in the sky, and he is lost when he gets away from it. The terminology
of the fighter pilot even enters his literary thinking. Here is our hero with
the woman he loves: ''Court took her hand. He wanted to cradle her in his arms.
He lifted his other hand to her chin, and gently tilted her head up. He wanted
her and wanted her bad, but couldn't bring himself into the pursuit mode.'' Mr.
Berent is not cut out to be a romantic novelist. But he has written an unusually
arresting book about the early days of Vietnam. There the pursuit mode works.

*

Flying also occupies a good part of HOSTAGE ONE by David E. Fisher and Ralph
Albertazzie (Random House, $18.95). Mr. Fisher is a novelist and the author of a
number of scientific books (he is a professor of cosmochemistry at the
University of Miami). Mr. Albertazzie is a former military pilot who was the
commander of Air Force One during Richard Nixon's years as President.

So if the modus operandi of the Presidential hijacking in ''Hostage One'' might
appear a little farfetched, one is brought up short with the realization that a
former pilot of Air Force One has provided his considerable expertise. But it is
indeed a farfetched scenario. It involves the Libyans, who initiate the project
as revenge for the 1986 American air attack on their country. It brings in a
superb former Vietnam flier who has his own emotional problems and is seeking
his own kind of revenge. The F.B.I. is also part of the story. The action is
nonstop, the writing expert, the climax of the down-to-the-wire variety and none
the worse for that. Nice going. Nice flying.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 17, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT;
NONFICTION

BYLINE: By DULCIE LEIMBACH

SECTION: Section 7; Page 25, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 267 words



THE ROAD TO JOY: The Letters of Thomas Merton to New and Old Friends. Edited by
Robert E. Daggy. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $27.95.) Thomas Merton was, in his
mind, at all times a monk. His other vocation, the writing of poetry and books,
was secondary. He treated his writing, which was influential in the secular and
spiritual worlds, as an ''addiction'' that sometimes needed curbing. In ''The
Road to Joy'' - edited by Robert E. Daggy, director of the Thomas Merton Center
at Bellarmine College - the reader has further access to the heart and mind of
the author of ''The Seven Storey Mountain'' and other books. After becoming a
Trappist monk, Merton achieved his cherished solitude and devoted his time to
prayer and writing. In this collection, the second volume in a series that began
with ''The Hidden Ground of Love'' in 1985, the letters date from 1931, 10 years
before Merton joined the monastery of Our Lady of Gethsemani, to 1968, when he
died. His letters portray Merton's enduring exuberance and optimism, as well as
his keen intelligence and sharp-tongued humor. They mostly concern literary and
religious matters, from overseeing his publications to discussing his spiritual
enlightenment. Often, Merton offered priestly advice or expounded on social and
political issues - the Vietnam War and racism, for example - despite his
cloistered existence. His gift as a letter writer was the ability to maintain
the balance between his two vocations, sometimes to the point where the boundary
lines disappeared. In reading these letters, one wistfully longs for Merton's
close company.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 17, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ART;
In a First for Nardin Gallery, Five Photographers Exhibit

BYLINE: By VIVIEN RAYNOR

SECTION: Section 12WC; Page 30, Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 702 words


CROSS RIVER

BARBARA BRUNDAGE, Daniel and William Delaney, Geoffry Kerrigan and John Van
Valkenburg: they live in Westchester, practice photography here and are
exhibiting prints at Nardin Fine Arts here.

Officially, the show celebrates the celebrated-to-death 150th anniversary of the
camera's invention. But in fact, its genesis was purely social. The Delaney
brothers worked for an older brother at the Fifth Division Market, in Cross
River, which counts among its customers Mr. Kerrigan and, as well, the director
of the gallery, Concetta Nardin.

As members of the board for the Trailside Nature Museum in Pound Ridge, Mr.
Kerrigan and Mr. Van Valkenburg were already acquainted and Mr. Kerrigan knew
Ms. Brundage. So one thing led to another and before long Ms. Nardin found
herself committed to a photography show - the gallery's first.

The display is large - 77 prints in all - and, as usual, the space not occupied
by the gallery's stock of artifacts from Africa and India is small. As a result,
congestion reigns, and at the time of the reviewer's visit the pictures' labels
had still to materialize. It appears that photographers are no better than
painters when it comes to organizing their own shows.

Nature is a subject for all the exhibitors, but for Mr. Van Valkenburg it is the
subject, and he treats it tenderly - in small color prints and in large
high-keyed monochromes, which are made close-toned and grainy. Seductive though
this technique is, it doesn't sit well on the sepia image of ducks on the lake,
where it gives water the consistency of batter. But it works perfectly in the
deer studies, enhancing the ghostliness of the creatures standing in long grass.

Mr. Van Valkenburg gets the best spot in the gallery with his large black and
white of a raccoon in a bucket. But this is a crowd-pleaser when compared with
the small color studies of warblers, each of them a gem in a leafy setting and
all of them tours de force of patience and observation. The photographer is a
professional whose pictures have appeared in Sports Illustrated, Field & Stream
and other publications. He is having his own exhibition at Muscoot Park on Route
100 in Somers. A staff photographer for Cross River's Ledger newspaper, Mr.
Kerrigan shows black and whites that are photo-journalistic - the shots of the
Vietnam War Memorial in Somers, of children swimming and playing Indians. Still,
his best effort is the dramatic study of a glassy reservoir that does not have a
gray in it.

The brothers Delaney make an interesting contrast: Daniel, who works as a
cameraman for a publishing company, specializes in black-and-white Americana, a
la Walker Evans. Here is a dark factory emblazoned with the white sign,
''Vincent''; there, half of an old pick-up truck moldering in a field; and in a
picture taken at an agricultural fair, a young woman poses with her
prize-winning goat. The magnum opus, though, is the study of a mill facade in
Little Falls, N.Y., which still seems to be functioning, in spite of the plastic
covering some of its myriad windows.

William Delaney, too, is interested in the poetry of the commonplace, but his
subjects (in black and white) range from reflections in Manhattan store windows
seen at night to the skull motifs carved on Colonial tombstones; and, in color,
from blue medicine bottles on a windowsill to painted female puppets of exotic,
possibly Mexican origin. This Delaney also works for the printing trade, but in
the marketing division.

A photographer for newspapers on both the East and West Coasts, Ms. Brundage is
said to use a type of film that responds to anything containing chlorophyll.
This may account for the vaguely Twilight Zone atmosphere in her scenes of trees
glowing white and unearthly behind black wrought-iron railings. These are small
but intensely felt pictures, especially the one of a deer lying dead on the
road. It is the antithesis of Mr. Van Valkenburg's romantic visions and the one
image in the show to suggest that all may not be right with the world.

The gallery is at Yellow Monkey Village, on Route 35; the show remains on view
through Sept. 24 and may be seen Tuesday through Sunday between 10 A.M. and 6
P.M.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of work by Daniel Delaney; work by John Van Valkenberg; work by
Geoffrey Kerrigan

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 17, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

OLD TROOPERS TO THE RESCUE

BYLINE: By DAVID MURRAY; David Murray, a former national and foreign
correspondent for The Chicago Sun-Times, writes frequently on military affairs.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 666 words



ARMY BLUE
By Lucian K. Truscott 4th.
436 pp. New York:
Crown Publishers.
$19.95.

There can be little question that Lucian K. Truscott 4th possesses an intimacy
and empathy with the United States Army, new and old. The son and grandson of
distinguished career officers, he himself is a graduate of West Point, an
environment he aptly dissected in his earlier novel, ''Dress Gray,'' a tale of
murder and corruption at the Military Academy.

''Army Blue,'' the title of his second effort, is also the name of a song that
is as much a part of the West Point and Army traditions as battle honors on a
regimental flag. Sung to the tune of a sentimental pre-Civil War ballad called
''Aura Lee,'' it is played to end West Point dances and at commencement, when
the first classmen march up to receive their diplomas and commissions.

And Army blue was not only the service dress color before olive drab and green,
but also the color of the dress uniform in ''a time when boots were still brown
and sabers still rattled along the flanks of a pony at full gallop and taps was
still played on a real bugle.'' Army blue also refers to the Blue family, the
novel's central characters - grandfather, father and son.

Gen. Matthew Nelson Blue Jr., the patriarch, came out of the Oklahoma plains to
rise from private to general. His son, Matthew 3d, went to West Point and
remained in the Army, despite a childhood dominated by a man who demanded of the
boy more than he would have expected of a soldier in his command.

In his turn, the son produced a West Pointer son of his own who was raised in
the same stern discipline, and as the novel opens Lieut. Matthew Nelson Blue 4th
is commanding a platoon in the Vietnamese boondocks. He is also about to get
himself in serious trouble with his superior officers, which will result in a
court-martial for desertion in the face of the enemy. It is this capital charge
- what led up to it and how the two older Matthew Blues join together after a
long estrangement to help the young officer - that forms the basis of Mr.
Truscott's plot.

Mr. Truscott has drawn on his own forebears' experience to present a detailed,
convincing picture of career Army life and politics. General Blue, for example,
believes that an infantry battalion is ''the most perfect thing in the world''
because it ''will do any goddamned thing you tell it to do.'' But he also knows
that there is ''nothing lonelier than waking up in the morning and moving two
stickpins on a map and knowing that by noon two hundred men would be dead - two
hundred of your men, American boys.''

For Lieutenant Blue, his first command is the lonely exhilaration of having
''twenty-four pairs of eyes and twenty-four pairs of ears watching you and
listening to you all day and all night expecting more wisdom and needing more
courage from your twenty-three years than you knew was in there.'' He hates the
war in Vietnam, but he loves the Army, as do his father (whose career stagnated
after distinguished service in Korea) and grandfather.

In this generally well-written novel, there are evocative descriptions of the
old Army between the wars, when polo playing was at least as important as field
maneuvers. The minor characters are graphically drawn, particularly the senior
sergeants, a breed that has been the backbone of every army since Philip of
Macedon. To Mr. Truscott, the Army as an institution is a force for good; only
those who subvert it from within are villains.

As ''Army Blue'' moves toward its climax, the general and the colonel are helped
by two reporters, one of them a professionally aggressive woman who is
determined to get the real story behind the court-martial. Together, they
discover the facts and the villains behind the charges against the lieutenant.
Unfortunately, the solution comes in the form of a deus ex machina that leaves
the reader unsatisfied. It is a pity, because Mr. Truscott has a good tale to
tell and knows his subject and his characters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 19, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Errant Rocket Spares U.S. Embassy in Colombia

BYLINE: By JAMES BROOKE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 501 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia Sept. 18


Terrorists struck the United States Embassy here with a homemade rocket on
Sunday night. Fired from a park 10 blocks away, the rocket bounced harmlessly
against a wall and fell to the ground without exploding.

No group took responsibility for the incident, but it was widely believed to be
connected to the violence that has broken out since the Government cracked down
on drug traffickers. The attack raised the possibility that Americans could
become targets in a terror campaign being waged by Colombia's cocaine
traffickers.

Angered by Extradition

The drug merchants are known to be angry over the recent extradition of a
Colombian narcotics suspect to the United States for trial and over recent
announcements by President Bush that the United States would send aid totaling
about $150 million to help Colombia battle the drug cartels.

In other anti-American incidents this month, a State Department airplane used in
anti-narcotics work was firebombed in Monteria, an American flag was burned at a
university rally here where anti-American and anti-extradition slogans were
chanted, and a bomb was deactivated last Thursday at the Colgate-Palmolive
Company's headquarters in Cali.

On Aug. 30, the State Department ordered the evacuation of spouses of American
diplomats here - about 40 people. But, few of the estimated 18,000 American
citizens are believed to have left Colombia. Many have family ties here and are
accustomed to a high level of violence.

A wave of bombings here over the weekend destroyed five bank branches and
damaged dozens of stores, causing losses estimated at $1 million.

Drug Figure's Ranch Seized

In Chapinero, a middle-class shopping area, display windows on 30 stores were
blown out by dynamite. ''You feel powerless, unable to do anything,'' said Maria
del Pilar Gomez, manager of a bombed branch of Colmena bank. [Officials said
troops seized a 22,000-acre ranch and hundreds of show horses belonging to Jose
Gonzalo Rodriguez Gacha, sought by the United States for drug trafficking, The
Associated Press reported.] On Saturday, a presidential candidate, Alberto
Santofimio Botero sharply attacked the Government's extradition policy and its
war on the traffickers. Assailing what he termed ''North American imperialism''
he said that instead of ''dumping on us war junk left over from Vietnam or the
Second World War, Americans should allow us to be paid decent prices for our
basic exports like coffee.''

A sharp rejoinder came Sunday, from Bogota's Roman Catholic Archbishop, Mario
Revollo Cardinal Bravo.

''I don't see how there can be any dialogue or conversations with people whose
mentality is one of violence, whose attitute is arrogant and who support
themselves on the basis of immorality,'' he told reporters.

According to Bogota radio, a local judge today issued an arrest warrant for Yair
Klein, an Israeli mercenary who allegedly trained paramilitary squads for
Colombian drug traffickers. The station did not identify the judge.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: A powerful bomb blast yesterday caused extensive damage at a bank
branch in Bogota. It was the latest in a series of bombings at bank branches and
stores in Colombia. (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 19, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Third-World Refugees Rootless in the U.S.

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 913 words



Jasmine
By Bharati Mukherjee
241 pages. Grove Weidenfeld. $17.95.

''We are refugees and mercenaries and guest workers,'' declares Jasmine, the
heroine of Bharati Mukherjee's new novel. ''You see us sleeping in airport
lounges; you watch us unwrapping the last of our native foods, unrolling our
prayer rugs, reading our holy books, taking out for the hundredth time an
aerogram promising a job or space to sleep, a newspaper in our language, a photo
of happier times, a passport, a visa, a laissez-passer.

''We are the outcasts and deportees, strange pilgrims visiting outlandish
shrines, landing at the end of tarmacs, ferried in old army trucks where we are
roughly handled and taken to roped-off corners of waiting rooms where surly,
barely wakened customs guards await their bribe. We are dressed in shreds of
national costumes, out of season, the wilted plumage of intercontinental
vagabondage. We ask only on thing: to be allowed to land; to pass through; to
continue.''

Like the people in her recent award-winning collection of short stories (''The
Middleman and Other Stories''), the characters in ''Jasmine'' are all exiles,
expatriates, wanderers, people on the move, shucking off old lives as easily as
a snake sheds its skin. They are third-world refugees, fleeing poverty and
oppression; but they are also Americans moving from coast to coast, small towns
to cities, exchanging one partner for another in search of a dream that always
seems to elude them. Although they possess a seemingly infinite freedom - the
possibility of becoming whatever they want to become -the price of that freedom
is rootlessness and dislocation, a feeling of perpetual displacement.

Indeed, everyone in ''Jasmine'' seems to be reeling from the speed-of-light
changes of recent history. Families in India see their homes and fortunes
disappear in the wake of the Partition; families in Vietnam are torn apart by
the war and refugee-camp red tape; families in Iowa lose the land they inherited
from their parents to developers and banks.

Bud Ripplemeyer, a successful Middle Western banker, goes to China on a business
trip, has a sudden epiphany about the emptiness of his life, divorces his wife,
moves to a tiny new house and then is abruptly shot - and crippled for life - by
a crazed neighbor, distraught over losing his farm. Du, a Vietnamese refugee,
survives the war, is adopted by an American family, teaches himself English and
electronics, then leaves his adoptive family to find his sister in California.
''He has lived through five or six languages,'' Ms. Mukherjee writes, ''five or
six countries, two or three centuries of history; has seen his country, city and
family butchered, bargained with pirates and bureaucrats, eaten filth to stay
alive,'' survived ''every degradation known to this century.''

Jasmine, Bud's girlfriend and Du's adoptive mother, has had an equally
disjointed, mind-boggling life. A poor village girl, married off at the age of
15 to a part-time repairman in India, she sees him killed in front of his shop
by a homemade bomb. She leaves for America, where she is raped, upon arrival, by
a drifter who preys on refugees. She kills the man, sets off down the road, and
is rescued by a kindly woman, who teaches her how to avoid the immigration
authorities.

In New York, Jasmine is taken in by some of her dead husband's friends, who give
her a home in the immigrant community. Suffocated by their circumscribed life,
she takes off again, and gets a job as a nanny with a nice Upper West Side
couple. She enrolls in some extension courses at Columbia University, and learns
to talk and dress like an American. When the wife leaves for another man, the
husband proposes to Jasmine, but she feels restless and threatened, and once
again, she leaves - this time for Iowa, where she meets and falls in love with
Bud. In the process of all this moving, she changes her name several times -from
Jyoti to Jasmine to Jane, and she discovers that she has acquired a kind of
addiction to change, an unwillingness to make permanent commitments.

''It is by now,'' says Jasmine, ''only a passing wave of nausea, this response
to the speed of transformation, the fluidity of American character and the
American landscape. I feel at times like a stone hurtling through diaphanous
mist, unable to grab hold, unable to slow myself, yet unwilling to abandon the
ride I'm on. Down and down I go, where I'll stop, God only knows.''

So rapidly does Jasmine's life change that the reader occasionally feels
overwhelmed by the sheer amount of plot in Ms. Murkeejee's novel - much of it
implausible. How is it possible, we wonder, that she has been able to escape -
from the immigration authorities, from the police, from crazed enemies - so many
times? How is it possible that she always manages to meet a man who will give
her a new life, each time she decides to move on? How is it possible that she
seems emotionally unscathed by all the terrible events she has survived?

Such questions prove, in the end, to be quite beside the point. Though
''Jasmine'' attests to an eye for meticulous observation and an ear for
contemporary American slang, it becomes clear that Ms. Mukherjee is less
interested in giving us a realistic depiction of one woman's peripatetic life
than in creating a fable, a kind of impressionistic prose-poem, about being an
exile, a refugee, a spiritual vagabond in the world today; and in this, she has
eloquently succeeded.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Bharati Mukherjee (Tom Victor)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 19, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Emmy Awards for 'Roe v. Wade' and 'Day One'

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 782 words

DATELINE: PASADENA, Calif., Sept. 18


The television industry saluted the movies ''Roe v. Wade'' and ''Day One'' with
Emmy Awards on Sunday evening.

''War and Remembrance,'' a graphic portrayal of the Holocaust, captured the Emmy
for best mini-series; the 28-hour epic cost ABC $30 million because of low
ratings.

NBC's ''L.A. Law'' and ''Cheers'' collected the top series awards at the 41st
annual presentations.

CBS's cynical newsroom comedy ''Murphy Brown,'' the ABC drama
''Thirtysomething,'' and the Fox network's comedy-variety ''Tracey Ullman Show''
each won four trophies.

The western mini-series ''Lonesome Dove'' was largely ignored, although it had
received 18 nominations, more than any other show. It did pick up seven Emmys,
but all but one were awarded at Saturday's untelevised ceremony for technical
awards. The adaptation of Larry McMurtry's novel won only one category Sunday,
for the director, Simon Wincer.

Holly Hunter's Thanks

In a season in which the networks had to cope with advocacy groups and
advertiser boycotts, the Academy of Television Arts and Sciences embraced two
shows whose paths to the screen were torturous. ''Roe v. Wade,'' which was
rewritten 20 times, and ''Day One'' each took four years to make.

''Roe v. Wade,'' the account of the battle to legalize abortion, captured an
Emmy for Holly Hunter (best actress in a mini-series or special) and shared the
award for top drama-comedy special. ''I'd like to thank NBC for getting this
movie on the air,'' Miss Hunter said in accepting the award. She thanked the
real Jane Roe, Norma McCorvey, ''for continuing to keep women from being
second-class citizens, and for refusing to give up her right for a reproductive
choice.''

CBS's ''Day One,'' an account of the personal and scientific struggles behind
the making of the atomic bomb, split the drama-comedy prize with ''Roe v.
Wade.'' The award was the first for the co-executive producer, Aaron Spelling.

''L.A. Law,'' which won as best dramatic series in 1987, repeated that Sunday
night. So did ''Cheers,'' which was named best comedy series in 1983 and 1984.

Fox Gets First Awards

CBS, third in the A. C. Nielsen Company ratings last season, collected 27
awards, followed by top-rated NBC with 25 and ABC with 13. Fox claimed its first
Emmys, finishing with four.

''War and Remembrance'' continued the saga Herman Wouk began in the novel and
mini-series ''The Winds of War,'' beginning one week after Pearl Harbor.

James Woods, who played the founder of Alcoholics Anonymous in ''My Name Is Bill
W.,'' was named outstanding actor of a mini-series or special. Mr. Woods, who
won an Emmy two years ago for ''Promise,'' told the audience he considered it
''truly an honor to play the man I consider a saint.''

Dana Delany won her first Emmy, for best actress in a dramatic series, playing a
nurse in the Vietnam War series ''China Beach.'' Also winning her first Emmy was
Candice Bergen, for lead actress in a comedy series, for her portrayal of
''Murphy Brown.'' She closed her acceptance speech by saying, ''Dad, if you're
watching, this is for you.'' Her late father, the ventriloquist Edgar Bergen,
was the founding president of the television academy.

Carroll O'Connor collected his fifth Emmy, his first for a dramatic role, for
the crusty officer of ''In The Heat of the Night.''

Two for Colleen Dewhurst

Richard Mulligan of ''Empty Nest'' won his second award; his first was for his
zany role in ''Soap.''

Tracey Ullman came on stage with her eight co-producers to claim the award for
outstanding variety, music or comedy program for ''The Tracey Ullman Show.''

Colleen Dewhurst was named Saturday for outstanding guest actress in a comedy
series as Miss Bergen's mother in ''Murphy Brown.'' She added another Emmy on
Sunday as supporting actress in a mini-series or special for her role as
Margaret Page in the NBC special ''Those She Left Behind.''

The British actor Derek Jacobi was selected outstanding supporting actor in a
mini-series or special for playing the impostor G.I. in ''The Tenth Man,'' on
the ''Hallmark Hall of Fame.''

The governor's special award went to Lucille Ball, who died in April. ''Lucy
loved her work and loved the television industry,'' said her husband, Gary
Morton, in accepting the award. ''You made the Lucy I love very happy.''

''Cheers'' won as best comedy series, and Woody Harrelson as the shy bartender
and Rhea Perlman as the brassy barmaid won best supporting players in a comedy
series.

Larry Drake, who portrays the mentally retarded Benny Stulwicz of ''L.A. Law,''
and Melanie Mayron, the unmarried man-hunter in ''Thirtysomething,'' won for
best supporting actor and actress in a drama series.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Holly Hunter with the Emmy Award she won for outstanding
actress in a special. (By MICHIKO KAKUTANI)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 20, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnamese Leader, Assailing the West, Ignites Fear at Home

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 808 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, Sept. 19


The Vietnamese leadership has intensified a crackdown in ideological and
intellectual life, warning against Western subversion in the language of the
cold war.

Two recent speeches by the Communist Party General Secretary, Nguyen Van Linh,
who is regarded as a reformer, profoundly disappointed and depressed some of his
allies in this country's intellectual and journalistic elite.

They also raised concern among some prominent economists who have helped to draw
up the changes, known here as renovation, that have begun to reduce the economic
role of the state and to attract private capital and initiatives.

Concern Over Aid and Trade

They worry that in the absence of a comprehensive settlement in Cambodia, which
the United States is now making a condition for improved relations with Vietnam,
Hanoi's new defensiveness about the intentions of the West will further delay
the aid and trade that it needs to salvage a rickety economy and provide jobs
for a rapidly growing population.

Vietnam's withdrawal next week from Cambodia, which it invaded in December 1978,
driving out the Government led by Pol Pot and the Khmer Rouge, is now believed
unlikely to lead to the United States' lifting its embargo on Vietnam. The
embargo forestalls signficant investment and trade from other Western countries
and has caused bitterness here.

At the same time, radical changes elsewhere in the Communist world - in China,
the Soviet Union, Poland and Hungary in particular - seem to have shocked the
party leadership here and increased a sense of threat, insecurity and isolation.

Conservative voices that were muted during the first two years of Mr. Linh's
rule, which began in December 1986, are now dominating debate only a little more
than a year before Mr. Linh himself has said he will step down.

Some magazines and newspapers have been closed and some editors in chief,
including To Hoa of Saigon Giai Phong, this city's most important paper, have
been retired or replaced. Vu Kim Hanh, the 37-year-old editor of the newspaper
Tuoi Tre, or Youth, which has written movingly of the country's social problems,
is on a list of six editors to be dismissed, Vietnamese officials say privately,
though for now she has retained her post.

''I tell you frankly that we writers and poets are facing great difficulties,''
said a novelist who has spoken openly before. ''We do not want to speak of
political problems, and please do not mention names, for this is Vietnam.''

An official said: ''The problem now is that there is no clear ideological line.
It is very easy now to cross it. Being an editor now is a very dangerous job.''

Mr. Linh spoke to senior journalists here in March, encouraging them to
emphasize positive accomplishments as well as ''negative phenomena,'' and he
spoke out strongly against ''pluralism'' and multiparty democracy at the end of
a party meeting on March 29.

In a speech here on Aug. 24 at the end of another party meeting, devoted to
ideological questions, Mr. Linh accused the West, and in particular President
Bush, of intervening in the internal affairs of Communist countries and trying
to undermine them. He spoke of the ''escalating'' battle between the Communist
camp and a fundamentally unchanged capitalist world, ''with its very insidious
schemes and tricks.''

While apparently continuing to seek Western investment and encourage private
enterprise here, he spoke harshly of an increasing exploitation of workers under
capitalism, and said that modern technology, by increasing productivity, was
robbing the worker of his ''surplus labor value by tens of time compared with a
worker in the previous century.''

He also criticized ''some deviant ideological viewpoints among a handful of
cadres and party members,'' which have been breeding amid ''the impact of wrong
ideological currents coming from outside.''

''This was a very clumsy speech,'' said a senior journalist here. ''It was the
language of 45 years ago, and it depressed many people.''

A Vietnamese official said there had been only one vote against the speech in
the Politburo, cast by Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach, a Linh ally who did not
attend the August party meeting due to illness.

It was Mr. Thach who had pressed for the early withdrawal of Vietnamese troops
from Cambodia to end Vietnam's economic and political isolation, and if the
withdrawal does not produce some results, Mr. Thach's position will be
jeopardized, the official said.

In a second speech Sept. 1, for Vietnam's national day on Sept. 2, Mr. Linh took
up the same themes. He said Vietnam was prepared ''to broaden our external
economic relations with all other countries, foreign companies and international
organizations'' without political conditions, but he warned against ''the life
style and decadent culture'' of the bourgeoisie and the West.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 20, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 897 words



INTERNATIONAL    A3-15

The Vatican supported relocation of a Carmelite convent from the site of the
Auschwitz death camp in Poland. It said it was willing to pay part of the cost
of a new interfaith prayer center outside the camp.    Page A1



Move applauded in U.S.    A12


Vatican acts after persuading Glemp to ease stance    A12



A U.S. move to advance arms talks with Moscow was announced by Secretary Baker.
He rejected charges that the Bush Administration is cool to changes in the
Eastern bloc.    A1



President Gorbachev's new policy on the growing issue of nationalist agitation
was announced. It invites conciliation but draws the line firmly against the
separatist hopes.    A8



Communists and foes back a multiparty in Hungary    A14


Opposition forms in East Germany    A9



Vietnam has intensified a crackdown in ideological and intellectual life,
warning against Western subversion. Changes in the Communist world seem to have
shocked the leadership.    A1



Vietnamese says rebels have 23,000 troops in Cambodia    A10


Deng, looking fit, sees a Japanese politician    A13


Japan limits ships with huge nets    A3



Man in the news: Joseph Garba, a Nigerian diplomat, was unanimously elected
President of the 44th General Assembly of the United Nations.    A3



Lebanon peace plan stalls as Christians insist Syrians go    A9


French DC-10 lost over West Africa    A5


220 DC-10 engines are to be inspected for possible defects    A5


Namibia election rivals accuse Swapo of torturing detainees    A15



NATIONAL    A16-25, B6-9

A hurricane passed the Bahamas and inched its way north toward the East Coast of
the United States. The storm has caused a lot of destruction but relatively few
deaths.    A1



Small storm nearby may sap Hugo    B8



Consumer prices were unchanged in August, making it the first month in more than
three years that the Consumer Price Index did not rise, the Labor Department
reported.    A1



New housing department policies, which Secretary Kemp plans to propose next
month, include eliminating discretionary funds and requiring consultants to
disclose fees.

A1



Pierce considers citing the Fifth Amendment    B6



An AIDS drug has had good results, said the director of a private study of the
drug. But he warned that people who have the drug, known as compound Q, should
not take it yet.    A21



Campeau has obtained a loan pact for $250 million, the retail empire said. The
money is intended to ease a cash crisis at nine department store divisions in
the U.S.    D1



A secret blacklist of banned aliens was ordered by a judge to be made available
to lawyers of a Colombian reporter on the list. The Government must also show
reasons for the banishments.    A22



Senate hearings on a Medicare bill to revise the catastrophic-cost program were
ended for the day by Senator Bentsen. He complained that Secretary Sullivan had
not appeared.    B6



Barney Frank can still survive the publicity over his past relationship with a
male prostitute, colleagues in the House and friends say. But the outlook is not
good.    A16



Washington at Work: Margaret Tutwiler, spokeswoman    A18



State legislatures facing abortion this fall will no longer be able to placate
anti-abortion constituents and expect the courts to overturn or modify the
restrictions they pass.    A16



Oil companies have obtained waivers from the F.C.C. to eliminate radio officers
on many tankers. Critics contend that the cost-cutting move would increase the
chances of oil spills.    A24



Waste study set at weapons plant    A25



REGIONAL    B1-5

Rudolph Giuliani is shifting strategy for his campaign for mayor of New York
City. With David Dinkins, not Mayor Koch, as an opponent, he will try to appeal
to conservative Democrats instead of liberals.    A1



Giuliani seeks D'Amato's support    B4


Koch details his final year as Mayor in management report    B3



A schools chancellor will be named today by the New York City Board of
Education. He is the Superintendent of the Miami-Dade County school system,
Joseph Fernandez.    B1



In Bensonhurst, Jesse Jackson told high school students that after the killing
of a black teen-ager there last month, they had an important opportunity to
reaffirm the victories of the civil rights movement.    B1



Parents who don't pay child support are being tracked down by New Jersey,
Connecticut and New York. The states are collecting the money by seizing wages,
intercepting tax refunds and putting people in jail.    B1



Robert Garcia's wife was known in Bronx political and business circles as ''the
real Congressman,'' a former Wedtech official testified at the Garcias' trial on
bribery charges.    B3



Metro-North routinely had workers remove asbestos from walls, steam pipes and
wires under Grand Central Terminal ''without any protection from the serious
health risks,'' the New York State Attorney General charged.    B5



Connecticut teaches drivers to relax    B1


Attica appeal is dismissed    B2


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 20, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnamese General Says Rebels Have 23,000 Troops in Cambodia

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 514 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, Sept. 19


A week before Vietnamese forces are scheduled to pull out of Cambodia, a senior
Vietnamese general said today that the guerrilla coalition opposed to the
Vietnamese-backed Government in Phnom Penh has 37,000 soldiers, of whom 23,000
are currently inside the territory of Cambodia.

Estimates of the size of the Phnom Penh Government's army vary from 30,000 to
60,000, with 80,000 to 200,000 more in local militias.

The forces of the Khmer Rouge, whose government Vietnam ousted when it invaded
Cambodia in December 1978, consist of 23,000 people, including 17,000 soldiers,
13,000 of whom are inside Cambodia, the Vietnamese general said.

Speaking at a news conference, Gen. Nguyen Van Thai, the deputy director of the
political department of the Ministry of Defense, said that he was confident that
the Phnom Penh Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen was capable of defending
itself without Vietnamese troops.

Withdrawal Ends Tuesday

General Thai said the last Vietnamese soldier in Cambodia would leave the
country around midday next Tuesday, completing a withdrawal of the final 26,000
Vietnamese soldiers there that is to begin Sept. 21.

He said that since 1979, 25,300 Vietnamese soldiers had died inside Cambodia,
with another 55,000 seriously wounded.

General Thai said Vietnam would leave no soldiers behind, and that charges by
the opposition coalition that some Vietnamese soldiers had already changed into
Cambodian uniforms were a ''fabrication.''

Western diplomats in Bangkok also regard such charges wtih skepticism, saying
that the opposition needs a pretext for continuing the war after Vietnamese
troops withdraw.

Vietnamese Troops Reduced

''The resistance needs a foreign invader to remain a resistance and not an
insurgency,'' one senior Western diplomat said. ''Emotionally, it helps to tell
the troops that they are still fighting against the Vietnamese, and not other
Khmer.''

General Thai said Vietnam has cut its army to some 500,000 from 1 million, with
more demobilizations to follow.

General Thai said that 24,000 Vietnamese troops were already withdrawn from
Cambodia between May and July this year, before the rainy season.

General Thai said Vietnamese estimates of total opposition forces facing Phnom
Penh were more than 50,000, 37,000 of whom are ''fighting men.''

He said the Khmer Rouge consisted of 23,000 people, including 17,000 soldiers,
13,000 of them inside Cambodia. Western estimates of Khmer Rouge strength range
from 30,000 to 40,000.

The general said that Mr. Son Sann has 10,000 soldiers of whom 3,000 are inside
Cambodia and that Prince Sihanouk has 17,500 men, including 12,000, of whom
7,000 inside Cambodia.

Western estimates for Mr. Son Sann's forces are 16,000, and for Prince Sihanouk,
21,000. Western diplomats estimate the size of Mr. Hun Sen's army at 30,000 to
40,000, the same as for the Khmer Rouge, and estimate his provincial and local
militia with a strength of some 80,000 to 100,000 soldiers. Cambodian officials
say their army contains about 60,000 soldiers with a militia of nearly 200,000.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 20, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

The Case of the Reluctant Idler

BYLINE: By JACQUES LESLIE; JACQUES LESLIE, a former foreign correspondent for
The Los Angeles Times, lives in Mill Valley, Calif.

SECTION: Section 5; Page 41, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1364 words


I SUPPOSE I inherited my aversion to vacations from my father. His idea of
foreign travel consisted of venturing from his office in suburban Los Angeles
all the way downtown, which his job occasionally required him to do.

Impatient with the inconveniences the journey imposed, such as sitting in his
car for half an hour, he tried to cope by disregarding such impediments as
ordinances against speeding while he devised ingenious routes that entailed
running about a dozen yellow lights in succession. Hurtling through suspect
neighborhoods conceivably populated by non-English speakers, he entertained the
notion that he was some kind of intrepid explorer, like Magellan.

Journeys to more remote destinations were all but unthinkable to him. It's true
that he made the odd pilgrimage to Las Vegas, but he seemed to lose interest
even in that astounding locale once he discovered that the pleasures it afforded
were no greater than those he derived at home, at the poker table of a declining
former movie mogul who held weekly games. My mother, on the other hand,
considered herself an archeology buff, and delighted in pursuing Etruscan
artifacts down to their origin, which was usually outside Los Angeles. She
dragged my father along on several European expeditions, and each time he
declared that his favorite part of the trip was re-entering our house in L.A. He
was extremely articulate on such subjects as the stresses imposed on Egyptian
airplanes by softball-sized hailstones, some of which purportedly penetrated the
Egyptian airplane my parents were occupying. Listening to these perorations, I
sympathized with my father. My regard for the fruits of archeological excavation
was certainly no greater than his, and in ensuing years, when summer approached
and my mother proposed to include me in a little swing through, say, Mycenae, I
cultivated an intense interest in Little League. Thereafter my mother made her
European jaunts without us.

It wasn't until after I graduated from college that I realized my father's
attitude toward travel might be a shade extreme. I therefore attempted to
redress this error in my world view: I got a job as a reporter in wartime
Vietnam. It seemed to me that in doing so I was forging a trail distinct from
both my parents': unlike my father, I was deriving satisfaction in living far,
far from home; unlike my mother, I was embracing Asia, which struck me as
infinitely more alluring than staid Europe. In many ways I liked Vietnam, even
though the objects intended to penetrate the aircraft I sometimes rode in were
substantially harder than hailstones. What I struggled with were vacations. I
was entitled to a weeklong R & R every few months, presumably to recover from
the depredations of war, and indeed I looked forward to these leaves with
unreasonable longing. Ah, I thought, I will take a room in the best hotel in
Hong Kong and luxuriate in its air-conditioning, its good food, its lack of
incoming artillery. I usually managed to follow the plan as far as reaching the
Hong Kong hotel, but then it tended to unravel. I caught a cold from the
air-conditioning. I tired of eating alone. Most disturbing, I missed Vietnam. I
bought every newspaper available and read the Vietnam articles, and I fretted
that some big event would occur while I wasn't there. Like my father, I was
still a kind of homebody: my implausible feat was to substitute Vietnam for Los
Angeles.

As I understand it now, the problem wasn't traveling per se, but vacations; I
was a good traveler as long as I had a mission, particularly one that promised
intensity. But put me in a resort with nothing to do but have fun, and that is
the last thing I would have. Oh, I'd amuse myself by mocking the tourists in my
midst or by telling war stories to acquaintances who did not show obvious signs
of boredom, but these pursuits quickly paled.

Leslie, my wife, didn't marry me until my foreign reporting phase was over, so
it took her a while to understand my response to vacations. One of our first
trips was to Hawaii, which until then I'd looked on in a mildly favorable way as
the place where the plane stops for a hour on its way to Asia. Surely Leslie was
joking when she proposed that we enjoy ourselves by sitting on the beach there,
by swimming and sunbathing. The beach in Hawaii wasn't even mined.

My objections to beaches started with the fact that they were often filled with
sand, which sticks to my feet and makes me shiver in the same way that eating
very cold ice cream does. My wife, however, liked beaches. I consequently did my
best, trying to get the hang of lying on a towel, doing nothing. When my
restlessness reached manic proportions, Leslie thoughtfully suggested we go for
a hike instead.

Up to that point I'd considered a hike a kind of necessary evil, making sense as
long as there is a worthwhile objective at the end of it, such as a pot of gold
or a battle in progress. Our hike, however, did not hold out such a reward; all
we did was follow a trail around the side of a mountain that descended
spectacularly into the ocean. We still have a document of the expedition, a
photograph my wife perversely insisted on framing. In it I am striding forward,
grim-faced, as if calculating how many more steps will be required to bring the
ordeal to a merciful end. Exhibiting a gleam that I associate with revenge,
Leslie called the picture ''cute.''

Our most successful vacations have been our most active ones. At the top of the
list is a trek I actually inspired, in the Mount Everest region of Nepal - if
you've got to walk, I figured, why not do it within sight of the world's highest
mountain, surrounded by Sherpas, some of the world's gentlest people? Here at
last was an opportunity to wallow in intensity, particularly since the 70-degree
weather we expected did not materialize; instead, it snowed for three or four
days of our 11-day trek. Wet clothes hung on lines inside our tents not only
did't dry, but froze. Passing a mountainside bazaar, I rented the only available
parka, which was warm but filthy and bug-infested; it had somehow turned so
stiff from previous expeditions that it seemed capable of climbing Everest on
its own. Cold and exhausted, my wife proposed that we turn back, but our leaders
summarily rejected the plea, to my relief. The trek wasn't warfare, but it was
close; my spirits soared. Leslie didn't fully come around until the trek was
over, but now she has the idea. Whenever we show slides of the trip, she urges
our friends to go, even as the projector displays the meals of deep-fried eggs,
deep-fried bread and deep-fried sausage we were asked to consume day after day.
Apparently my idea of a good vacation is rubbing off.

NOT entirely, though. Since giving birth nearly three years ago, Leslie has once
more developed a fondness for relaxing vacations, as a counterbalance to the
incessant demands of motherhood. Reluctantly, I recently agreed to go with her
to a hostelry called Ventana, in Big Sur, Calif. Aside from consuming multiple
portions of the breakfasts that the inn provides without additional charge, I
failed to find much to do; I had no choice but to follow my wife to the pool. As
it happens, Ventana provides a partitioned clothing-optional sundeck that my
wife, a sun worshiper, opted for. On our first day, we shared the deck with a
middle-aged man from New York whom we befriended. He told us he takes frequent
vacations at Ventana, for two weeks at a time, and taught us to ask busboys to
bring complimentary wine and cheese deckside in the late afternoon.

By chance the deck gradually grew more popular; by our last day at Ventana it
was filled with naked sunbathers of both sexes, and the New Yorker announced
that this was the most people he'd seen there in five years of vacations.
Alluding to the few clothed sunbathers who sat around the pool, he proclaimed,
''There are more of us than them! Let's liberate the pool!'' The rest of us had
been rendered torpid by the sun, and failed to rally to his call. Nevertheless,
as I surveyed the bodies around me and considered my uncommonly tranquil state,
I found myself thinking: I can get used to this.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 21, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

POWELL SEES RISKS IN WAR ON DRUGS

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 28, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 376 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 20


Gen. Colin L. Powell, President Bush's nominee to be Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, said today that involving the armed forces in the war on drugs
would be risky but would not lead to another Vietnam.

Speaking at a confirmation hearing before the Senate Armed Service Committee,
which gave him its unanimous approval, the Army general opposed proposals that
military aircraft shoot down unarmed planes suspected of drug smuggling if they
refuse to identify themselves.

But he pledged that as the nation's senior military officer, he would fully
support a greater engagement of the armed forces in stopping smuggling.

In his present position as operational commander of Army forces in the United
States, General Powell said he had ordered his staff at Fort McPherson, Ga., to
scrutinize units for transport, intelligence and other support for
law-enforcement officials along the Mexican border. Secretary of Defense Dick
Cheney has asked for such plans from all field commanders by Oct. 15.

Senate Vote in a Few Days

General Powell is scheduled to take over from Adm. William J. Crowe Jr. on Oct.
1 as principal military adviser to the President. A vote by the full Senate on
his nomination is expected within several days.

The general's pledge of support for the Administration's war on drugs reflected
a marked change in attitude among military leaders, who have until recently
opposed diverting troops and money from training for wartime missions into
action against drug smugglers. But directives from Secretary Cheney and pressure
from Congress have changed their minds.

Even so, the general continued to oppose giving troops the authority to make
arrests or otherwise become law-enforcement officers. ''I think by law and
tradition that is an inappropriate role for servicemen,'' he said.

General Powell said dispatching American military advisers and support personnel
to foreign countries, like those in Colombia now, ''will not be without risk.''
But he added: ''I think it's a risk worth taking.''

On the other hand, he said, ''I don't sense that this is a slippery slope that's
going to get us into some sort of Vietnam.'' The American involvement in Vietnam
began with the dispatch of small numbers of military trainers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Gen. Colin L. Powell, nominee to be Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, after being introduced to the Senate Armed Services Committee
by Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan for his confirmation hearing. (NYT/Andrea
Mohin)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 21, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Houston Man Gets 25 Years In Slayings of Two in Queens

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section B; Page 11, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 162 words


A man convicted of killing an Army friend and a bystander over drugs was
sentenced Tuesday night to 25 years to life in prison, the Queens District
Attorney, John J. Santucci, said yesterday.

The man, Donald Nacey, 37 years old, a maintenance worker from Houston, was
convicted on Aug. 30 of killing Randall Runkle, 30, and Frederick Markowitz, 37,
in Elmhurst, Queens, in 1982. Mr. Runkle and Mr. Nacey became friends while
serving in Vietnam.

The two became addicted to drugs, and when they returned from Vietnam they
turned to crime to support their drug habits, Mr. Santucci said.

In 1979, Mr. Nacey and Mr. Runkle tried to rob a Bank of Ireland branch in
Manhattan. Mr. Nacey was captured, and served two years in prison.

After getting out, he moved to Houston, and Mr. Runkle began sending him heroin.
When Mr. Runkle failed to send a package of heroin to Mr. Nacey in 1982, Mr.
Santucci said, Mr. Nacey came to New York and shot Mr. Runkle and Mr. Markowitz.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 22, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 973 words



INTERNATIONAL    A3-11

Nicaraguan opposition groups in the election scheduled for February would be
assisted by a new proposal that the Bush Administration submitted to Congress.
The initial plan was rebuffed amid questions about its legality.    Page A1



Colombia's Justice Minister, a symbol of the nation's war against cocaine
cartels, has resigned, a presidential aide confirmed.    A1



Saudi Arabia beheaded 16 Kuwaitis by sword in the Islamic holy city of Mecca in
connection with bombings and other terrorism during the annual Muslim pilgrimage
in July.    A8



Yasir Arafat withheld endorsing Egypt's newest Middle East initiative, but said
he was ready for a discussion with Israel.    A8



Sunni Muslim in Lebanese parliament killed    A9


Investigators reach wreckage of French jet    A8



The Polish Primate agreed that the disputed Carmelite convent at the site of the
Auschwitz death camp should be moved to an interfaith center to be built nearby,
as the Vatican urged two days ago.    A3



The U.S. and the Soviet Union moved toward setting a date for a summit meeting
as Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze presented President Bush with new
proposals on arms control.    A10



Where the elk and the diplomats roam    A10



Muscovites were pessimistic about chances that the Politburo change would help
the country's economic plight. Thousands wait every day outside the American
Embassy hoping to apply for a visa.    A10



A Soviet newspaper apologized for a article that depicted Boris Yeltsin, a
popular Kremlin critic, as a drunken knave during his recent tour of the U.S.
The paper, Pravada, received a storm of criticism from readers.    A9



Vietnam's pullout from Cambodia is now in its final stage with the the last
soldier scheduled to leave next Tuesday. Efforts to create a cease-fire between
the Vietnamese-backed Government and the opposition have failed.    A3



Beijing journal    A4


Japan's boom continues, and it's creating problems    D1


Japan in deal for 10% of Tiffany    D1



More than 780 South Africans pledged to refuse to serve in the armed forces. It
was the largest campaign ever to resist conscription, which is required for all
white males.    A5



NATIONAL    A12-22

Hurricane Hugo hit South Carolina with heavy winds and torrential rains,
knocking down trees and power lines and flooding low-lying areas.    A1



U.S. troops landed on St. Croix to restore order to an island devastated by a
hurricane, then torn by looting and violence.    A22



Flood peril seen along East Coast    A20


Disaster aid for Puerto Rico is sped    A20



The British Colony of Montserrat, the Caribbean island hardest hit by Hurricane
Hugo, is now in the midst of orderly relief and reconstruction. ''It was like
about 10 lions and 50 tigers outside,'' said one resident.    A22



Aleast 19 high school children died and 50 were injured in Alton, Tex., when
their bus plunged into a rain-filled 40-foot chasm after a collision with a
delivery truck.    A12



The fight over a new tax plan commenced in the House with Democratic leaders
scrambling to sell their proposal as a boon to the middle class and Republicans
saying that it was just another tax increase.    A1



H.U.D. inquiry links five more to big fees    A14



The F.B.I. will not appeal a sweeping court order intended to eliminate
discrimination against Hispanic agents, the bureau said.    A12



Rockwell is suing the Government over the company's role as manager of the
Energy Department's Rocky Flats nuclear weapons plant.    A18



Bankers Trust announced plans to handle the sale of a new issue of ''junk''
bonds, thus becoming the first banking company to manage a public sale of
corporate bonds.    D1



Declaring life begins at conception, a circuit judge gave temporary custody of
seven frozen embryos to the woman who hopes to carry them to term, not the
estranged husband who doesn't want to be a father.    A13



Stricter limits on how many appeals death row inmates can file were recommended
by a committee of Federal judges.    B20



Defects top cause of infant deaths    A18



REGIONAL    B1-5

The F.A.A. is seeking the pilot of the plane that plunged into Rikers Island
Channel on Wednesday night. He has not been contacted since the accident, and
investigators said they did not know why he aborted the takeoff.    A1



Survivors of the plane accident at La Guardia Airport described moments of
intense drama that occurred during the plane's plunge into dark waters and the
subsequent rescue efforts.    B1



David Dinkins now describes himself as a ''mainstream Democrat,'' as he courts a
broader constituency. In the Democratic Primary, he campaigned as ''a liberal
and proud of it.''    A1



Senator D'Amato will support Rudolph Giuliani, the Republican nominee, in the
New York City race for mayor, he said. He had been a vigorous supporter of
Ronald Lauder.    B3



The decentralized administration of New York City's schools should be re-placed
by a plan that emphasizes school control, said Joseph Fernandez, the incoming
Chancellor.    B1



''Massive'' layoffs of city workers could occur if opponents of the Colisuem
Center project pursue a lawsuit to block the construction project and deprive
New York City of $247 million, Mayor Koch warned.    B1



Regan criticizes how state debts were financed    B3


Tremont Ave. shooting called racial    B3


A man and two women are found slain in a Harlem apartment    B3


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 22, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi in Last Phase of Cambodia Pullout

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 668 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Sept. 21


The formal period of what is said to be the final Vietnamese military withdrawal
from Cambodia began today, with some farewell ceremonies in the provinces and
the return here of Prime Minister Hun Sen from talks with the Thai Prime
Minister in Bangkok.

Mr. Hun Sen provided few details of his conversations with Thai officials,
including Prime Minister Chatichai Choonhavan and Gen. Chavalit Yongchaiyudh,
the Commander in Chief.

It was the third time this year that Mr. Hun Sen had been invited to Bangkok, an
indication of the growing ties between the two nations despite Thailand's
official support for the opposition armies opposed to the Vietnamese-backed
Government here.

The Thais are trying to engineer a cease-fire in the Cambodian war before
Vietnamese troops withdraw after a nearly 11-year occupation. But with the last
Vietnamese soldier scheduled to leave Cambodia next Tuesday and the opposition
armies opposed to a cease-fire, few regard the Thai effort as much more than an
effort to keep good relations with all the combatants.

Vietnam invaded Cambodia in December 1978, driving out the Government led by Pol
Pot and the Khmer Rouge. Despite the approaching pullout, no comprehensive
settlement in Cambodia has been reached.

Hun Sen Is Hopeful

Mr. Hun Sen made much of his visit to Bangkok, saying ties between Cambodia and
Thailand, which does not recognize his Government, were steadily improving. He
suggested that the Thais were moving to reduce the supplies of Chinese arms they
pass on to the Khmer Rouge and two smaller non-Communist forces.

''We believe that Thailand does not want to see a civil war in Cambodia,'' Mr.
Hun Sen said. ''Thailand also does not want to see Pol Pot return to power in
Cambodia. Therefore I believe that Thailand will adopt a concrete position in
this regard.''

The Khmer Rouge is the strongest member in military terms of the guerrilla
coalition opposed to the Government in Phnom Penh. The two non-Communist
coalition members are loyal to former Prime Minister Son Sann and to Prince
Norodom Sihanouk, who was overthrown as Cambodia's head of state in 1970 and who
is the leader of the rebel coalition.

More Fighting Expected

Fighting is considered likely to intensify considerably after the Vietnamese
troops go.

Combat has already increased since the failure of an international conference on
Cambodia in Paris, but Soviet diplomats say they regard the fighting as having a
probing character. Khmer Rouge activity has increased not only near the
Thai-Cambodian border but also in Kompong Cham and Kompong Speu provinces,
closer to Phnom Penh.

Mr. Hun Sen expressed confidence that his army would withstand any attacks. He
acknowledged that many Cambodians feared the return of the Khmer Rouge, under
whose rule more than one million Cambodians died.

After the withdrawal, he said, Cambodians ''will learn the real strength of the
army of Cambodia.'' He acknowledged that the Government, too, would learn
whether the people ''stay with us or leave us - that is the problem.''

Asked if he thought Prince Sihanouk would accept a cease-fire or break with the
Khmer Rouge and return here as head of state, Mr. Hun Sen said the Prince was
unpredictable. ''If you ask me to predict if it will rain or not, I am better
off than if you ask me about Prince Sihanouk,'' he said. ''His attitudes change
quicker than the London weather.''

In Siem Reap Province today, in the northwest, there was the sort of farewell
ceremony to Vietnamese troops that will take place all over Cambodia in the next
few days. Gen. Pol Saroeun, a Deputy Defense Minister, thanked Vietnamese
soldiers for having saved Cambodia from ''Pol Pot's genocide.''

And in the capital Wednesday night, near the Health Ministry, two truckloads of
Cambodian soldiers drove up to check the papers of young men on the street, who
ran away in all directions in an effort to escape possible forced impressment
into the Cambodian Army for the fighting expected to come.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Vietnamese troops leaving Cambodia (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 22, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

At the Movies

BYLINE: By Lawrence Van Gelder

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 5 words



Year of Kyra Sedgwick

So far, the 24-year-old actress has (a) played an anti-Vietnam War campaigner in
Oliver Stone's ''Born on the Fourth of July''; (b) performed in a play; (c) had
a baby, Travis, in July; (d) was cast to appear with Paul Newman and Joanne
Woodward in the Merchant and Ivory film ''Mr. and Mrs. Bridge.''

In the Oliver Stone movie, scheduled for release this year and based on the
memoir by the quadriplegic Vietnam veteran Ron Kovic who became an antiwar
advocate, Ms. Sedgwick plays the role of Donna opposite Tom Cruise as Mr. Kovic.

''She's Ron Kovic's sort-of girlfriend from high school,'' she said. ''You see
her before the war, but they sort of miss each other, like two ships passing in
the night. That's the irony and sadness of the whole thing. He comes back from
the war paralyzed, and they meet at Syracuse University, where she serves as a
catalyst for him becoming involved in the antiwar movement. Again, they don't
get together, even though you think they should.''

The cast, Ms. Sedgwick noted, includes a couple of Mr. Stone's old friends from
his Academy Award-winning ''Platoon'' - Willem Dafoe and Tom Berenger, who
appear in small roles.

The first thing that attracted Ms. Sedgwick to the part, she said, was the
chance to work with Mr. Stone. ''He's a perfectionist, and so am I.'' she said.
''So we got along very well.''

The next attraction was Donna herself. ''She's a very passionate woman,'' the
actress said. ''Unlike a lot of female roles written for my age group, she's not
just the star's girlfriend. She has a direction and a goal that have nothing to
do with him.

''She's an idealist. That part was very difficult for me. My generation - now,
in our present-day society -everyone feels very helpless toward the world
situation, government, environment.

''That was the hardest thing for me, to imagine you could actually change it.
Everything is too big. You feel you have no control over it. From the time I was
a child, the Government wasn't for the people and never listened to the people.
Now everything is chaos. That doesn't mean you should be apathetic. That doesn't
mean you should do nothing. You should do something.''

In ''Mr. and Mrs. Bridge,'' being filmed in Kansas City, Mo., Ms. Sedgwick plays
the role of a wild daughter in a rather repressed family in the 1930's. ''You
see her as a young child, an adolescent, and then she goes off to New York and,
much to her father's chagrin, works on a sort of socialist magazine,'' she said.
''Then she comes home, and she doesn't fit in. She's like the black sheep of the
family.''

During rehearsals in New York City, Ms. Sedgwick found herself at the Lee
Strasberg Studio, playing the balcony scene from Shakespeare's ''Romeo and
Juliet'' opposite Mr. Newman.

''I thought to myself,'' she said, ''this is everybody's dream come true.''

A Taste for Poking Fun

When it comes to busy people, there's also Kevin Bacon, who just happens to be
Ms. Sedgwick's husband. (They met while doing the ''American Playhouse''
production of ''Lemon Sky'' in 1987.) ''Actually, right now,'' he said, ''I have
three pictures in the can.'' First, there's ''The Big Picture,'' the newly
opened satire of Hollywood in which Mr. Bacon plays a young student film maker
who finds himself courted by the industry. Then, he said, there is an untitled
work that he described as a country-and-western science-fiction movie in which
he portrays ''sort of a cowboy handyman - a loser who is forced in the course of
the film to be a reluctant hero when this small town is besieged by monsters.''

And finally, there is ''Queens Logic,'' in which he plays a musician from Queens
who has moved to Los Angeles to find fame and fortune and comes home again to
visit his buddies.

Mr. Bacon said he first heard about Christopher Guest's ''Big Picture'' from his
wife and decided he wanted the role of Nick Chapman, who finds his ideals under
siege by producers, agents and starlets after his student film wins a major
award.

''I like to see a movie about the movie business that pokes fun at it,'' Mr.
Bacon said. ''We so often have little sense of humor about ourself, which is
always surprising to me.''

But wanting the role wasn't enough. ''They weren't interested in seeing me,
frankly,'' said Mr. Bacon, who has appeared in such films as ''National
Lampoon's Animal House,'' ''Diner,'' ''She's Having a Baby'' and ''Criminal
Law.'' ''They had an idea they didn't want a name,'' he added.

Neverthless, Mr. Bacon asked to meet Mr. Guest, who co-wrote the screenplay with
Michael Varhol and Michael McKean. And, he said, ''We really hit it off.''

With three new films behind him, Mr. Bacon doesn't know what's next. ''I think
my biggest focus right now is working with really good directors,'' he said.
''That's the thing I find is really attractive to me.''

As for making a film with Ms. Sedgwick, he said, ''We're dying to work
together.'' But he observed: ''I think the day of couples who get a chance to do
a whole bunch of films, like Tracy and Hepburn, are over. We feel we should be
very careful and wait for the right project. We feel they're only going to give
us the chance to do it once, and we better do it right.''

Tony Walton Exhibition

Movies like ''Mary Poppins,'' ''The Boy Friend,'' ''All That Jazz'' and ''Prince
of the City'' are central to the exhibition opening today at the American Museum
of the Moving Image.

But the show, running through Aug. 26, is not devoted to a director or a star.
It is the first comprehensive exhibition the museum has devoted to a set and
costume designer - in this case, Tony Walton, who has designed sets and costumes
for nearly 100 plays, movies, television programs, operas and ballets.

The exhibition, ''Tony Walton: Designing for Stage and Screen,'' brings together
some 300 original sketches, models, production photographs and other materials
from Mr. Walton's three-decade career.

In conjunction with the display, the museum, in Astoria, Queens, will screen a
number of related films. On Sunday at 4 P.M., after a 1 P.M. screening of ''The
Boy Friend,'' Mr. Walton is to appear at the museum to discuss his work. The
museum is at 35th Avenue at 36th Street. Tickets are $5, $4 for the elderly,
$2.50 for students and children and free for museum members. Information: (718)
784-4520.

Streep Won't Be Evita

Citing exhaustion she attributed to a heavy schedule of work, Meryl Streep has
withdrawn from Oliver Stone's film version of the hit musical ''Evita.''

Filming was to begin in February in Seville, Spain. ''Evita'' is based on the
life of Eva Duarte de Peron, an undistinguished actress who achieved immense
political influence after becoming the second wife of Juan Peron, the President
of Argentina.

Mr. Stone reacted to Ms. Streep's withdrawal by saying: ''I still want very much
to see 'Evita' made. I am looking toward the future and the new singer-actresses
that are coming up.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Kyra Sedgwick

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 23, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
2 Strangers Telling Each Other Their War Stories

BYLINE: By Herbert Mitgang

SECTION: Section 1; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 864 words



Dirty Work
By Larry Brown
236 pages. Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill/Workman Publishing. $16.95.

Two wounded Vietnam War riflemen, bedridden in a Veterans Administration
hospital, talk through the night. One is white, the other black. Both are from
small towns in Mississippi. They do not know each other to begin with. Then
their common experience in the boondocks of Southeast Asia binds them together.
They curse the darkness of living with broken bodies. And talk.

And what talk. By the time they have finished - one still immobile on his
hospital bed, the other about to re-enter the strange, feared civilian world at
home - we have learned about their aborted youth, their families, loves and
dreams, the sick humor and shortcut vulgarisms of infantrymen and, inevitably,
where paths of glory lead to in wartime and, for the unlucky, long afterward.

There has been no antiwar novel -certainly no first novel - quite like Larry
Brown's ''Dirty Work'' since Dalton Trumbo's ''Johnny Got His Gun,'' which was
published 50 years ago. In fact, there is a brief nod of recognition early in
the book to Trumbo's novel. But ''Dirty Work'' is less horrible than the story
of the mutilated war victim in ''Johnny Got His Gun.'' It is a powerful and
original work all its own that moves along in short, staccato chapters with
indisputably authentic language. At times, the reader feels he is eavesdropping
on a conversation between foreigners, not Americans. For these two men inhabit
the alien world of the unseen, half-dead hospitalized wounded.

Mr. Brown stands aside and lets his fictional characters speak for themselves in
compelling monologues, flashbacks and conversations. These voices in the night
know military life and Vietnam's atrocities from first-hand experience. Braiden
Chaney, the black, has lost all four limbs after being hit by machine-gun fire.
He is a Veterans Administration hospital lifer, confined to his bed for years.
After being caught in a crossfire, Walter James, the white, has lost most of his
face and some of his mind.

In turn, both men have had their share of killing Vietcong. Without the author
ever saying so directly, the reader comes to realize that these two
Mississipians share a brotherhood of battle that leads to a brotherhood of
understanding that crosses racial lines.

After the two men have trusted each other enough to talk about their killing
experiences, Braiden Chaney indulges in one of his monologues that has a
musicality to it:

''What I'm saying is, now listen to me. I have done paid my price. I was unlucky
and black and young and poor and they drafted me. But I believed in the American
dream. Serve your country, do your part, come on home and take a active part in
society. You know what I was gonna be? A schoolteacher. Yeah. I was gonna get me
a college education, man, on the G.I, Bill, go to college.''

And thinking of his slave ancestors, he adds fatalistically: ''What would this
country be like, man, if they never had brought none of us over here? But that's
history. You can't change it. Just like this. Just like you. You can't change
what happened to you. But there ain't nothing else I can do in this world,
Walter. I can't help it. My chance was gone 22 years ago. I ain't doing nothing
but waiting to die.''

Speaking in his distinctive voice, Walter James confides how he fell in love
with a young woman, herself mutilated as a child by a wild dog's bites. They are
united by their scarred looks. He feels sympathy for her and shame about facing
the world with his own shattered skull. To his hospital friend, he says:

''They don't know how I feel. People can't tell you they know how you feel. Wear
a face like this around for a while. See people cringe when they look at you.
Then tell me you know how I feel. Start watching 'Easy Rider' and wake up with
snow on the screen. Then tell me you know how I feel.''

Neither can read very well in the hospital so television movies become an
important part of their lives. They talk of the actors in ''The Young Lions''
and ''One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest.'' A third character enters the story, a
sympathetic black nurse, who bends and breaks the rules by allowing them their
beers and grass and helps them dream of sex. The recollections of wartime
firefights and killings in the novel carry a cry of reality; after the passage
of time, the combat sounds purposeless: shooting back at someone who is shooting
at you.

In the most risky chapter in ''Dirty Work,'' Braiden Chaney has a conversation
with Jesus about his plight. He hopes that his life will end soon. Jesus
promises him, ''It won't be much longer,'' and he replies, ''Thank you, Lord.''
It's a daring scene to attempt, but it is a measure of the author's skill that
he brings it off.

Mr. Brown is a Marine Corps veteran who now serves as captain of the fire
department in his native Oxford, Miss. A collection of his short stories,
''Facing the Music,'' appeared last year and received the Mississippi
Instititute of Arts and Letters award for literature. His first novel is
published by a small house in North Carolina, Alqonquin Books of Chapel Hill,
and it's a credit to both.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Larry Brown (Susie James)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 23, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

America's Vietnam Trauma Is the Stuff of British Musical

BYLINE: By CRAIG R. WHITNEY, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 601 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Sept. 22


Broadway, get ready for ''Miss Saigon,'' the $4.8 million Cameron Mackintosh
musical about love, separation and tragedy in the Vietnam War. The spectacle,
which brings ''Madama Butterfly'' into the 20th century, complete with the last
American helicopter battering its way out of Saigon in 1975, has been leaving
most of its opening-week audiences here in stunned, tearful appreciation.

''By fusing the sweep of opera with the naturalism of the musical play, 'Miss
Saigon' is the best of the new school of the British musicals,'' Mark Steyn
wrote today in a review in The Independent.

He declared this ''the most hopeful development in the nascent British musical
tradition'' that Mr. Mackintosh helped establish with ''Cats,'' ''The Phantom of
the Opera'' and ''Les Miserables.''

The lyrics were originally written by Alain Boublil in French and rendered into
not always lyrical English in collaboration with Richard Maltby Jr. The music,
in the heavily amplified, romantic style made familiar by the new English
musical, is by Claude-Michel Schonberg, who created ''Les Miserables'' with Mr.
Boublil.

A Star Is Born

The critics, and the audiences, have made a new star of Lea Salonga, a
19-year-old Filipino actress who plays Kim, the Vietnamese bargirl who conceives
a child when she falls in love with an American marine, Chris (Simon Bowman),
just before the war ends.

Michael Coveney of The Financial Times wrote the next morning: ''Throughout the
evening, Lea Salonga as Kim sings her socks off, and the dedication to her son
is one of the most moving things I have ever seen on the London stage.''

Her 5-year-old child, Tam, is played by David Platt, who got stuck in a traffic
jam outside Buckingham Palace on opening night Wednesday and delayed the
premiere at the Theater Royal, Drury Lane, by 15 minutes.

Tam is a symbol for all the Amerasian children left behind after the evacuation
in 1975, as the chorus sings:

They're called Buu Doi,
The Dust of Life,
Conceived in hell
And born of strife
- They are the living reminders
Of all the good we failed to do.''

Richard Morrison, reviewing the music in The Times, said: ''Miss Saigon takes
more than its story from Puccini. Sung from start to finish, it aspires to grand
opera.''

But, he found, ''There are no great songs.''

Critics Are Divided

The big Broadway-style chorus-line number toward the end of the second act,
''The American Dream,'' is a vehicle for Jonathan Pryce as ''The Engineer,''
Kim's pimp, and his dream is mainly of unbridled greed.

But as the curtain falls, it is not clear he will ever get there. Kim takes her
own life, to persuade Chris and his American wife (Claire Moore) to accept his
child as theirs.

Unsurprisingly, critics here have divided sharply along political lines, as the
show reproduces the antiwar line of the 1960's as faithfully as the miniskirts
and bell-bottom trousers of those days.

Michael Billington, in the liberal daily The Guardian, found it ''an unusually
intelligent and impassioned piece of popular theater: revamped Puccini with a
sharp political edge,'' which he found ''rare and refreshing.''

But Charles Osborne, in the conservative daily The Telegraph, was far more
critical. ''It gives the impression of having been cynically concocted - with
lavish high-tech decor as the most important ingredient -merely to fill theater
seats,'' he wrote. ''For anyone who knows 'Madama Butterfly,' there will be no
surprises in Miss Saigon.''

Mr. Mackintosh told reporters on opening night, ''If it is a hit, it'll go to
Broadway - that's a promise.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Lea Salonga (Michael Le Poer Trench)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 23, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1053 words



INTERNATIONAL  2-5, 24

An explosion in a British barracks killed at least 10 people, wounded 22 others,
and damaged dozens of homes in southeast England. The Irish Republican Army
claimed responsibility.    Page 1



A plan for nuclear arms inspections was agreed to in principle by Secretary of
State James Baker and the Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard Shevardnadze, a Soviet
spokesman said. The plan is expected to help the prospects for a strategic arms
treaty.    1



Soviet citizens trying to immigrate to the U.S. are being victimized by an
extortion racket involving Soviet police guards as they wait on long lines
outside the U.S. Embassy in Moscow, American officials said.    3



Democracy's outlook in the world is very promising, agreed Vice President Quayle
and other conservative politcal leaders who are meeting in Tokyo. But they
disagreed on how to respond to some of the world's major political and economic
shifts.    5



News analysis: German unification is a scenario that West Germans find exciting
and unsettling. While the prospect thrills many Germans, they are also aware of
the suspicions and fears it raises among the country's European neighbors.    3



France's Michelin agreed to acquire the Uniroyal Goodrich Tire Company in a deal
that will create the world's largest tire producer.    31



A cease-fire plan for Lebanon, designed by the Arab League, was accepted by Gen.
Michel Aoun, the military leader of the Lebanese Christians, setting the stage
for discussions on national reconciliation.    1



Murders by Egyptian women of their husbands have provoked debate about the
future direction of a country that now seems mired in a profound social malaise.

    4



News analysis: J.P. Morgan's move to drastically increase its financial cushion
against bad loans to third world countries raises new questions about how those
countries will escape their economic problems.    1



Colombia's Justice Minister was asked to resign because she was ''dragging her
feet'' on signing papers to extradite drug suspects for trial in the U.S., a
presidential aide said.    24



Many Vietnamese who were living in Cambodia have returned to Vietnam, nervous
about what will happen once Vietnamese soldiers end their withdrawal next week,
officials said.    5



Prime Minister Bhutto of Pakistan and her ruling party are on the defensive
after only 10 months in power. Her government is losing popularity because of
unfulfilled election promises.    5



A hole has opened in the ozone layer above Antarctica, and scientists said it
was growing at the same rate as one in 1987, which broke records and alarmed
environmentalists.    2



Campeau's foes in Toronto gloat    31



NATIONAL    8, 24, 29-30

Charleston, S.C., was reeling from the devastation left by Hurricane Hugo.
Bridges were twisted, buildings leveled and television towers toppled as the
storm raced ashore, then swept northward through the Carolinas.    1



When Hugo struck the coast it was the 10th most intense hurricane ever to hit
this country, and experts are unsure why it gained so much power so fast.    29



A day of slow agony after a day of fear    29


U.S. relief moves to begin in Caribbean    30


Many aid efforts for storm victims    30



The crack used by President Bush as a prop in his anti-drug speech was obtained
in a ''sting'' by Federal agents, but the White House defended the purchase.
1



Senate talks on the anti-drug plan unexpectedly collapsed, with Republicans and
Democrats only $150 million apart on how much money to add to the President's
proposal.    24



Samuel Pierce will not allow television coverage of his scheduled appearance at
a House panel next Tuesday. The former Housing Secretary invoked a rule barring
broadcasting equipment from hearing rooms in certain circumstances.    8



Rockwell will give up management of the Government's Rocky Flats nuclear weapons
plant, officials said. The company departs amid an F.B.I. investigation and
possible criminal violations of anti-pollution laws.    8



Hundreds of children with AIDS are suffering or dying prematurely because they
are unable to obtain AZT, a drug that could prolong and improve the quality of
their lives, experts said.    8



Rights panel steps into hospital treatment of newborns    8



REGIONAL    25-28

Miscues by an inexperienced crew led to the aborted takeoff of a USAir jetliner
that crashed into the East River at La Guardia Airport Wednesday night.    1



Pilots faced with a decision on whether to take off or abort the flight of a
troubled jet must rely on instinct and experience, and also math. Such a
decision can be particularly pressing at La Guardia Airport, which is nearly
surrounded by water and housing.    26



Drug tests for pilots to be tightened    26



Twice as much money was raised by David Dinkins in the two weeks surrounding the
Sept. 12 primaries as by his Republican-Liberal opponent, Rudolph Giuliani.
25



Unveiling campaign ads and winning support    27



President Bush endorsed the Republican candidate for governor of New Jersey,
Representative Jim Courter. The President, on a visit to East Brunswick, said
the race was a nationally significant referendum on Republican policies and
values.    25



A plan to reshape the school system of New York City elicited praise and
cautions about potential obstacles. The plan, which stresses school-based
control, came from Joseph Fernandez, the incoming Chancellor.    25



Traffic is a pressing problem in Fairfield County, Conn., and employers are
addressing the commuter travails of their employees with subsidy programs and
other efforts.    25



Two managers of a billing company for 10 private hospitals in New York City
pleaded guilty Thursday to falsifying documents used to qualify hundreds of
patients for Medicaid, state officials said.    27



M.T.A. rejects sex-act curbs by Metro-North    27


Army doctor is cleared of sex-abuse charges    27


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 23, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

No U.N. Monitors for Cambodia

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 282 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Sept. 22


The Cambodian Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen has been rebuffed in an
attempt to assemble an international force of military observers to monitor the
Vietnamese troop withdrawal, diplomats here say. The Vietnamese pullout is
scheduled to be completed next week.

So far only India, which is one of the few non-Communist countries that
recognizes the Hun Sen Government, has agreed to send observers to verify the
Vietnamese pullout, the diplomats say. The list of countries refusing to do so
now includes Japan, Canada, Sweden, Finland, Australia, Poland, Colombia and
Yugoslavia.

Their refusal is seen as a setback for the Hun Sen Government, which diplomats
say is seeking international endorsement for its claim to be in sole control of
Cambodia and no longer dependent on the Vietnamese Army to keep it in power.

The countries refusing to send observers say they did so because Vietnam's
withdrawal is not taking place as part of a comprehensive political settlement
that would end Cambodia's long civil war.

The six members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations are encouraging
other countries not to send observers, saying that to do so would legitimize the
Hun Sen Government and reduce the chances of a negotiated end to the civil war.

''We don't want another Afghanistan where the invading force withdraws but the
civil war goes on,'' an Asean diplomat said.

The six Asean countries Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore
and Thailand - will again introduce a resolution at this year's United Nations
General Assembly session calling for a comprehensive political settlement in
Cambodia and opposing any return to sole power by the Khmer Rouge.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 25, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

A headline Saturday on an article about monitoring of a Vietnamese military
withdrawal from Cambodia misidentifed the observer force that the Cambodian
Government is seeking. It would be international, but not sponsored by the
United Nations.

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 23, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

In Fear, Settlers From Vietnam Leave Cambodia

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 724 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Sept. 22


Several thousand Vietnamese citizens living in Cambodia have recently returned
to Vietnam, nervous about what will happen once Vietnamese soldiers complete
their withdrawal from Cambodia next week, diplomats and relief officials said
today.

If there are no vendettas against Vietnamese civilians remaining here and the
Vietnamese-backed Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen stands its ground against
the Khmer Rouge guerrillas, the departures are likely to be only temporary, the
diplomats said.

A Soviet diplomat and the Vietnamese Ambassador here, Ngo Dien, said there had
been a few cases of violence against recent Vietnamese settlers, with a few
bodies found floating in the Mekong River. But Mr. Dien said it was possible
they had been killed by the Khmer Rouge as a provocation.

Thousands of Vietnamese Slain

Under the American-backed Government of Marshal Lon Nol from 1970 to 1975,
thousands of Vietnamese were killed and many bodies were tossed into the river.

The killings and flight of Vietnamese accelerated under the Communist Khmer
Rouge, who overthrew Mr. Lon Nol in 1975 and set about a brutal remaking of
Cambodian society. More than one million Cambodians died under the Khmer Rouge
until the Vietnamese invaded in December 1978 and ousted them.

Mr. Dien said only 2,000 to 3,000 Vietnamese remained in Cambodia when Hanoi's
troops arrived, a figure impossible to confirm.

The issue of Vietnamese settlers in Cambodia is also important because of
assertions by the opposition coalition, led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk but
dominated by the Khmer Rouge, that Hanoi has been sending many thousands of
Vietnamese as colonizers to try to extend its occupation of Cambodia.

At the recent international conference on Cambodia in Paris, which was suspended
late last month with no agreement, Prince Sihanouk said that there were 1.25
million Vietnamese living in Cambodia and that there could be no diplomatic
settlement without resolving the question of colonization.

Conflicting Figures

Western diplomats in Bangkok say that a more realistic estimate of Vietnamese in
Cambodia is between 200,000 and 400,000. But no one is sure. The Cambodian
Government says the number is 80,000, and Mr. Dien, when asked, said Cambodian
officials had given him the same figure.

It is also difficult to know how many Vietnamese have come here to live for the
first time since 1979 and how many simply returned after the ouster of the Khmer
Rouge to what had been their home for many years.

Mr. Dien said he found Prince Sihanouk's charge confounding because about
500,000 Vietnamese lived here under his reign. Western diplomats say the figure
is accurate. The French in colonial Indochina brought many Vietnamese to
Cambodia to work on rubber plantations and as clerks, mechanics and fishermen.

The coalition has also said that the Vietnamese withdrawal is not a complete or
genuine one, and that many thousand Vietnamese troops have donned Cambodian
uniforms to mask the fact that they are not leaving. The Vietnamese and
Cambodian Governments say such charges are absurd. It is impossible for
journalists covering the withdrawal to verify them.

Western diplomats say they regard the settler issue as more valid than the issue
of switching uniforms, and say it will need to be dealt with in any
comprehensive settlement.

Fewer Vietnamese Vendors

As the deadline for withdrawal approaches, there are fewer Vietnamese running
stalls in the markets, and visitors to Vietnamese fishing villages on the Tonle
Sap say some are empty.

Aid workers say many Vietnamese have decided to wait out the next few months in
Vietnam. Some Vietnamese interviewed in the market today said they had sent
their families home but said they thought those living in Phnom Penh would be
safe.

Mr. Dien said that some Vietnamese now leaving were economically dependent on
the Vietnamese Army's presence here. He also acknowledged that, given Vietnam's
economic difficulties, some Vietnamese could find life much easier here.

Pham, a shoe repairer in the Oresay market here, came to Cambodia from the
southern part of Vietnam in 1981 and has married a Cambodian. He said the
Cambodian Government was much more liberal than the Vietnamese one. ''You can do
business freely here,'' he said. ''You can do very little freely in Vietnam.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Several thousand Vietnamese living in Cambodia have reportedly returned
to Vietnam, concerned about events in the wake of Vietnam's withdrawal. In
Battambang yesterday, Cambodians bade farewell to a departing unit of Vietnamese
soldiers. (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 23, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Army Clears West Point Doctor in Sex-Abuse Case

BYLINE: By JAMES FERON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 353 words

DATELINE: WEST POINT, N.Y., Sept. 22


The United States Military Academy has cleared an Army gynecologist of charges
of sexual abuse brought by three women at West Point who claimed that he hugged,
kissed or fondled them and, in one case, had sexual intercourse.

A hearing officer, Col. Stephen J. Harper, assistant director of the law
department at West Point, found that the allegations, made by wives of solidiers
stationed here, were not supported by the evidence. No cadets were involved in
the case.

One of the women's lawyers, Bonita E. Zelman, called the findings ''an
outrageous and obvious whitewash'' and said a civil lawsuit would be filed.

A spokesman for West Point, Lieut. Col. Bruce Bell, said the doctor, Maj. Ernest
Flores, a Reserve officer with 18 years of active duty, including a tour in
Vietnam, would be leaving the service at the end of this month.

Incident in Oklahoma

In a report issued today, Colonel Harper found that the 44-year-old doctor
''hugged and kissed'' the women ''in a manner consistent with his normal
physician-patient relationship.'' Other patients had come forward to say the
complainants probably misinterpreted Major Flores's actions.

As for the patient who accused Major Flores of having sex with her in his
apartment while she was ''in a terrible mental and emotional state'' recovering
from a hysterectomy, Colonel Harper said the allegation was not supported by the
evidence.

Colonel Harper found that while Major Flores was stationed at Fort Sill, Okla.,
he ''committed adultery'' with a former patient. At the West Point hearing the
former patient came forward with her son, which she said Major Flores had
fathered, to testify against him. Colonel Harper recommended that Major Flores
be ordered not to invite patients to his apartment.

The hearing was part of the military justice procedure and could have led to a
court-martial. A West Point spokeswoman, Andrea Hamburger, said the findings had
been approved by the West Point Superintendent, Lieut. Gen. Dave R. Palmer. Two
other recommendations in the report were not made public ''based on the privacy
act,'' Ms. Hamburger said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 24, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

As Vietnamese Withdraw, Cambodians Fear Intensified Civil War

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Gen. Nguyen Dinh Chuc bidding farewell to Cambodians as troops headed
back to Vietnam yesterday. With Hanoi's last troops due to leave on Tuesday, joy
in Phnom Penh is muted by fear of a return to power by the Khmer Rouge. The
prospect also worries Beijing, which backs the guerrilla group but wants to
avoid world criticism. Washington, meanwhile, is reassessing its policy.
(Reuters) Articles, page 18.

TYPE: CAPTION

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 24, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 911 words



INTERNATIONAL/3-20



Alternative Soviet political parties that have the same rights as the Communist
Party could be legally created under a law that the Soviet legislature has
drafted.          Page 1



Plans for a U.S.-Soviet summit next year and progress on a broad array of arms
control fronts were announced by Secretary of State Baker and Soviet Foreign
Minister Shevarndadze at the end of their two days of talks.          1



News analysis: An arms treaty on long-range nuclear missiles seems closer to
fruition as Moscow has conditionally put aside a demand that the United States
abandon its ''Star Wars'' anti-missile program.          16



Lithuania declares annexation invalid           5



Arab militias in the West Bank, armed and trained by the Israeli military, are
regularly assaulting their neighbors, bolstering the army's effort to quash the
Arab uprising, according to West Bank residents.          1



The guns of Lebanon were quiet as representatives from the warring Christian and
Muslim factions agreed on measures intended to bring the country back to a
semblance of normalcy.          3



Cambodians are celebrating again, with the last of Vietnam's troops scheduled to
leave on Tuesday. But the celebrations are tempered by foreboding about the
return of the Khmer Rouge.          18



U.S. reassessing Indochina policy            18



Beijing puts Khmer Rouge on shorter leash           18



Colombia's democratic system is in turmoil as the drug war's violence persists.
The latest status symbol among politicians is to have an ambulance in your
motorcade.          20



Coffee impasse imperils drug fight           20



Pretoria cracked down on a protest against apartheid by preventing a huge march
by black and white women through the South African capital. Meanwhile, white
supremacists were permitted to hold their own downtown rally.          3



Pakistanis view U.S. as a suspicious friend           19



Quebec seperatists jockey for 90's power play           11



Dollar's rise could hurt global economy, ministers say           15



NATIONAL/22-31, 44



''Victory over drugs,'' the goal which President Bush set forth in his
drug-policy address, cannot be achieved in this generation, the Administration
now concedes.          1



In the wake of Hurricane Hugo, there is a vexing, multimillion-dollar question:
What can be built and rebuilt on South Carolina's battered coast?          1



Hugo will be one of the costliest hurricanes ever to to blow into the United
States, according to insurers, who have dispatched a small army of claims
adjusters into stricken areas of the Southeast.          44



People of mixed parentage do not fit into traditional racial classifications,
and many are not sure if they want to fit. About 3 percent of all children born
in the United States are ''mixed,'' demographers say.          22



The anti-air pollution plan of President Bush is also a national energy policy
in the making. The measure would favor natural gas and other clean-burning fuels
at the expense of coal and gasoline.          22



A bill to free a jailed mother who has been in prison more than two years
because of a custody dispute was signed by President Bush.           22

Bush will back national education goals           24


  Bush asks action against abortion           27



A sailing voyage around the world will be undertaken by a prosperous Chicago
businessman who wants to set an inspirational example for underprivileged
children. The man grew up in a single-parent household living on welfare.
          26



Search for 1776 gunboat           28



School spanking is debated as abuse           23



Veterans housing program feels pinch           31



Panel finds no risk in tests of gene-altered organisms           27



REGIONAL/34-47



The supply of unsold homes has grown, and demand remains sluggish, a year after
the housing boom of the 1980's ended in the New York City area. Homesellers are
lucky to get what they would have received in early 1988, experts said.
          1



The crash of the USAir jetliner may have resulted as much from the inexperience
of the cockpit crew as the condition of the aircraft, the way pilots are
assigned to flights or countless other variables, Federal investigators said.
          34



Jet toll highest in a decade           35



A century-old wooden bridge in Brooklyn, closed for repairs since 1985, was
reopened with flags and brass bands in a ceremony that officially reunited two
neighborhoods on opposite sides of the Gowanus Canal.          40



New Jersey's electoral makeup may change significantly as state agencies are
preparing for a new voter registration effort.          39



Bulletproof vest saves officer in Brooklyn           40



Judges reverses ban on Cliff Notes parody           41



A protest over bail for suspects in racial killing           42


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: SUMMARY

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 24, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

For Cambodians, Joy and Foreboding

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 18, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1203 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Sept. 23


With the last of Vietnam's troops scheduled to leave Cambodia on Tuesday,
residents of this capital are dancing again, but the celebrations have a
frenzied character, tempered by foreboding that they will be cut short by the
Khmer Rouge guerrillas.

After having been shut down for about two months because of excessive drinking,
rowdiness and prostitution, a few carefully regulated discotheques have been
allowed to reopen. Friday night, in the Hotel Monorom, young Cambodian men and
women did a synchronized dance step to a tolerable rendition of ''Summertime.''

But in this city that was emptied in 1975 by the Khmer Rouge, under whom more
than a million Cambodians died, there is a heightened level of anxiety about
what will happen in the next few weeks and months now that the Government will
be on its own to deal with the revived Khmer Rouge.

Heavier Fighting Feared

Under strong international pressure to end its occupation and in dire need of
Western economic assistance, Vietnam, whose invading forces ousted the Khmer
Rouge in 1979, announced in April that all its troops would be out of the
country by the end of this month. But efforts to reach a political solution for
Cambodia collapsed last month at an international conference in Paris, raising
the prospect of intensified fighting by the Khmer Rouge and other guerrilla
groups seeking to oust the Hanoi-installed Government.

Prime Minister Hun Sen and his Cabinet assure the population that their soldiers
can cope alone with any threat, while at the same time forcibly impressing young
people into the army. It is a double message that further confounds an urban
population susceptible to rumor, misinformation and fatalism.

The prices of imperishables like rice and canned goods are rising, and more
Cambodians are changing their riels for dollars and especially for gold and gems
- the only valid currency under the Khmer Rouge regime. Scores of shops offer
English lessons, and the Voice of America Cambodian service is listened to
widely.

While Government officials cite the continuing economic boom, especially the
purchase of motorbikes and cars that began with ideological liberalization and
constitutional changes in May, more skeptical Eastern bloc diplomats and
international aid workers suggest that these vehicles may soon be driven to
Vietnam, some four hours away, at the first sign of serious trouble.

A Flight of Capital

International aid workers also say that escape routes have been arranged to
Thailand through the port of Kompong Som, a three-hour drive south. Perhaps more
ominously, some businessmen of Chinese origin, a respected barometer of
political stability in Southeast Asia, are beginning to move some capital
outside the country.

''What worries me is not so much the likelihood of increased military activity
as the psychological situation,'' said an aid worker.

''People here have such imaginations and rumors spread so fast, I fear you won't
need a hell of a lot of explosions for people to panic, hoarding food and goods,
causing economic instability that will create more panic, making the military
situation worse.''

But Yim Sokhom, the Deputy Governor of Kompong Speu Province, southwest of Phnom
Penh, has another worry - the growing contrast between the situation in Phnom
Penh and in the rest of the country.

The war is not far from Kompong Speu town, in a province two-thirds covered by
forest that has always, in its remoter regions, been a refuge for the Khmer
Rouge. While Phnom Penh has no curfew and has electricity much of the day, the
town of Kompong Speu has a 9 P.M. curfew and electricity only from 7 P.M. to 10
P.M.; many houses have no electrical connections at all.

In the countryside, there is no curfew, in part because there is no electric
light and in part because it would be impossible to enforce it in at least half
the province's eight districts, where the Khmer Rouge rule the night.

Attack by Khmer Rouge

About two weeks ago, Mr. Yim Sokhom said, in Amlang village in Tpong district in
the northwest, about 200 of the estimated 1,300 Khmer Rouge guerrillas operating
in the province attacked at 3 A.M.

The Khmer Rouge, he said, killed the village administrator and burned down the
local government office building and some nearby houses. They stole pigs and
chickens, he said, and forced some residents to carry their ammunition and their
injured.

The Government sent about 70 soldiers to the area, and after some fighting, the
Khmer Rouge were gone by 10 A.M.

The incident was an indication of the level of warfare that has existed for some
time in Cambodia. It is why most people in the countryside seem less concerned
about the future than those in the capital; they have been living with war.

There has been increased fighting in Cambodia since the international conference
failed last month, and every Cambodian and diplomat interviewed here expects the
fighting to grow more serious still.

But the fighting this month, before the Vietnamese finally depart, has had a
probing character. Inexperienced Government troops have sometimes run, diplomats
say, or lost ground, but they have nearly always recovered it either by
counterattack or by default, when the Khmer Rouge withdraws.

Fighting on the part of the non-Communist opposition factions of Prince Norodom
Sihanouk and former Prime Minister Son Sann has been ''almost negligible,''
senior diplomats say. The two groups have been allied with the more powerful
Khmer Rouge in a fractious coalition.

Recently there has been a lot of artillery fired by both sides in the hills
south of Pailin, in the northwest near the Thai border, according to diplomats
and Khieu Kanharith, editor of the semi-official weekly newspaper Kampuchea.

The region is important for its gemstones, which both the Khmer Rouge and the
Government mine for sale to the Thais. Despite widespread rumors that Pailin has
fallen, a Soviet diplomat said the Defense Minister, Gen. Tie Banh, was too
committed to the region and to Thai-Cambodian business cooperation to allow it
to pass into Khmer Rouge hands.

There are also indications of increased Khmer Rouge infiltration into Kompong
Cham and Kompong Thom provinces, and along the area bordering Kompong Thom and
Siem Reap province.

But if there are signs of a squall gathering, an Asian diplomat here said,
''there has been no great amount of rain.'' Like many diplomats here, he said
that with their knowledge of the oppressive methods of the Khmer Rouge,
Cambodians are likely to at least make a serious effort at fighting.

Mr. Yim Sokhom himself, 35 years old, was a student when the Khmer Rouge took
over and imposed a brutal reorganization of Cambodian society. He was sent to
work in the rice fields east of the Mekong River in Kandal Province. Six of his
eight brothers died under the Khmer Rouge, he said.

''Those who escaped were the ones who knew how to swim,'' he said, ''but
unfortunately I did not.'' He looked away, abashed. Asked if in the nearly 11
years since Vietnamese troops drove out the Khmer Rouge and have occupied the
country he has taken the opportunity to learn, he laughed shyly. ''Yes,'' he
said. ''I now know how to swim.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Cambodian and Vietnamese soldiers exchanging flags as the
Vietnamese prepare to leave (Reuters); map of Cambodia indicating Pailin. (NYT)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 24, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

In Search of Sovereignty: The Cambodian Torment

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 18, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 305 words


Nov. 9, 1953 The kingdom of Cambodia, with Prince Norodom Sihanouk as monarch,
is established as an independent state, effectively ending French control. Over
the next 15 years, Prince Sihanouk struggles to maintain Cambodia's precarious
neutrality. August 1969 The American-backed Marshal Lon Nol becomes Prime
Minister under Prince Sihanouk, who delegates much of his power to the general.
The United States begins military operations against Vietcong forces in Cambodia
during the Vietnam War. March 18, 1970 Marshal Lon Nol deposes Prince Sihanouk
as head of state and the Prince goes into exile in China, where he forms an
alliance with the Communist Khmer Rouge, which had opposed him in Cambodia. Oct.
9, 1970 The Khmer Republic is proclaimed by the Lon Nol Government, ending
Cambodia's 24 years as a constitutional monarchy. April 17, 1975 The Khmer Rouge
guerrillas defeat Marshal Lon Nol's forces and take over Cambodia. Prince
Sihanouk is reinstated as head of state. The Khmer Rouge imposes a brutal
reorganization of society in which more than 1 million Cambodians die. April 2,
1976 Prince Sihanouk resigns and Pol Pot of the Khmer Rouge becomes Prime
Minister. Dec. 25, 1978 Vietnam invades Cambodia. On Jan. 7, Pol Pot flees as
Cambodia's capital, Phnom Penh, falls to the Vietnamese. A Hanoi-backed
Government is installed. June 22, 1982 A Cambodian government-in-exile
representing three guerrilla groups is formed with Prince Sihanouk as President,
Khieu Samphan of the Khmer Rouge as Vice President and Son Sann as Prime
Minister. April 5, 1989 Vietnam announces that all its troops will be withdrawn
from Cambodia by Sept. 27. Aug. 30, 1989 Peace talks involving 19 nations and
Cambodia's warring factions collapse with the scheduled withdrawal of Vietnamese
troops from Cambodia less than a month away.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: CHRONOLOGY

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 24, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Is Taking a New Look at Indochina

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 18, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1022 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 23


The Bush Administration is reassessing its policy toward Indochina after the
failure of a monthlong international conference to devise a political settlement
for Cambodia.

Administration officials said this week that the United States was ready to
support Prince Norodom Sihanouk if civil war breaks out in Cambodia after the
departure of Vietnamese troops. They note that the Administration has not
abandoned its proposal to send guns to non-Communist guerrillas controlled by
Prince Sihanouk and Son Sann, a former Prime Minister of Cambodia.

Vietnam has promised to end its nearly 11-year occupation of Cambodia next week,
but American officials said they did not know if there would be a complete
withdrawal of Vietnamese troops, as promised by Hanoi.

The Administration says it does not want a United Nations force to monitor and
verify the Vietnamese withdrawal except as part of a comprehensive settlement to
end the conflict in Cambodia. No such settlement is in sight.

The 19-nation peace conference in Paris broke up last month in disagreement over
what role, if any, the Khmer Rouge should have in governing Cambodia.

The United States continues to profess unswerving support for Prince Sihanouk,
even though he embarrassed many of his backers by insisting in Paris that the
Khmer Rouge be included in an interim coalition government. More than a million
Cambodians died under Khmer Rouge rule, from 1975 through 1978, when Vietnam
invaded Cambodia and installed a Government in Phnom Penh.

'Hanoi Has an Obligation'

Richard H. Solomon, the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific
Affairs, welcomed the prospect of Vietnam's withdrawal, but said it was not
enough. ''After more than a decade of occupation,'' he said, ''Hanoi has an
obligation to do more than just walk away, leaving Cambodia in a state of civil
war. Vietnam must participate constructively in efforts to bring about a
settlement in Cambodia.''

At the Paris conference, he said, neither the Vietnamese nor their
''surrogate,'' Prime Minister Hun Sen of Cambodia, displayed any willingness to
compromise.

Richard C. Holbrooke, an expert on Asia who served as Assistant Secretary of
State under President Carter, said the Bush Administration's efforts to arm the
non-Communist guerrillas in Cambodia had become indefensible.

''Sihanouk has become openly pro-Khmer Rouge, even though they killed his
children,'' Mr. Holbrooke said. ''His behavior in Paris leaves the very grave
possibility that, in his mercurial way, he is fronting for the Khmer Rouge, and
that American aid to the non-Communist resistance amounts to American aid
through Sihanouk to the Khmer Rouge.''

''The formulators of the current U.S. policy use the language of hostility to
the Khmer Rouge to mask a pro-Chinese policy, a pro-Sihanouk policy, that has
turned out to be a pro-Khmer Rouge policy without their realizing or desiring
it,'' he said. China is the chief patron of the Khmer Rouge.

Sihanouk is 'Our Horse'

The Bush Administration has tried, without success, to get Prince Sihanouk to
separate himself from the Khmer Rouge. Mr. Solomon described Prince Sihanouk as
''our horse in this race,'' and he said that the United States ''went along with
his judgment'' that the prospects for peace would be improved by including the
Khmer Rouge in a coalition government.

That position offends many members of Congress, who regard the Khmer Rouge as
obscene, and it has also caused personal anguish for Mr. Solomon, according to
his friends.

Nayan Chanda, a senior associate at the Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace, who has written a history of Indochina, said: ''The Administration is in
a dilemma and is rethinking its proposal to provide lethal assistance to the
non-Communist resistance. Having placed all its hope in Sihanouk, the
Administration finds it very difficult to say 'we cannot support him' when he
embraces the Khmer Rouge.''

The Administration shows no willingness to deal with Mr. Hun Sen, even though he
is gaining respect in Southeast Asia. Hostility to Hanoi, a legacy of the
Vietnam War, still appears to be a potent theme in American policy toward
Indochina, and the United States does not want to give Hanoi a victory by
recognizing the Government that it installed in Cambodia.

''We are clinging to the outmoded policies and paranoia of the Vietnam War, but
the war is over and the world has changed,'' said Representative Chester G.
Atkins, Democrat of Massachusetts. ''What happened in Paris should be an
inducement to the United States to face the woeful inadequacies of our own
policies.''

Obstacles to a Settlement

Mr. Solomon said Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia was the principal obstacle to
normal relations between Washington and Hanoi. He said Washington would
establish diplomatic relations with Hanoi ''only after a complete and verified
Vietnamese withdrawal from Cambodia in the context of an acceptable
settlement.''

American officials say there will not be a political settlement until the
Cambodian factions test one another on the battlefield.

The Administration also says that Hanoi must help the United States determine
what happened to the American military men unaccounted for in Vietnam. The
degree of Hanoi's cooperation ''will affect the pace and scope of the
development of our overall relationship,'' Mr. Solomon said.

The Paris conference could be reconvened at any time if the co-chairmen, France
and Indonesia, thought it would be useful. It ''was only suspended, not
adjourned,'' Mr. Solomon said.

In Bangkok, the Prime Minister of Thailand, Chatichai Choonhavan, said today
that Prince Sihanouk had agreed to a new round of informal talks with rival
Cambodian factions. Mr. Chatichai said the talks would include France, Vietnam
and other Southeast Asian countries. No date has been set.

He expressed concern that Vietnam would ''reintervene'' in the Cambodian
conflict if Phnom Penh asked Hanoi for assistance. Mr. Hun Sen has said he might
request such assistance if the opposition coalition led by Prince Sihanouk
received large amounts of foreign aid.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 24, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Beijing Puts Khmer Rouge on Shorter Leash

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 18, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 805 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Sept. 22


As a new round of civil war threatens Cambodia, diplomats here say China finds
itself in the awkward position of wanting the Khmer Rouge troops it supports
neither to win nor lose.

The Khmer Rouge, which brutally ruled the country from 1975 until the Vietnamese
invasion in December 1978, is China's most dependable ally in the region, partly
because no one else wants anything to do with the Khmer Rouge.

Yet Western and Asian diplomats say China would be alarmed if the Khmer Rouge
enjoyed a major string of victories after the Vietnamese troop withdrawal under
way. In part, the reason has to do with China's suppression of the democracy
movement in June, which created a storm of outrage that has made Beijing
reluctant to face a new barrage of international criticism for pushing the Khmer
Rouge back toward power.

'Watching and Waiting'

China will continue to arm the Khmer Rouge, but may counsel it toward restraint
on the battlefield, diplomats say. It is unclear how effective China's counsels
would be, or how far China would go to avoid a Khmer Rouge victory, but the
diplomats say there are signs of renewed flexibility in its Indochina policy as
the principal arena of confrontation moves from the conference room to the front
lines.

''China is waiting and watching,'' an Asian diplomat said. ''This is the chance
to test each faction on the battlefield.''

The diplomat and others interviewed said China's principal goal was not to
secure a military victory, but to put sufficient pressure on the
Vietnamese-backed Government in Cambodia that it will return to peace talks in
about six months willing to make further compromises with the Khmer Rouge.

At the same time, specialists say, China will not allow relations with Vietnam
to improve. Only when there is a settlement of the Cambodia issue will
diplomatic and economic relations be normalized, the Chinese have told diplomats
here.

China regards the future of Cambodia as a matter of paramount importance, partly
because of a traditional hostility between China and Vietnam. With Vietnam
enjoying support from the Soviet Union, China is alarmed at the possibility of
its Soviet-backed rival forming a sphere of influence on its southern flank.

Skepticism of Vietnam Pullout

Reflecting the official line here, the Chinese press has been extremely
skeptical over taking the Vietnamese troop withdrawal at face value. A report
carried today by the official New China News Agency said that while ''several
groups of Vietnamese troops'' rode to gathering points in army trucks, no tanks
or heavy weapons were seen. The implication was that the tanks and tank crews
were remaining behind.

On Thursday, China's Foreign Ministry spokesman said that Vietnam was not
sincere in searching for a political settlement and was ''playing tricks'' on
the international community by pretending to withdraw.

Early this year there was some sign of a diplomatic warming, when the Vietnamese
Vice Foreign Minister came to Beijing twice for talks. But the Chinese Foreign
Ministry concluded that the Vietnamese official was unwilling to compromise, and
so it decided not to allow further such visits.

The distrust of Vietnam, coupled with the feeling that the Khmer Rouge is the
most effective fighting force against Vietnam, seems to be the primary
explanation for China's ties with the Khmer Rouge. The embarrassment about being
associated with a group held responsible for more than a million deaths under
its rule seems to have grown in recent years.

''They don't love the Khmer Rouge for itself,'' a Western diplomat said. ''They
love the fact that each dollar they put in Khmer Rouge hands produces a dead
Vietnamese.''

No Reduction in Aid

Because ties to the Khmer Rouge are also based on its past friendship and
loyalty to senior Chinese leaders, diplomats say, China's economic difficulties
will not mean a reduction in aid to the Khmer Rouge and to the other two
anti-Government factions: one led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk and the other by
Son Sann, a former Prime Minister.

China has complained privately to some Asian diplomats that the Soviet Union is
increasing its military assistance to the Hun Sen Government now in power in
Cambodia, and so some diplomats expect that China could provide a matching
increase in funds for the three Cambodian guerrilla factions.

Chinese officials earlier this month called in officials from Asian countries
for a meeting on Cambodia, and some were struck by one sign of movement in
China's position. A year ago, China was unhappy about some wording in a United
Nations resolution that in an indirect swipe at the Khmer Rouge called for a
''nonreturn to the universally condemned policies and practices'' of the recent
past. But in the meeting this month, China seemed content with such wording.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 24, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Colombian Campaigns Amid Risks of Drug War

BYLINE: By JAMES BROOKE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 20, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1430 words

DATELINE: MEDELLIN, Colombia, Sept. 21


From the front of the airplane, the candidate emerged blinking into the bright
sunshine of this Andean metropolis. He greeted a crowd of local politicians and
then plunged happily into a forest of microphones.

From a cargo hold in the back of the plane, an aide retrieved a plastic foam box
containing two liters of the candidate's blood and took it to a waiting
ambulance.

In the violent world of Colombian politics, the latest status symbol is to have
an ambulance in the campaign motorcade. Today, Senator Ernesto Samper Pizano,
front-running presidential candidate for the governing Liberal Party, had two.

Colombia today is mural of people drawing on courage, ingenuity and obstinacy in
a collective effort to preserve democratic normalcy in highly abnormal
circumstances. Living under the threat of violence from cocaine gangs, many
judges, journalists and politicians battle daily to keep democratic institutions
alive.

Slice of the Daily Struggle

A day spent with candidate Samper in this city - Colombia's second-largest but
most violent - provided one slice of the daily struggle in this nation of 30
million people.

As the 39-year-old senator settled into his airplane seat, he had already heard
the morning radio roundup of political violence in Bogota, his home and the
nation's capital. In a series of predawn attacks, bombs had destroyed nine
political party headquarters.

Although no group claimed authorship, the bombings were believed to be part of a
terror campaign begun last month by cocaine traffickers.

As the chartered airplane flew west over the Andes, the candidate mulled over
the recent political history of Medellin, home to Colombia's most violent
cocaine cartel.

Assassins believed to be working for the drug traffickers carried out a series
of murders here - the state governor in July, the state police chief in August
and a popular former mayor 10 days ago.

No presidential candidate had ventured into this city since Aug. 18, the day
Senator Luis Carlos Galan, the Liberals' previous front-runner, was killed at a
campaign rally near Bogota.

Brother Left After Threats

Senator Samper needed no reminder of the political violence. His brother,
Daniel, now works as a journalist in Spain since death threats forced him to
leave Colombia.

On this trip, Ernesto Samper carried within him what he called his three
souvenirs - three of the 10 bullets that penetrated his body during a shootout
in Bogota's airport in March. The target of the attack, a Communist leader, was
killed.

Mr. Samper survived the shooting -and a long series of operations in Bogota and
in Miami. Surgeons including Eduardo Cuellar, who flew with him to Medellin,
decided that it would be too dangerous to remove three of the bullets.

But as the campaign Gulfstream plane circled over this clean, modern city of two
million people, the candidate knew he had a good advance man on the ground.

Standing below a shade tree at Medellin's downtown airport, Police Capt. German
Osorio ran down a mental checklist of measures taken to protect the candidate.

Preventing Rocket Attacks

The pilots had instructions to vary their takeoff and landing approach. To
prevent rocket attacks, sharpshooters were posted in surrounding hills. Early in
the morning, trained German shepherd dogs had scoured the airport for bombs.
Police then reduced public access to two security checkpoints.

About an hour before the plane landed, three companies of police officers and
two companies of Army soldiers arrived. Wearing field fatigues, the soldiers
established a perimeter around the airfield.

The 270 uniformed policemen and soldiers carried a mix of Uzi submachine guns,
Galil semiautomatic assault rifles and G-3 rifles. In addition, about 30
undercover agents were on hand, largely armed with machine pistols.

''We have two helicopters on alert, the army barracks on alert and the best
clinic in town on alert,'' Captain Osorio said, his eyes constantly viewing and
reviewing the military operation that was unfolding.

The military show of force was not enough to faze a professional politician like
Mr. Samper. After the airport press conference, he slid his bulky frame into the
back seat of a silver-gray Renault, rapped a knuckle against a thick window, and
asked the captain, ''It this armored?''

Not only was the car armored, but it was protected by a military cocoon of 25
motorcyles with soldiers weilding automatic weapons, four jeeps bristling with
undercover agents and the two ambulances.

Danger Part of the Routine

After leaving the airport, Captain Osorio twisted around in the front seat to
give the candidate the bad news.

''We can't bring uniformed security into the university - there are E.L.N. and
E.P.L. on campus,'' he said, referring to leftist guerrilla groups that are
believed to be working locally for the cocaine cartels. ''I'm afraid the
university is a no go.''

To the captain's dismay, Mr. Samper insisted on going ahead with the campaign
stop at Antioquia University.

''To be a politician in Colombia is a dangerous activity,'' he said as motorcyle
outriders pushed the convoy through the city streets. ''The direct contact with
people is indispensable.''

At the university gates, the armed escort peeled away. ''Keep the damn window
up!'' the police captain snapped nervously as the driver reflexively lowered his
window to get a receipt from a parking attendant.

With Captain Osorio fingering a Smith & Wesson pistol he kept hidden in a
leather bag, Mr. Samper strode to the packed campus auditorium.

Professor in a Bulletproof Vest

On seeing the candidate, his stocky figure made burly by a bulletproof vest
under his business suit, the students broke into a chant: ''You're late! You're
late!''

Standing behind the wooden lectern of the assembly hall, the candidate looked
like the economics professor he once was. With television lights reflecting off
his glasses, Mr. Samper expounded without notes on the major themes of his
campaign - a government of national unity, an end to violence, better
international prices for Colombian coffee, renegotiation of the foreign debt and
an international solution to the drug trafficking problem.

Oblivious to the candidate's proven crowd pleasers - ''Let's not turn Colombia
into the Vietnam of the war on drugs'' - the restless eyes of Captain Osorio
could been seen roving constantly across the amphitheater.

As the students asked questions, largely hostile to American military aid in the
drug war, an aide outside said, ''This is the first time that a candidate has
been on this campus in 20 years.''

After a press conference, the campaign caravan continued to a political
fund-raiser at a local steakhouse.

Afterward, squeezing again into the back seat of the Renault, the candidate
said: ''Great welcome. It just shows that people want to take back the political
spaces closed by the violence.''

Political violence is believed to have taken the lives 4,000 people in Colombia
last year.

Tradition of the Public Square

At the next stop, a state women's group meeting in a public library, Julio E.
Pena, the campaign travel coordinator, insisted on the importance of returning
Colombian politics to its traditional place in ''la plaza publica,'' the public
square.

''The first thing we think of is security,'' Mr. Pena said as soldiers with
submachine guns patrolled the card catalogue area. ''After the Galan murder, all
the candidates agreed to only have daytime events in closed halls.''

During this event, Cecilia Serna, a women's leader, spoke for many Colombians
when she said: ''We don't want candidates in closed halls. We don't want
candidates to go around guarded against violent minorities.''

Soon, after another whirlwind ride through the city, Mr. Samper was aloft in his
airplane mulling over the risks of another day in politics. ''Someone even
proposed that I buy what I call a 'Bogota-mobile,' '' he said, cracking a
trademark crooked smile. ''It would be a car of armored glass where you talk to
the people like a fish in a fishbowl.''

But for Mr. Samper, a politician steeped in Latin America's populist tradition,
politics means ''bathing in the people.''

''To go back to Medellin was an act of collective therapy,'' he said.

As the campaign plane descended toward the early evening lights of Bogota, a
cheer went up from his small band of campaign advisers.

''All these acts of solidarity go into a little book,'' he said confidently to
his campaign faithful. ''It's called P.S.C. -Possible Samper Cabinet.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Senator Ernesto Samper Pizano, the Liberal Party candidate for
President of Colombia and the current leader, campaigning in Medellin. With him
is Police Capt. German Osorio, his head of security. (NYT/James Brooke)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 24, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM VIEW;
Villains of the World! Hollywood Beckons

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 3; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1569 words


Wanted: a new public enemy. Height, weight, sex, age and racial origins
immaterial as long as the public enemy is sadistic, effete and strictly
dishonorable.

Time and circumstances are forcing the retirement of Hollywood's most
long-lived, most hard-working villains - tireless Russian Communists who have
been plotting to make the world unsafe for democracy for the last 40 years.

By comparison, the Germans and Japanese of World War II movies are
supernumeraries in Hollywood history.

Is it possible to award an Oscar to a concept? The Russians deserve some sort of
recognition. By behaving abominably in hundreds of mostly jerry-built movies,
they have allowed our side to look good.

As the Red Menace goes into its last dissolve, Hollywood movie makers find
themselves in a bind. Who or what is going to take its place? Glasnost is taking
its toll.

Even before General Secretary Gorbachev and President Reagan began hugging each
other at public ceremonies, it was clear that the cold war was running low when,
in ''Rambo III,'' Sylvester Stallone was forced to intercede in the Russian
invasion of Afghanistan. For all of his sacrifices on behalf of the freedom
fighters, Rambo looked out of place and out of date in Afghanistan. Current
events had passed him by.

Rambo, the character introduced in ''First Blood,'' a hysterical but not
ineffective portrait of a Vietnam vet trying to readjust, is a product of the
lost United States cause in Vietnam. He also stands for a particular American
attitude toward the Vietnam War. As a proud hawk who believes that wars are
fought to be won and that there are no gray areas in the battle against
Communism's evil empire, Rambo has no doubts about who his enemies are. They are
surly little North Vietnamese Communists, their somewhat taller, even more
vicious Russian mentors and the lily-livered, pinko, physically out-of-condition
United States Congressmen who engineer the American retreat from Southeast Asia.

Once Rambo found himself in Afghanistan, where the Russians were pretty much in
the position that the Americans had been in Vietnam, he was suddenly playing the
role of a kind of Americanized Vietcong guerrilla. Never much given to
introspection, Rambo didn't know it, but audiences sensed that something was
beginning to go terribly wrong:

The Russian soldiers, facing imminent defeat and a long march back to Moscow,
were almost sympathetic.

The image of the public enemy was blurring, which is fatal to the sort of pulp
fiction exemplified by the ''Rambo'' movies and by Chuck Norris's Vietnam-based
''Missing in Action'' films.

With riotous disregard for history, but with their fingers ever on the public
pulse, Mr. Stallone and Mr. Norris refought and won the Vietnam War. In their
bold anti-intellectualism and covert racism, their movies recall the old World
War II Hollywood potboilers in which Philip Ahn, Richard Loo, Hugh Hoo and a
handful of other Asian-American actors came to represent everything evil that
America was committed to destroy in the war against Japan.

It probably is not a coincidence that the careers of both Mr. Stallone and Mr.
Norris have seemed to slump of late. The end of the cold war, at least as we
have known it since Winston Churchill's ''Iron Curtain'' speech in Fulton, Mo.,
has precipitated a collective crisis in the imaginations of movie makers. New
bogeymen are needed.

The Nazis, once personified by Conrad Veidt, are no less evil today than they
were 50 years ago, but they are, entertainment-wise, old hat, which may be one
reason the nearly endless ''War and Remembrance'' mini-series was such a dud.
There is also the mitigating effect of today's global film market. Any World War
II movie made today cannot be too pious at the expense of the Germans and
Japanese, or the box office will suffer.

Because American movie companies have never had any Russian market to lose,
Communists have, until now, been the perfect rats. This has been true even when,
as in the James Bond films, they have been as comic as they are wicked or, in
films based on the novels of John le Carre they been allowed to have their human
sides.

The Mafia has been so humanized through the ''Godfather'' movies that even
organized crime is no longer the monolithic evil once presented by movie makers.
As seen in such recent films as ''Married to the Mob'' and ''Cookie,'' members
of the Mafia can now be seen as figures of fun.

Bigots are good for a film or two (''Mississippi Burning,'' ''Do the Right
Thing''), but bigotry is too discomforting and too close to home to become the
kind of institutionalized menace required by the sort of people who make
''Rambo'' movies and by the people who flock to see them. Then, too, if you like
the ''Rambo'' movies, you may well believe that a little bigotry in the right
places can do no harm.

Middle Eastern terrorists have been the bad guys in movies from time to time.
Yet this also is a touchy subject if the terrorists always appear to be Arabs.
It's not that American movie makers are dedicated to fair-mindedness, but that
they love their overseas markets more.

This period of transition has produced some oddball if well-meaning efforts to
accommodate institutionalized evil in a time of glasnost. There was first ''Red
Heat,'' in which Arnold Schwarzenegger, as a Moscow cop, joins forces with Jim
Belushi, as a Chicago cop, to hunt down a Russian drug dealer. Currently there
is ''The Package,'' in which Gene Hackman, as a United States Army sergeant,
uncovers a dreadful conspiracy that is the dark side of glasnost.

''The Package'' imagines that power-mad members of the military-industrial
complexes in the United States and Russia work in concert to sabotage an
American-Russian anti-nuclear arms treaty that will put them out of business.

However, the military-industrial complex works better as a bogeyman in prose
than in pictures. It's a concept not easily comprehended by someone who
identifies a villain by what he looks like and the number of cigarettes he
smokes. It can't be visualized in any dramatic way. In ''The Package,'' it boils
down to the rather pinched expression of John Heard, as an American Army officer
who is a member of the conspiracy, and some anonymous actors wearing Russian
uniforms.

Ridley Scott's new policier, ''Black Rain,'' means well; but it does nothing to
facilitate the search for bad guys to replace the sort of devious cold war
villains played by Oscar Homolka and Gert Frobe. ''Black Rain'' sometimes looks
ultra-classy in the now familiar Ridley Scott fashion. It's full of scenes of
neon-lit brightness alternating with others that seem to have been shot through
an atmosphere dense with toxic waste.

The film has a lot of pictorial style, but the story that takes place in all of
this visual chic is not great. It's the one about a couple of New York
detectives who reluctantly join a Japanese detective to find an Osaka gangster
dealing in counterfeit money.

One should not despair, however. Where there's a will, there are movie makers
stumbling upon a way, and it could be that they have already found it without
being completely aware of it. In announcing his war on drugs several weeks ago,
President Bush made it official.

Drugs and (be prepared) drug lords are going to be the new bugaboos we all can
loathe with a clear conscience, even though drugs are certainly not new to
movies.

Brian De Palma's grotesquely, exuberantly overstated remake of ''Scarface'' may
well turn out to have been the seminal work of this new post-cold war era. At
the same time, Al Pacino's go-for-broke, giddy performance in the title role, as
the crazed druggie kingpin, will be the one against which all other actors
playing drug lords will be measured.

For some years now, the drug trade has been the McGuffin, the excuse, for what
seems to be at least three out of every four crime films released - films such
as ''Red Heat,'' ''Tequila Sunrise'' and ''Extreme Prejudice'' - as well as for
television police shows, most notably ''Miami Vice.''

The movies and shows haven't been about drugs, about the effects of drugs on the
individual, the community and society. Too downbeat. Instead the movies have
dealt with the cost of drugs only in terms of money. Drugs are just something in
a suitcase that is exchanged for another suitcase packed with crisp $1,000
bills.

Typical is ''Lethal Weapon 2,'' a movie that manages to make the drug trade or,
more correctly, the busting of drug traffickers, vastly entertaining as it is
acted out by Mel Gibson and Danny Glover. ''Lethal Weapon 2'' also tentatively
suggests that South Africans (the drug traffickers in the film are South African
diplomats) could take the place of Russians as immediately identifiable
villains, since we're all more or less in agreement about that country's
apartheid policies.

It seems more likely, though, that Hollywood's emphasis will remain on drugs as
a gimmick, the contraband substance of choice of people who think up the plots
of mass-market entertainment movies. The President's message will be cited as
certification of the worthiness of such endeavors.

Some of the movies may well be fun to watch. Yet they will remain resolutely
beside the point of the drug problem. In much the same way, most cold war movies
remained beside the point of human aspirations as expressed in political
systems. That's entertainment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Conrad Veidt, the archetypal Nazi (Culver Pictures); Oscar Homolka, the
personification of postwar Communism (pg. 1); Robert Davi in ''Licence to Kill''
(Keith Hamshere) (pg. 15)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 24, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

HOME VIDEO/NEW RELEASES: NEW VIDEO RELEASES

SECTION: Section 2; Page 32, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 632 words



Out Cold
1988. HBO. $89.99. Laser disk, $39.95. Closed captioned. 1 hour 31 minutes. R.

Malcolm Mowbray's essentially British comedy, which just happens to be set in
California, is about two butchers, business partners and friends, Dave (John
Lithgow) and Ernie (Bruce McGill) - Ernie is frozen to death in a meat locker-
plus Ernie's dangerously pragmatic wife (Teri Garr). ''Though the story, which
devotes a lot of energy to the disposing of the frozen Ernie, could easily have
degenerated into broad farce, the cast and Mr. Mowbray keep it drily witty all
the way through.'' (Janet Maslin)

Bambi
1942. Disney. $26.99. 1:09. LD, $39.99. CC. G.

When the feature-length animated musical, five years in the creating, opened at
Radio City, the Times critic wrote: ''Walt Disney's wizards have caught much of
the breathless and breathtaking fantasy of Felix Salten's tremulous story of the
little fawn who grew up in the woodland with his assorted playmates and finally
became a great forest prince like his father.''

Slaves of New York
1989. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. LD, $49.95. 2:05. R.

James Ivory's film, starring Bernadette Peters, Chris Sarandon and Mary Beth
Hurt, is based on Tama Janowitz's short stories about various denizens of the
downtown art scene. It ''has no intrinsic shape of its own'' and ''simply drifts
from situation inviting the audience to soak up atmosphere . . . which isn't
remotely as offbeat or unconventional as the peripheral trappings make it
appear.'' (Maslin)

The Dream Team
1989. MCA. $89.95. LD, $34.98. CC. 1:53.
PG-13.

Michael Keaton, Christopher Lloyd, Peter Boyle and Stephen Furst play four
institutionalized mental patients on their way to a baseball game who are
separated from their doctor and chaperone and find themselves on their own in
the wilds of Manhattan. The problem with Howard Zeff's comedy is ''that it's not
funny too much of the time. On those occasions when it is funny, the humor less
often prompts laughter than mute appreciation of the talents of the principal
performers.'' (Vincent Canby)

Gone With the Wind
1939. MGM/UA $89.95. LD, $49.95. 3:51.
 CC. G.

 This is a 50th-anniversary reissue of a film that the Times critic of the day
called ''the greatest motion mural we have seen and the most ambitious
film-making venture in Hollywood's spectacular history.'' Margaret Mitchell's
epic love story of Rhett Butler (Clark Gable), the handsome soldier of fortune,
and Scarlett O'Hara (Vivien Leigh), the plantation belle, is told against the
background of the Civil War and the physical destruction of the South.

The Last Days of Pompeii
1935. Turner. $19.98. 1:36. No rating.

Preston Foster stars as a blacksmith-turned-gladiator in a biblical drama from
the makers of ''King Kong.'' A critic of the day appraised it as an ably managed
historical work that loses something by bringing in a foolish little romance.
''But the hero of the occasion is Basil Rathbone,'' the critic added, ''whose
Pilate is a fascinating aristocrat, scornful in his hauteur and sly in his
reasoning.''

Powwow Highway
1989. Cannon. $89.95. 1:31. R.

Two Cheyenne Indians - Philbert Bono (Gary Farmer), a scene-stealing mystical
giant, and Buddy Red Bow (A. Martinez), an angry Vietnam veteran - team up for a
weeklong journey in Philbert's new jalopy. Philbert is searching for some kind
of spiritual core in contemporary American Indian life and Buddy is ostensibly
coming to the aid of his sister, arrested on trumped-up drug charges. It aims
for a sweetly comic tone and includes some sadly affecting glimpses of life
among American Indians who have lost touch with their past, but ''most of the
film simply ambles along at a genial pace.'' (Maslin)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 24, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION;
Decades of Change: A Look Back At China in Chaos

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD; Fox Butterfield, a former Beijing bureau chief for
The New York Times, is the author of ''China: Alive in the Bitter Sea,''
published by Times Books.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 31, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1426 words


It is Shanghai in 1927. Chiang Kaishek is conducting a bloody purge of his
erstwhile allies, the Communists. In the old black-and-white film,
boyish-looking suspects are interrogated by laughing policemen, then held in a
cage by a guard brandishing an executioner's sword and finally dispatched by a
shot to the back of the head.

The scene is part of a meticulously researched two-hour documentary, ''China in
Revolution, 1911-1949,'' to be shown on PBS stations, including WNET in New
York, on Wednesday evening at 9. The program, which grew out of the
serendipitious discovery of a cache of rare footage about China in a private New
Jersey movie archive, combines original film with interviews with Chinese
soldiers, peasants and political leaders. These individual participants in the
chaotic period between the overthrow of China's last imperial dynasty in 1911
and the founding of the People's Republic in 1949 tell extraordinary tales:
stories of warlords and Japanese atrocities, accounts of small girls sold as
child brides and recollections of Mao Zedong as a young revolutionary.

Huang Wei, a former Nationalist general, is shown on newsreel footage from 1949
being captured by Communist troops as they swept to final victory. Then, in a
recent interview, Mr. Huang recounts how he was subjected to thought reform by
the Communists for 27 years but still remains devoted to his one-time commander,
Chiang Kai-shek.

''This man, I think, was a great man, a hero,'' Mr. Huang says of Chiang. ''But
his methods were the old ones of China, so he lost. In the end, I was buried
alived for him.''

The broadcast of the program now, shortly after the tumultuous events of the
student-led democracy movement in Beijing last spring, is fortuitous. When Sue
Williams, the New York-based writer, director and co-producer of ''China in
Revolution,'' began work on the project four years ago. ''Everyone told us we
were crazy,'' she said recently. ''They said, 'Who cares about China between
1911 and 1949?' ''

''China in Revolution'' does not directly explain the events leading up to the
protests in Tiananmen Square. But for the Chinese history is a living force, as
real to them as baseball box scores are to American boys, and thus the film
helps the American viewer to appreciate the Chinese mind set. It suggests why
many older Chinese, who experienced the disastrous division of China before
1949, fear anarchy, and why so many younger Chinese still yearn for the elusive
goals of democracy and modernization.

''China in Revolution'' bears many similarities in tone and style to two earlier
highly acclaimed documentary series presented by WGBH in Boston: ''Vietnam: A
Television History,'' and ''Eyes on the Prize: America's Civil Rights Years,
1954-1965.'' The resemblance is not coincidental. Judith Vecchione, the
executive producer of ''China in Revolution,'' was a key participant in both
earlier productions. Ms. Williams was a film researcher for ''Eyes on the
Prize,'' and Kathryn Dietz, the co-director and co-producer of ''China in
Revolution,'' worked on the Vietnam series. Will Lyman, who narrated the Vietnam
programs, also provides the carefully subdued voice for ''China.''

Moreover, the producers also borrowed the concept of assembling a team of
academic specialists for guidance from the earlier series. The experts, who
included Jonathan Spence, a historian at Yale University, and Andrew Nathan, a
political scientist at Columbia University, helped identify unlabeled film and
offered advice on historical disputes. The result is a carefully balanced
presentation that few scholars would quibble over.

But those familiar with China's history may find that the producers' very
attempt at fairness sometimes works against them, regretfully draining some of
the passion that the period evoked. To recall the heady atmosphere in the
Communists' wartime headquarters in the caves of Yanan, the producers interview
John Paton Davies, a brilliant State Department officer who spent time in Yanan.
But there is not even a mention that Mr. Davies's favorable reporting on the
Communists, compared to the corruption, inflation and incompetence that wracked
the Nationalists, would lead to his dismissal by Washington and the ruin of his
career in the anti-Communist witch hunt that followed the Communists' victory.

Nor is any reference made to the great debate, in the United States and Taiwan,
to which the Nationalists fled in 1949, over ''who lost China.''

Ms. Vecchione insisted that to have mentioned Mr. Davies's fate or the debate
over who lost China would have been ahistorical. ''It would have gone beyond our
period and would have gotten into the argument in America,'' she said. ''We
tried to stay with a Chinese point of view.''

The producers were also constrained by other problems, some beyond their
control. For one thing, for many key episodes, there was simply no film
available. The Communists did not have a cameraman with them on their epic Long
March in 1934-35, in which they journeyed an average of 17 miles a day over
mountains and wastelands, while fighting continuous battles and losing 95
percent of their men.

Another difficulty was that because of the time period, many important
participants were dead or too ill to be interviewed. Madame Chiang Kai-shek,
still living in Taipei, though in poor health, declined all requests. ''She sent
us tea and cookies,'' said Ms. Dietz.

Deng Xiaoping, China's current leader and a ranking military commissar in the
Red Army before 1949, similarly refused to be interviewed. Mao Zedong's widow,
Jiang Qing, imprisoned since his death in 1976 as a leader of the discredited
''Gang of Four,'' not only was unavailable, but because of an order she gave
years ago to cover up her early years as an actress in Shanghai, the producers
were denied access to a valuable repository of Chinese archival film.

There was also the sheer complexity of modern Chinese history. ''We didn't want
to overload viewers with strange names and dates,'' explained Ms. Williams. ''We
could really turn the audience off.'' So, the producers had to winnow down the
material.

''Many of these people are very colorful, if you are writing about them, but not
on film,'' said Ms. Vecchione.

In several cases, the producers' omissions are unfortunate. They discovered some
remarkable footage of the student demonstration in Beijing on May 4, 1919, which
has assumed almost mystical significance to later generations of youthful
Chinese. But while the film is briefly shown, there is no mention of what came
to be called the May Fourth Movement. In part, it was the 70th anniversary of
this long-ago march that inspired students this past spring in Beijing.

Much of the early film was found in the John E. Allen archive in Park Ridge, in
northern New Jersey, the home of a private film collector. For years, Ms.
Williams, whose grandfather had gone to China to make his fortune in business
and whose mother was born and raised in China, had routinely asked archives if
they had any footage on China when she was working on other projects.

Suddenly, she had a treasure. But because it was old, nitrate-based stock, much
of it had deteriorated. ''You would open the cans and find this white, slimy
mess,'' she said. It also was uncatalogued.

Sometimes participants were able to help identify film. Soong Hsi-lien, a former
Nationalist general whom the producers interviewed, was sitting in the cutting
room one day watching footage when he pointed at a figure standing on a hill
with binoculars in his hand. ''That's me,'' he exclaimed. The producers made
some other stunning finds. There is old newsreel film of emaciated conscripts,
roped together by the Nationalists, being led off to fight the Japanese or the
Communists. One and a half million of them died before ever reaching the front
because of misappropriation of the funds intended to feed them.

Juxtaposed with this is newsreel footage of Chiang Kai-shek, whom the American
commentator of the time calls ''the lean, keen Generalissimo, the undisputed
leader and idol of 450 million Chinese.''

Ms. Williams is now planning a sequel to ''China in Revolution,'' carrying the
story from 1949 up to Mao's death in 1976. It will be a very different story,
something the close of the current film presages. When the producers were in
Beijing, they happened to see a play on television in which Chiang, in an
apocryphal conversation, quotes a Chinese proverb to Mao: ''It is easy to seize
power, but difficult to maintain it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chiang Kai-shek and his wife in 1937 (Central News Agency, Taiwan)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 24, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

RECORDINGS;
American Pie With a Dash of the Eccentric

BYLINE: By PETER WATROUS

SECTION: Section 2; Page 27, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 982 words


Musical eccentricity is an attitude that the music industry, along with its
audience, hasn't always found so attractive. Those who fall between the cracks
stylistically tend to fall through the commercial cracks as well; record
companies, radio stations and record stores don't do much cutting of the barbed
wire that separates genres.

NRBQ - that's New Rhythm and Blues Quartet - who have just released ''Wild
Weekend'' (Virgin 91291-1; all three formats), their first major-label recording
in six years, are a musical enigma drapped in garish clothes embroidered with
question marks. The band, which released its first album 20 years ago, has
consistently ignored the rules of genre, playing neither pop, rock, jazz,
experimental nor roots music, but an amalgam of all of them.

The musicians play at styles, stealing from everywhere - from Sun Ra to Tin Pan
Alley to Joe Turner to Carl Perkins - but remaining elusive, shifty. Which means
that they've been relegated to a cult level, flirting occasionally with
major-label recordings. But they are fun, smart and some of the best musicians
working in American pop - or whatever their hybrid is called.

And that's the problem, at least for those wishing to categorize them. What NRBQ
has to say is at odds with the stunning music they write and play. They're
obsessed with the subjects of pre-AIDS, pre-Vietnam pop, which leaves them for
the most part with songs about girls (not women), cars, homework and even a bit
of sex.

There are few groups who have as thoroughly rewritten the American vernacular
musical landscape while managing to preserve dance music's true vitality, the
integrity of the solo and the sheer joy of loud improvisation. But NRBQ's
tension stem at least in part from their lyrics, in which can be found a sort of
low yuksterism and a sometimes heavy, unblinking irony.

The second tune on the album, ''Little Floater,'' starts off with a sumptuous
chiming of piano, electric keyboards and guitar. Suddenly Joey Spampanato, the
group's bassist, begins singing in a high, almost angelic tenor: ''My baby's old
fashioned/ I love you/ Zoom, zoom,'' which is an odd love song, but not
inconceivable. But the bridge of the tune spills the truth: ''I'm in love with
an automobile and I know it's in love with me,'' all done to a melody harmonized
with the dollars-and-cents finesse of the best of Tin Pan Alley.

The album is filled with those sorts of incongruities. On ''Boozoo, That's
Who,'' Terry Adams, the group's pianist, sings about the zydeco singer and
bandleader Boozoo Chavis. the song sums up Mr. Chavis's life, telling us where
he was was born (on Dog Hill), that he trained horses (one was called Motor
Dude), that he has ''paper in his shoe'' (which was the name of Mr. Chavis's
biggest regional hit). Meanwhile the band plows through a hard-rocking
arrangement of the tune, which includes several drifts into the land of zydeco,
with Mr. Chavis himself huffing away on accordion.

This is about as arcane as pop gets. It's no accident that Mr. Adams chose an
obscure figure like Mr. Chavis to commemorate, to turn the daily routines of his
life into things of significance, however Dada-esque.

Mr. Adams is a connoisseur of American regional music and an absurdist, somebody
who, on piano, can play uncannily like Thelonious Monk - and has even borrowed
some of Monk's stage mannerisms - or Jerry Lee Lewis's. On electric keyboards,
he can sound eerily like Sun Ra, the self-proclaimed ''master of the omniverse''
(the band featured Mr. Ra's ''Rocket No. 9'' on their debut album). All of this
comes out in concert, with Mr. Adams smashing away at the piano, forcing Cecil
Taylor into song forms, Thelonious Monk into an unsuspecting country tune.

The members of NRBQ are masters of dance music, albeit oddly played; few groups
can share the stage with them and not wither under the huge groove they build.
The guitarist, Al Anderson, can deliver archetypally perfect rockabilly solos
with climaxes that are waves of metallic bliss. And Mr. Spampanato and the
band's drummer, Tom Ardolino, form an extraordinary rhythm section that carries
the orgy of American musical forms and fragments. Mr. Ardolino is the king of
the grooving back beat, and Mr. Spampanato is an idiosyncratic bassist who
occasionally sounds like he's playing an acoustic instrument, but on a rocking
airliner. The album rests on their bedrock.

''Wild Weekend'' is as pop as NRBQ gets, with a few keyboard solos, a handful of
guitar solos and lots of rhythm. It's this combination of a hard-driving,
eccentric rhythm section, mixed loud and up front, along with the strangely
sophisticated and satisfying tunes, that allows the album to radiate so much
pleasure - it's the type of record that, once it gets on a turntable, stays put.

Partially produced by Andy Paley (who worked on the last album of the former
Beach Boy Brian Wilson and one of the few producers the band, notoriously
standoffish when it comes to outside advice, has ever used), the album has a
bright sheen to it, contributing to the most uniform sound an NRBQ album has
ever had, and giving it real pop commercial credibility. Strange little blips
flourish - the sound of an audience that filters into a part of the tune
''Immortal for a While,'' or the sound of the disembodied vocals on the song
''Wild Weekend.''

But ultimately it's the melodies, and their references, a sort of nostalgia for
a music that never existed in the form they present it in, that accounts for the
music's success. It's been 40 years since the birth of most of the music the
band draws on. The group's synthesis and understanding of the mechanisms of
American music seems not only logical but imperative, the only way to face this
century's explosion of creativity. And they've done it all with the sort of
intensity that can keep a person dancing all night, and laughing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Terry Adams, Al Anderson, Joey Spampanato and Tom Ardolino (with
Cabbage Patch doll twin) of NRBQ (Star File/Chuck Pulin)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 24, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
After 17 Years, A Director Reappears

BYLINE: By PETER GRILLI; Peter Grilli is a writer and consultant specializing in
Japanese culture.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 15, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2398 words


Twenty-five years ago, a young unknown Japanese director named Hiroshi
Teshigahara sent tremors through the world of cinema with a film of stunning
originality, awesome power and technical brilliance. Called ''Woman in the
Dunes,'' it won the Special Jury Prize at the 1964 Cannes Film Festival. A
spectacular debut, agreed European film critics; and later in the same year
acclaim greeted the film in America when it was shown at the New York Film
Festival. Its impact was not quickly forgotten: nearly 20 years later, when the
Film Society of Lincoln Center featured it again in a retrospective of the
finest films from the first two decades of the New York Film Festival, ''Woman
in the Dunes'' was the hottest ticket of the event.

Now, 17 years since his last feature, Mr. Teshigahara returns with a new film
totally unlike any of his earlier works. Called ''Rikyu,'' it is an inquiry into
Japanese cultural politics of the 17th century that raises questions about
Japan's present-day values. The new film, which opened in Japan last week,
receives its New York premiere at an invitational screening on Tuesday the Japan
Society, followed by two public showings on Wednesday.

For a decade or so following ''Woman in the Dunes,'' Mr. Teshigahara remained
almost constantly in the international film-making spotlight. Appearing at one
festival after another, introducing his new films or those of other Japanese
directors, attending film juries, collecting awards, he seemed to spend almost
more time abroad than in Japan. But it was at home that he remained most active,
directing a series of distinctly original films that helped bring to world
attention the creativity of the contemporary Japanese avant-garde.

A number of Mr. Teshigahara's films were based on the novels of Kobo Abe, and
all were distinguished by original musical scores by Toru Takemitsu, Japan's
internationally celebrated composer. Austere dramas of psychological
incisiveness, films like ''Pitfall,'' ''Face Another'' and ''A Burned Map''
formed something of a one-man New Wave, reinforcing the director's reputation as
an artist of uncommon authority and joining ''Woman in the Dunes'' on the
circuits of art-film theaters.

The United States premiere of ''Summer Soldiers'' in 1972 provoked special
controversy. The corrosive story of young American deserters fleeing the war in
Vietnam into anonymity and depravity in Japan struck a painful nerve as
America's national conscience was being most brutalized by the war.

What would the unconventional young Japanese film director turn to next?
''Summer Soldiers'' was followed, surprisingly, by silence.

Mr. Teshigahara, still only in his early 40's, abruptly disappeared from the
international spotlight. Because that spotlight, at least in those days, almost
never penetrated the work of Japanese artists at home in Japan, nothing was
heard from the director. Turning his hand to ceramics and flower arranging, he
confined his film making to documentaries.

Where Mr. Teshigahara's earlier feature films were spare, tightly compressed
investigations of contemporary social or psychological deviance, ''Rikyu'' is an
extravagant, big-budget costume drama about the relationship of a great Japanese
warlord of the 16th century and his spiritual mentor.

Where the characters in Mr. Teshigahara's earlier films were scrutinized like
helpless insects under a scientist's microscope - indeed, the hero of ''Woman in
the Dunes'' was himself an entomologist, observed from above as he struggled to
free himself from a pit at the bottom of a sand dune - in ''Rikyu'' the
characters step larger than life from the pages of Japanese history, costumed
brilliantly in lavish brocaded robes and placed against the splendid settings of
an epoch that has been called Japan's Renaissance.

Asked to account for his 17-year absence from film making, Mr. Teshigahara
laughs modestly. ''I've been doing so many other things that all seem now to
have been preparations for this film,'' he says. ''I have been making pottery,
working at flower arranging and environmental sculptures and studying Japanese
history and the tea ceremony. I could never have made this film without such
study. Not that I was consciously preparing for ''Rikyu,'' of course - I've only
been working on this film for the past two or three years - but I can see now
that everything I've worked at over the years has helped me.'' And, indeed, he
has been busy.  For his entire adult life, Mr. Teshigahara has been deeply
involved with the activities of Sogetsu, the flower-arranging school his father
established in the 1920's and which now numbers more than a million adherents in
Japan and around the world. Sofu Teshigahara, Hiroshi's father, had shocked the
prewar Japanese establishment with his radical innovations in the traditional
art of flower arranging.

For Sofu, flowers were not simply quiet, natural artifacts to decorate an alcove
but equally a medium for large Dadaist expressions of creative energy. Even
while making his acclaimed films in the 1960's, Hiroshi had been a pivotal
figure in Sogetsu and in the life of the Japanese arts avant-garde.

He had extended Sogetsu's interests far beyond flowers and transformed it into a
cultural center where poets, artists, choreographers, theater directors,
designers, film makers and other artists could experiment freely with new media
and new directions. As early as 1962, he had invited John Cage and other
American and European composers and musicians to present their newest work in
Tokyo. Painters, sculptors, writers and conceptual artists from all over the
world soon followed, and the exhibition and performance spaces of the impressive
Sogetsu Building in Tokyo quickly became known as the places to go to see the
newest and best in international avant-garde arts.

Following the example of his father Sofu, Hiroshi Teshigahara was fascinated as
much by the sculptural expressiveness of flowers as by their natural beauty. In
designing huge environmental settings for flowers, he began experimenting with
large-scale ceramic pieces to contain and surround the flowers. In 1973, under
Sogetsu auspices, he established the Echizen Togei-mura, a new arts center in an
area of western Japan known for its ceramics since ancient times.

For more than a decade, Mr. Teshigahara devoted nearly every free moment to the
study of ceramics, inviting many of Japan's finest traditional potters to come
to Echizen to work with him. He also continued his leadership of Sogetsu's
experimentation with other arts and oversaw the construction of a remarkable new
Sogetsu Building in Tokyo, designed by Kenzo Tange and featuring a superb
interior plaza of rock sculptures by his close friend Isamu Noguchi.

''It never occurred to me that I had stopped film making,'' Mr. Teshigahara
says. ''It's only other people who say that. I continued to make small
documentary films and experimental works on film, many of them in connection
with events at Sogetsu. And then, five years ago, I went to Spain to do a film
on Gaudi.'' That film, a documentary about Antonio Gaudi's architectural work in
and around Barcelona, revealed Gaudi's innovative artistic mind as something of
a spiritual mirror in which Mr. Teshigahara no doubt caught glimpses of himself.

In Sen-no-Rikyu, the 16th-century protagonist of his new film, can it be that
Mr. Teshigahara also sees aspects of himself? Rikyu, whose name is known to all
Japanese schoolchildren as the founder of the Japanese tea ceremony, was the
consummate artist. In this ritual serving of tea, he combined virtually all
Japanese arts and crafts with architecture, landscape design, cuisine and
etiquette to create a serene setting for personal intimacy and communication.

A man of spiritual and meditative inclination, living at one of the most
turbulent moments in Japanese history, he gained unexpected political influence
as the confidant and cultural mentor to the powerful warlord Toyotomi Hideyoshi.
Rikyu's relationship with Hideyoshi is a story that has taken on epic
proportions in Japanese cultural history. It illustrates the classic mutual
attraction of Man of Action and Man of Ideas.

Hideyoshi, a blunt, willful self-made general, had risen through the ranks to
become, by 1582, the most powerful individual in the country. As overlord to a
host of warring feudal lords, he had succeeded in unifying a land that had been
savaged by civil war for nearly two centuries. Rikyu, a cultivated artist,
potter and master of the tea ceremony, tutored Hideyoshi in the gentler arts
once the general had secured his military domination over the ancient capital of
Kyoto and absolute power over the entire country. The friendship and mutual
dependence of warlord and tea master deepened over a decade and then abruptly
soured.

Like the relationship of Britain's King Henry II with Thomas a Becket, or that
of Rome's Emperor Nero with Seneca, the affection of the Man of Power for the
Man of Spirit seems to have turned gradually to envy, then fear and finally to
murderous hatred. Fearing Rikyu's increasing influence with rival warlords,
Hideyoshi impulsively demanded an apology for a trivial, or perhaps imagined,
slight. When Rikyu proudly refused, Hideyoshi angrily ordered him to commit
suicide; afterward, like Henry II and Nero, he is believed to have been torn
with guilt and remorse at his impetuous destruction of a beloved friend and
trusted adviser.

In the dramatic relationship of Hideyoshi and Rikyu, art and temporal power came
into conflict at an extraordinary moment in Japanese history. The last decades
of the 16th century saw not only the beginnings of national unification and
peace after centuries of disunity and civil war, but also Japan's first
encounter with European culture. Spanish and Portuguese missionaries, St.
Francis Xavier among them, had arrived at this farthest extremity of East Asia
at midcentury and were soon followed by traders, military men and ambassadors
from the Pope and other European heads of state.

Japanese greeted the cultural incursions from Europe first with curious
interest, then enthusiasm and finally wariness, fear and revulsion. The
political and social upheavals of the time were accompanied by an era of
cultural change marked by extraordinary diversity and radical innovation. If
peasants could transform themselves, almost overnight, into wealthy merchants or
powerful warlords, then artists could break dramatically with established canons
to experiment with new ideas, new forms and new styles.

As in Europe's Renaissance, some Japanese men of arts and letters turned for
inspiration to antiquity, rediscovering ancient arts and invigorrating them with
new ideas and aspirations. Some also turned eagerly to the new cultural models
imported by visiting Europeans, adopting them wholesale or gradually adapting
them to Japanese taste and lifestyles.

The importation of gunpowder and European firearms transformed military
technology, giving certain warlords rapid dominance over contenders for power.
Some daimyo, or feudal warlords, surrounded themselves with Europeans and amused
themselves by parading in Western costume or experimenting with exotic European
foods or musical entertainment; some even converted to Christianity.

In this setting of social and cultural ferment, it was Hideyoshi who dominated
the politics of the time, but it is Rikyu's legacy that is perhaps even more
enduring. Through artistic refinement and the spiritual retreat offered by the
tea ceremony, Rikyu provided the rough military society an escape from the
savagery and bloodshed of daily life. In the tiny rustic huts that Rikyu devised
as the appropriate setting for the tea ceremony, generals and samurai were
forced to shed their swords and military trappings, and with them their
self-aggrandizing pride.

They were invited to enjoy a brief respite from the battlefield in intimate
communication with tea masters who served as spiritual counsellors. Military men
were encouraged to try their own hand at arts like painting and pottery and to
cultivate their spirit through Zen meditation and the esthetic concentration
offered by tea ceremony. It was Rikyu's achievement to create in the tea
ceremony a synthesis of all contemporary Japanese arts and crafts, bringing them
to a level of perfection that has never since been matched.

The story Mr. Teshigahara has to tell in ''Rikyu'' is a compelling one both as
historical epic and as psychological interaction of two fascinating
personalities. Appropriate to the grandeur of the era, Mr. Teshigahara has
assembled lavish forces for his new film: an all-star cast headed by Tsutomu
Yamazaki as Hideyoshi and Rentaro Mikuni as Rikyu (last seen, respectively,
starring in ''A Taxing Woman'' and ''A Taxing Woman Returns''), costumes by Emi
Wada (who won an Academy Award for her costumes for Akira Kurosawa's ''Ran''),
another musical score by Mr. Takemitsu and the collaboration of Japan's leading
art directors, scholars, architects and craftsmen who have helped re-create the
period with meticulous authenticity.

The script for ''Rikyu,'' written by Mr. Teshigahara himself and the
painter-novelist Gempei Akasegawa, is based closely on a long novel titled
''Hideyoshi and Sen-no-Rikyu'' by the late Yaeko Nogami, who was more than once
suggested as a Nobel prize candidate for this masterwork.

With the confrontation of art and power as its central theme, and an era of
social ferment and explosive cultural innovation as its setting, the parallels
of ''Rikyu'' with present-day Japan are not hard to see. ''I never had much
interest in the tea ceremony until I began working on this film,'' says Mr.
Teshigahara, ''and then I came to recognize its value as a medium of profound
communication between human individuals, as vital today as it has ever been.''

Will modern Japanese, or non-Japanese who seem equally distant in time and space
from the values and aesthetics of the 16th century, be able to comprehend the
mentality of men like Hideyoshi and Rikyu? ''History and cultural patterns may
change over time,'' comes Mr. Teshigahara's reply, ''but fundamental human
problems do not. If somebody like myself can understand the personal conflict of
these two great men, and if I have managed to capture it honestly, then anyone
should be able to understand it as well.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Tsutomo Yamazaki as the warlord Hideyoshi and Rentaro Mikuni as the tea
master Rikyu in Mr. Teshigahara's 'Rikyu' (pg. 15); Hiroshi Teshigahara, the
director of ''Rikyu'' (pg. 18) (Japan Society)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 24, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Return to the Killing Fields

BYLINE: By Dith Pran

SECTION: Section 6; Page 30, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3690 words


On April 12, 1975, soon after Lon Nol, Cambodia's President, had fled the
country, the United States withdrew its forces from the capital. Sydney
Schanberg, then a New York Times correspondent, and Dith Pran, his Cambodian
assistant, stayed on to cover the story of the battle-scarred country under the
control of the Khmer Rouge and their leader, Pol Pot. Eight days after the
evacuation, Dith Pran was forced, with hundreds of thousands of other
Cambodians, to march from Phnom Penh to the countryside. There, he was to endure
almost four years of unremitting horrors.

In late 1978, Vietnamese Communists invaded the country, which the Khmer Rouge
had renamed Democratic Kampuchea. By early 1979, the Vietnamese had driven Pol
Pot and his forces to the Thai-Cambodian border; millions of starving Cambodians
fled from forced-labor camps. On Oct. 3, 1979, Dith Pran crossed the border into
Thailand. His story was the basis for the movie ''The Killing Fields.''

This summer, Dith Pran, now a Times photographer, and seven other members of the
Cambodia Documentation Commission, a human-rights organization, were invited by
Prime Minister Hun Sen to visit Cambodia. This is Dith Pran's story of his
return.


I HAVE BEEN LIVING IN AMERICA SINCE OCT. 19, 1979. FOR MUCH of that time, I have
had the same dream: I am a slave again in the Dam Dek labor camp in Pol Pot's
Kampuchea. I see people brutally beaten with sticks. I am in my black pajamas,
barefoot, working in the rice fields under the hot sun or pounding rain. I am
being tortured and people are being arrested, their hands tied tightly behind
them - I know they will be taken out to be killed and, terrified, I think, Will
it be me next? Sometimes, fighting off the terror in my sleep, I throw out my
arms and hit my wife, lying beside me. Often I talk in my sleep; sometimes I
cry, and when my wife wakes me, I am still crying. When I wake and find I am in
my bed in Brooklyn and not on a mat on the ground in Dam Dek, I am upset and
angry, and I curse the Khmer Rouge.

ON AUG. 17, IN BRIGHT AND HUMID SUNSHINE, HANG KHONG (AIR) Vietnam's chartered
flight from Bangkok to Phnom Penh lands at Pochentong International Airport. The
Pol Pot years are far from my mind; I even stop thinking like a photographer.
For the moment, I am once again a news assistant for The New York Times. The
last time I saw the airport, in April 1975, it was under heavy rocket attack
from the Khmer Rouge as the Americans pulled out; it was all smoke and noise and
fear and confusion.

I have looked forward to this day for years. The Khmer Rouge almost succeeded in
destroying the country's traditional customs and culture, but since they were
forced out 10 years ago, I have heard and read a lot about the slow revival of
the time-honored way of life; so I am not worried about my personal safety. I
have wanted to return to Cambodia to see my sister - the only close relative to
survive the Khmer Rouge terror - and to hold a memorial service for my parents
and other family members. My mother died two years ago. My father, a senior
public-works official in former regimes, died of starvation when Pol Pot
controlled the country. Three brothers (two were military officers in the Lon
Nol Government; one was a student) and one sister (the wife of an officer) were
killed by the Khmer Rouge.

As a member of the Cambodia Documentation Commission, which has been working to
get the World Court to put the Khmer Rouge on trial for genocide, I have also
wanted to see my native country before the Vietnamese withdrawal in late
September. I am afraid the real civil war - between Cambodian and Cambodian,
rather than between the Vietnamese and the Cambodian opponents of the Hun Sen
Government - will then break out and I will no longer be able to return.

At the airport tarmac, we are welcomed by two officials from the Foreign
Ministry. Young women give each of us a bouquet of flowers. Waiting for me in
front of the airport building is Sydney Schanberg. During the early 1970's, when
the Vietnam War spilled into Cambodia, I used to wait for him at this airport
because he was based in Singapore. Because of poor communications in Cambodia
today, people meeting a plane don't know the exact hour of its arrival. My
flight is four hours late.

''I wasted all day because of you,'' Sydney says, teasing.

''I used to wait for you, too, before,'' I reply. ''You remember?''

I was Sydney's assistant for two years, between 1973 and 1975, when he was a New
York Times correspondent. He is now a columnist for Newsday, and is in Phnom
Penh for the Cambodian premiere of ''The Killing Fields.''

As we walk out to the driveway, I am amazed to see cars in the parking lot a few
yards away. When I was working as a cook in a blacksmith brigade in Dam Dek
(about 120 miles northwest of the capital), I had seen the engines of brand-new
motorbikes and other vehicles (including cars, jeeps and all the American Army
trucks the Khmer Rouge couldn't fix) melted down and the iron and aluminum used
to make farm tools. The bodies of these vehicles were turned into buckets.
Rubber tires were used to make Ho Chi Minh sandals for the Khmer Rouge; the rest
of the population walked to work, barefoot.

The main airport gate is new. It has the traditional, red-tiled peaked roof and
bears the national symbol: the five towers of Angkor Wat. Flying from the top of
the gate is the new Cambodian flag. Instead of being all red with the yellow
emblem of Angkor Wat, it is now half-red and half-blue, with the emblem in the
center. Since April, the People's Republic of Kampuchea has also had a new name:
the State of Cambodia.

On the way to the Monorom Hotel, where I am staying, we pass a boulevard that
used to be called Kampuchea Krom, meaning ''lower Kampuchea,'' a reference to
the southeastern portion of the Khmer Empire that was swallowed by the
Vietnamese a few centuries ago. Under the present regime, the road has been
renamed Kampuchea Vietnam. Because of Kampuchea Krom, generations of Cambodians
were taught to hate the Vietnamese. My generation was told in school that our
ancestors who fought and lost the war were tortured by the Vietnamese. The
majority of Cambodians still do not trust the Vietnamese, even though they
realize the Vietnamese saved them from the Khmer Rouge, who killed more than a
million of their own people.

AT ABOUT 7 A.M. EVERY DAY, THE SIDEWALK RESTAURANTS ARE crowded with people
having noodle soup, rice gruel, coffee or iced coffee with milk. I am surprised
to see only a few soldiers, all unarmed, in the streets and markets. During the
Lon Nol regime, which was backed by the United States, soldiers would go about
with AK-47's, ammo belts across their chests, hand grenades in their belts.

At the Psar Thom Thmey (Big New Market), a short distance from the hotel, a
notice says in Khmer: ''Do not bring bikes, motorbikes, explosives, long or
short weapons into the market.'' Life appears normal. The market is again a busy
shopping mall and greenmarket, the shops privately owned.

Under Pol Pot, little rice or food was given to the people because the Khmer
Rouge wanted us to become so weak we would not have the strength to rise up
against them. But even then I believe rice was plentiful. Now stores and markets
are filled with Cambodian rice and fresh foods, as well as goods smuggled in
from Singapore and Thailand (such as soap, cosmetics, clothing, canned food).

On the east side of the market is a park. Here, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, who was
in power in the 1960's (and who is trying, once more, to regain power), had many
mango trees planted. I'm told that when Pol Pot and his Khmer Rouge took over,
he ordered them chopped down, and that the coconut trees planted in their place
were fertilized with the bodies of the regime's victims. The current Government
removed the coconut trees and transformed the area into a park.

The second day of my visit, as I walk out of the market, I am stopped by a young
woman who tells me she is the daughter of Mea (Uncle) Hup, who used to cook with
me for the blacksmith and farm-tool workers brigade in Dam Dek. She is on the
verge of tears because I remind her of her father, who died early this year. He
would give me tobacco from his small plot of land, which he tended in his spare
time. I had met his daughter in the labor camp when she was a teen-ager. We talk
for a moment and she introduces me to her husband. Before parting, I give her
some money in gratitude for her father's many kindnesses to me.

Outside the Monorom Hotel, people patiently watch for relatives and friends from
overseas, and you often see emotional reunions. That is how I meet my oldest
friend, Tith Boran, whom I have known for 29 years, later that day. We had met
when we were interpreters in the Military Assistance Group at the American
Embassy. I had last seen him on April 30, 1975, when, on our forced march out to
the countryside, our paths crossed. He was with his family, and he was pushing
his ailing mother in her wheelchair.

Tith Boran has heard of my visit, and has (Continued on Page 52) been waiting by
the hotel entrance. After hugging each other, we talk for about half an hour,
catching up on the past 14 years. He, too, had worked in labor camps. His mother
had died of starvation, but he and his wife had survived.

Near the hotel, a few beggars also wait. I usually give each 50 riels (about 25
cents), which will buy two bowls of noodle soup. On the streets and in
restaurants, children try to convince visitors to buy city maps or books. Other
children sell homemade cakes along the sidewalks.

At every intersection are a few unarmed, uniformed young police officers. When
traffic gets heavy, they start to direct it. Otherwise, they stand around the
corner. At night, I see them sleeping in hammocks, the ends tied to trees or
lightpoles. I have never seen the police sleep in hammocks, but I remember the
Khmer Rouge loved sleeping in hammocks. When I was in Dam Dek, the special
brigade (made up of strong young people who were given extra rations and who
also had to work extra hard) began to imitate the Khmer Rouge and sleep in
hammocks. Perhaps these traffic policemen were once members of the special
brigade. My group at the labor camp, the older people, were not given the extra
cloth to make hammocks; we slept on straw or palm-leaf mats laid on the ground.

Phnom Penh has an electricity shortage. Running water is scarce in the dry
season, which lasts from October to May. Sanitation is poor and there is also a
drainage problem; every time there is a rainstorm, flooding follows. This never
happened before.

The black market for gasoline is back. Prostitution is back. The ''handshake''
is back, which means sauk (bribery) is back. Members of local militias, formed
by village committees to protect the countryside, live in outposts and are fed
by the villagers. I see them stopping people carrying sacks of goods, and
cigarettes and money are exchanged in a handshake. In the cities, the policemen
also demand and get their sauk.

The Cambodia I see is poor. The country is still green and the markets are full
of food and goods, but because of its diplomatic isolation (it is recognized by
Vietnam, Laos, India and the Soviet bloc), it cannot export its teak and
hardwood or rubber or rice or seafood to much of the world. Tourism, which used
to be one of the country's biggest moneymakers, was nonexistent under the Khmer
Rouge; it is now slowly returning.

Whenever possible, I break off from the group I am traveling with to walk around
and talk to people. On these wanderings, no one stops me. I don't feel I am in a
Communist country. People don't seem to worry or talk about the war now being
fought along the Thai-Cambodian border between the Government and the forces of
Pol Pot, Sihanouk and Son Sann (once Prime Minister under Sihanouk).

To many Cambodians, it doesn't matter whether they are living under Lon Nol or
Hun Sen; it's all the same. (Pol Pot is another matter; no one wants to see him
back.) They worry about their children having to fight a war; they are jealous
of people like the police who can make extra money through sauk, and they
criticize high government officials for leading a privileged life and sending
their children abroad. What I often hear is: ''The children of the poor become
soldiers. The children of the rich become policemen. The children of the high
cadre study in foreign countries.''

EARLY SATURDAY morning, around 5:30, I go to Wat Lanka, one of the best-known
monasteries in the capital, to listen to the monks recite their prayers. There
used to be 500 monks at Wat Lanka; now there are 15. The Khmer Rouge nearly
wiped out the practice of religion in Cambodia. This year, the Hun Sen
Government re-established Buddhism as the state religion. The Government has
also allowed mosques to reopen, but Christian churches remain closed.

At 8 A.M., we take an Air Kampuchea flight to the provincial town of Siem Reap,
where I was born and raised. About 140 miles northwest of Phnom Penh, Siem Reap
has long prospered from its proximity to the Great Lake and the ruins of Angkor
Wat. We stop at the nearby killing field, which I had last seen in early 1979,
when the Vietnamese, as punishment, ordered their Khmer Rouge prisoners to dig
up the bones and skulls buried in the trenches.

We are then taken by a Foreign Ministry guide to an abandoned army outpost that
is pockmarked with bullets and shrapnel holes and that has neither doors nor
windows. Stepping in, I see - on a wooden platform and exposed to the sun and
rain - a pile of skulls and bones. For the first time since my arrival, what I
see before me is too painful, and I break down completely.

These are my relatives, friends and neighbors, I keep thinking. I know my father
had died slowly of starvation at home, but I don't know how or where my brothers
and sister and some of their families were killed. All I know is they were
probably killed nearby.

It is a long time before I am calm again. And then I am able, with my bare
hands, to rearrange the skulls and bones so that they are not scattered about.

Around noon, we go by bus to my sister's house. The bus stops about 100 yards
from my old home, where my sister Sam Proeuth, who is 12 years younger than I,
is still living. I get off and greet all the old neighbors I know. Then I see my
sister. She starts running toward me and I rush toward her. We hug each other a
long time and we are both crying.

My sister looks pale, malnourished. I last saw her soon after I had been freed
from labor camp and had made my way back to my hometown, about 20 miles from Dam
Dek. From a distance, we could not immediately recognize each other: we were
both very thin, wore old torn clothes and walked barefoot. I had lost almost all
my teeth because of poor diet, and my feet and legs were badly infected because
I had so often waded in animal manure when I worked in the rice fields.

Sam Proeuth had also worked in a labor camp. At these camps, malaria was common
and she and I both caught it. I suffered attacks every week. I would get sudden
chills, or the sweats, or high fevers, sometimes several times a day. I drank a
lot of boiled bitter medicinal leaves to ease the attacks. My sister has
suffered far more than I. She saw a daughter and our father starve to death and
our young brother taken away. She still has nightmares.

Surrounded by relatives, we walk to our parents' house. I go upstairs to the
veranda to greet Meak Oth, the only aunt on my mother's side living today. As I
hug her, I cry again, because she looks so much like my mother. My aunt is in
her late 60's but she looks much older; she, too, had starved and worked in
labor camps. Now, like many elderly Cambodians, she has had her head shaved as a
sign of her increased devotion to Buddhism.

My sister, my aunt, our relatives and friends walk to the family temple where
the ashes of my relatives are kept in the family crypt. Hundreds of people are
there. My sister and her husband made the arrangements for the religious
memorial ceremony, attended by four monks who were to say the prayers for the
dead. (I remember a similar ceremony for my father in early 1979, a few months
before I secretly made my way to a border camp. There were no monks then, so my
mother and the elders of my hometown led the ceremony and said the prayers. As
the male head of the family, I then took the urn holding my father's ashes and
placed it in the family crypt.) After the ceremony, we make a procession to the
crypt and I place the urn with my mother's ashes near that of my father. I say:
''Now my mother and my father are together again.''

AT 8 A.M., ON AUG. 21, a Monday, our delegation heads for Prime Minister Hun
Sen's office in the center of the capital.

Our Foreign Ministry guide brings us to Hun Sen's office. As we walk into the
waiting room on the second floor, the director of protocol, Theam Chuny, comes
forward to meet us. I have known him since the early 1970's when he was one of
the official censors in the Lon Nol Government. He had an office in the Teletype
room in the Post Office and he was one of two censors to go over all the
journalists' copy. We greet each other warmly. ''The Prime Minister is ready,''
he says in Khmer. ''You go first, Pran, and you sit near the Prime Minister.''

In the conference room, Hun Sen is waiting for me near the door. I press my
hands together and bow. He, too, gives the traditional Cambodian greeting.
Inside the room, crowded against one wall, are local and international
television crews, and as the TV cameras roll and the flashbulbs go off, Hun Sen
and I shake hands for a very long time. He knows the power of the news media and
the importance of a photo opportunity.

Hun Sen invites me to sit down on the sofa. We address each other with the word
bang (senior person). As the spokesman for the delegation, I ask for his
comments on various human rights issues. The Prime Minister is friendly and
seems comfortable answering my questions.

Even though I hear he never finished high school, Hun Sen speaks like an
educated man. He seems to know some English and probably some French as well. As
I am asking him whether his Government plans to include human rights
declarations and conventions in its agenda at the month-long international
conference in Paris (to resolve the civil war in Cambodia as the Vietnamese pull
out), I cannot for a moment remember the Khmer word for ''conventions.'' So I
use the English word and he easily gives me the Khmer translation.

He insists that the human rights question be tied to the fate of the Khmer
Rouge. ''This is our request from the beginning,'' he says. ''We must prevent
the return of the genocidal Pol Pot regime. Without accepting this, human rights
violations will continue.'' He criticizes the Sihanouk and Son Sann factions for
separating the Khmer Rouge from the human rights issue, adding that human rights
is a problem he cannot resolve alone.

Although I am not satisfied with many of Hun Sen's answers, I am impressed with
his political skill. At the end of the 90-minute session, he says that the five
Cambodians in the delegation (all American citizens now) may have a Cambodian
passport if they wish. He also gives all of us a book he has written on the last
10 years his party has been in power. We shake hands, and I thank him for
inviting us.

AFTER MEETING with Hun Sen, we go to the village of Tuol Sleng, on the outskirts
of Phnom Penh, to the Museum of the Genocidal Crimes of Pol Pot. The museum is
in a former high school, which the Khmer Rouge surrounded with barbed wire and
turned into a prison. Here, they tortured 20,000 people during interrogations;
almost all of them were killed.

The barbed wire is still in place and on view are some of the police snapshots
of the interrogated. The faces of the young and the elderly are painful to see.
Some are children no older than 13. They knew nothing about politics. But many
of the Khmer Rouge were very young: it was the young killing the young. That is
why they could kill my youngest brother, who was 17 and a student and had
committed no crime.

Samnang Siv, a member of the delegation, suddenly sees a photograph of her
father. Like me, she survived Pol Pot's labor camps and escaped to the Thai
border and then to America. Her parents were killed by the Khmer Rouge but,
until this moment, she didn't know where they were killed or when. She starts to
cry uncontrollably. I go over and try to comfort her. ''We are not the only ones
who suffered,'' I say. ''Millions of people were victimized by the Khmer Rouge.
That is why we are here. We are working hard to find justice.''

Another delegate on the trip is Dr. Haing S. Ngor, who portrayed me in the movie
''The Killing Fields.'' He, too, suffered terribly under the Khmer Rouge. The
day before we leave Cambodia, he and I hold a memorial service for the unknown
victims of the Pol Pot regime at a monument built in their memory in Cheung Ek,
a village near the edge of the capital. The narrow, two-story monument, with the
traditional peaked roofs, has glassed-in shelves holding the skulls of some of
the 9,000 who were buried in the surrounding killing fields.

At the 60-minute ceremony, arranged with the help of local officials, Haing Ngor
and I lay a wreath in front of the monument. Four monks recite the prayers for
the dead. Then, assisted by the monks, we release 200 pigeons. We are both sad
and angry to see the skulls and know that Cambodia may soon be engulfed in
another civil war. By letting the birds go, we believe we will free them to
carry to the rest of the world the message that we Khmer want peace.

As the monks prayed, one held in his hands two turtles. After the ceremony,
Samnang Siv takes the turtles to the nearby rice field and frees them in memory
of her parents. Freeing turtles is also part of an old tradition. By giving
freedom to another living creature we gain merit and release from suffering, for
ourselves or for the people we love, in the life to come.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Author reunited with his sister Sam Proeuth.(pg.30) Skulls bear witness
to the atrocities of the Khmer Rouge regime.(pg.31)(Steve McCurry);Museum of the
Genocidal Crimes. Mud and flooding overcom the alleyways of Phnom Penh, the
capital.(pg 32)(Steve McCurry);The author in Thailand in 1979.(pg. 33)(Sydney
Schanberg); The author with Dr. Haing S. Ngor, also a survivor ''The Killing
Fields''.(pg. 33)(Steve McCurry); Food and Budhist monks at the
capital(pg.54)(Steve McCurry)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 24, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

UNIVERSITY PRESSES;
DISTORTIONS IN THE GLASS

BYLINE: By WAYNE KOESTENBAUM; Wayne Koestenbaum, who teaches English at Yale
University, is the author of ''Double Talk: The Erotics of Male Literary
Collaboration.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 50, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1400 words



APPLAUSE
By Carol Muske.
53 pp. Pittsburgh:
University of Pittsburgh Press.
Cloth, $16.95; Paper, $8.95.

DIEN CAI DAU
By Yusef Komunyakaa.
64 pp. Middletown, Conn.:
Wesleyan University Press.
Cloth, $18; Paper, $9.95.

Many contemporary poems stage a war between simple and complex styles - a battle
in which ''simplicity'' incarnates the virtues of nature, and ''complexity''
bears the curse of the sterile and the insincere. Carol Muske, however, nimbly
negotiates between these two poles. Though she tends to be straightforward, her
fourth poetry collection, ''Applause,'' also risks artifice, relinquishes
plainness and reaches toward the rhetorical. She tempers glib candor with a
recognition that language is inevitably impeded and enriched by all that resists
easy saying.

Even the volume's first sentence shows Ms. Muske's desire to place poems at an
oblique angle to her own ''I,'' to disembody her voice, to speak and to watch
herself speaking: ''It's my old apartment, Gramercy Park, / but then it's not.''
The divisions that trouble her are sometimes metaphysical - ''little 'you's and
'me's, / estranged suddenly from the vanity of their motion'' - and sometimes
historical. In ''Monk's House, Rodmell,'' for example, she confirms (and
questions) her own poetic vocation by visiting Virginia Woolf's house, where,
echoing John Ashbery, she sets

    a convex mirror on a stand,
so that when the visitor



looked in
expecting to see the familiar
line of lip and brow,



what appeared instead
was the head up-ended -
the mouth a talking wound


 More often, Ms. Muske's fleet changes of perspective occur when first and third
worlds, rich and poor, healthy and sick, collide. In ''August 1974: A
Tapestry,'' she watches an 8-year-old boy in Kashmir, whipped by his foreman,
weave a rug. Clearly, the weaver represents the artist, whose artifact is
stained blood-red by history. Ms. Muske implies that because poems, however
elegant, sometimes have ugly contexts, poets must answer to the unhappiness that
surrounds them and learn to harness their lovely images to argument.

''In the perfect center of the glass,'' she writes, ''there is resistance to the
image.'' Sometimes she should resist the image more strenuously. My favorite
phrase in the book is ''Nile-green Nile'' - precisely because it avoids
verisimilitude, offering instead a tautological emptiness (the Nile looks like
the Nile) exactly where we expect literal description. Sometimes Ms. Muske uses
images that clip unruliness into shape too succinctly: ''Outside, the green
August shade deepened, / grew burnished as a brass samovar.'' The poem that most
successfully resists a pat, unexamined relation to the image is the volume's
title sequence, ''Applause,'' a sustained meditation on what it means to behold,
to appreciate - particularly in the context of suffering. The poem's specific
pain is death from AIDS. That immensity makes Ms. Muske's tone bleak,
philosophically expansive: ''Applause has no opposite, contains its own poles.''

I enjoy her abstractions - such phrases as ''the exquisite, denatured vision /
of invention.'' They counter her reliance on a vocabulary that gives too little
tonal pleasure and on a stumbling, stop-and-start tempo. Some might call it
concision; to me, it seems a refusal to leap. The ideas come in small clusters,
tight sentences that often lack propulsion. I long to hear a phrase tumble
beyond its limit, for the shorter poems to achieve the momentum reached in
''Applause.'' And yet terseness brings rewards. Ms. Muske writes, wryly, ''It is
not night. / It is California.'' Here an idea casts a shadow; she reaches past
anecdote. Such flashes of wit give her work its distinctive, dry taste.

Yusef Komunyakaa's third volume, ''Dien Cai Dau'' (Vietnamese for ''crazy'' and
''American soldier''), renders a kind of experience so extreme it seems to
forbid a merely esthetic response. These poems record Mr. Komunyakaa's service
in the Vietnam War, for which he received a Bronze Star. Though his
tersely-phrased chronicles, like documentary photographs, give us the illusion
that we are facing unmediated reality, they rely on a predictable though
powerful set of literary conventions.

First, the poems depend on orchestrated, theatrical juxtapositions - in
particular, between scarifying war and succoring nature. Sometimes the
vegetation or planets that frame the combat are amoral or demonic: ''The moon
cuts through / night trees like a circular saw / white hot.'' At other moments,
nature offers camouflage, and soldiers blur into what surrounds them: ''The five
men breathe like a wave / of cicadas.'' When he portrays war as a part of
nature, he makes it seem natural - foretold, justified. In such images as
''Smoke-colored / Viet Cong / move under our eyelids,'' Mr. Komunyakaa turns
combat into art; and yet he also describes piercingly how extremity heightens
the senses. Like nature, sex provides an ironic foil to war: ''silhouettes of
jets / ease over nude bodies on straw mats.'' Whether through the consoling
presence of landscape or of flesh, his poems affirm some imagined whole that war
only temporarily ruptures, as if nature were able to repair itself around the
soldiers' ravages: ''Spiders mend webs we marched into.'' I doubt nature so
easily mends itself.

Mr. Komunyakaa's preferred tool is the simile or metaphor; his brief fables
proceed through - and climax in - such sharp images as ''he merely rocked on his
good leg / like a bleak & soundless bell.'' One poem, ''You and I Are
Disappearing,'' is simply a list of similes -repeated, futile attempts to find
an image sufficient to describe a Vietnamese girl in flames:


 She burns like oil on water.
She burns like a cattail torch
dipped in gasoline.
She glows like the fat tip
of a banker's cigar.



Simile, here, is a kind of theodicy, an effort to explain something morally
incoherent. Imagery may pose as reasonably accurate reportage, but it also
subtly editorializes. Figurative language varnishes the incident, gives it a
luster, a permanence - as if beneath museum glass. Mr. Komunyakaa thus maintains
a double relationship to his material - using images that raise and beg
questions.

The book works through accretion, not argument; the poems are all in the present
tense, which furthers the illusion that we are receiving tokens of a reality
untroubled by language. However, because Vietnam's aftershock still shapes the
poet's life, it is logical, and touching, that he renders war as if it were
still present:


 Again, thanks for the dud
hand grenade tossed at my feet
outside Chu Lai. I'm still
falling through its silence.


 Of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, he writes: ''I touch the name Andrew Johnson;
/ I see the booby trap's white flash.'' The leap from engraved name to explosion
occurs, as in a Pound ideogram, without transition. Mr. Komunyakaa, almost
echoing Pound's ''Cathay,'' writes, ''Peasants outside Pakse City / insist the
wildflowers / have changed colors.'' The ostensibly photographic technique of
imagism is not, in fact, morally neutral; because Pound honed his imagistic
method by imitating Chinese poetry, that oblique style - which Mr. Komunyakaa
borrows - comes burdened with the values of Orientalism, the appropriative
attempt to describe Asian experience through Western perspectives.

Though I regret the absence of a poem in this volume that exceeds in form,
length or ambition the scope of individual, atomized narratives, the book's
implications are richer than the poems separately betray. Issues of race and
gender, in particular, complicate the collection's more straightforward
preoccupation with warfare. Mr. Komunyakaa writes sensitively about the
difficulties and ironies of being a black American soldier fighting alongside
white men, and of American servicemen's sexual relations with Vietnamese women.
In two lines, he sketches an encounter with the Vietnamese girlfriend of his
sergeant major: ''Once I asked her about family. / 'Not important, GI,' she
said.'' ''Dien Cai Dau'' is filled with such unsentimental cameos, powerful
because foreshortened. But foreshortening itself is an ambiguous, murky process.
It distorts or disguises point of view, and mystifies the events it seems to
describe so lucidly.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 24, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

UNIVERSITY PRESSES/IN SHORT;
NONFICTION

BYLINE: By DAVID MURRAY

SECTION: Section 7; Page 49, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 280 words



WHERE THE RIVERS RAN BACKWARD. By William E. Merritt. (University of Georgia,
$24.95.) William E. Merritt, who served as an enlisted combat engineer in
Vietnam, was asked by one of his former teachers to talk to her class about the
war. He declined and wrote ''Where the Rivers Ran Backward'' instead. It is a
fascinating mosaic of reminiscences about Mr. Merritt's fellow soldiers, their
weapons, their travails and training and their war. Mr. Merritt has a zoom lens
for an eye and a broadcast-quality tape recorder for an ear. He focuses sharply
on people, like a Flying Tiger Airlines stewardess who, when the troop plane
arrives at Saigon, gives her soldier passengers the by-rote piffle about having
''an enjoyable stay'' and then bursts into tears. There is also a tank crew
washing their monster in a river, apparently to expiate their anger, hatred and
despair, and ''cursing God.'' There is even a colonel who, on presenting Mr.
Merritt with a Purple Heart, offers congratulations and adds: ''I hope you win
many more of these.'' To Mr. Merritt, now an attorney in Portland, Ore., the
soldiers' Vietnam in 1968 was a place of scary, lonely night watches and
ubiquitous post exchanges (''Places you couldn't go without air cover you could
find a PX''). Mr. Merritt's comrades are profane, funny, hyperbolic, frightened,
sad and exuberant. Impressions, actions and conversations are set down in the
form of short vignettes, laced with snatches of song lyrics and the noise of
weapons, and paced like a nasty firefight. ''Where the Rivers Ran Backward'' is
a well-crafted evocation of the tragic zaniness of wars and the quiet
perseverance of the men who fight them.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 25, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

News Summary    A3-12

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1005 words



A plan to cut chemical weapons in their arsenals before a global treaty is
reached on banning poison gas has been proposed to Moscow by Washington,
diplomats said.    Page A1

President Bush will speak at the U.N. today. A former delegate there himself,
Mr. Bush feels the organization has failed to live up to its potential, but has
an opportunity to enhance its world role.    A12

News analysis: Mikhail Gorbachev is acclaimed by world leaders as a visionary
peacemaker, but many of his countrymen are less enthralled as ethnic divisions
boil and consumers bemoan a dismal economy.    A1

China's leaders will ratify a detailed policy of economic retrenchment at a
meeting next month, officials say. The policy will last through 1991.    A1

Chinese exiles form worldwide opposition group     A10

A cease-fire in Cambodia was called for by the Vietnamese-backed Prime Minister,
Hun Sen, who also asked China to stop sending arms to the guerrilla opposition
after the last Vietnamese troops withdraw.    A3

Beirut's air and sea ports resumed normal activity after an agreement by
Lebanon's warring factions to an Arab-negotiated peace plan.    A3

A world pact to mine Antarctica for oil and other resources was scuttled by the
withdrawal of France and Australia.    A10

Third world nations seeking loans may find it more difficult to obtain them
after a move by three large American banks to increase their cushion against
previous bad loans, according to Mexico's chief debt negotiator.    D1

Tijuana journal    A4

Colombia's most violent city, Medellin , would like to bow out of the drug war.
Residents say they are reluctant recruits in a battle declared by Bogota, the
capital and Medellin's municipal rival.    A8

U.N. study finds one billion people are in poor health    A6

Swapo leader asks whites' help     A3

National    A14-17, B6-7

Many graduates lack basic skills for even today's assembly line jobs, and
businesses foresee an employment crisis in finding workers who can perform
complex jobs of the future.    A1

Changes in the views of Virginians, along with population changes and other
factors, have contributed to the possibility that the former Confederate state
might become the first to elect a black governor.    A1

Billions of dollars of drug money are being laundered by small storefront
money-transmitting and check-cashing operations in inner-city neighborhoods,
state banking regulators around the country say.    A1

Many drivers now face drug testing as well as tests for alcohol if they are
stopped for erratic driving. The technique, which uses physical and
toxicological tests, is being used in several states around the country.    A1

Los Angeles will yield water rights in some areas where it now draws 75 percent
of its water; in exchange, California will help it find new sources. The move
may help solve environmental problems in parts of the Sierra Nevada.    A14

Leaner lunches on the menu for California schoolchildren    A17

San Francisco journal    A14

The Tax Reform Act of 1986, monumental legislation that was the product of
dozens of political and economic trade-offs, seems likely to be torn apart by
lawmakers in votes this week.    D1

Washington Talk: President Bush practices much salesmanship when he is on the
road. The past week has shown him, in a political sense, at his clumsiest and at
his most deft.    A16

AIDS victims who need a drug that costs much less in England than in the United
States will begin receiving help in filling their prescriptions abroad from a
New York advocacy group.    A15

The virtues of natural farming were on display at a country fair in Maine.
Stands were piled high with apples, carrots and other crops raised without toxic
chemicals.    B6

Now that Hurricane Hugo has passed and the exhiliration of surviving it is over,
residents of Charleston, S.C., face the daunting challenge of repairing the
storm's damage.    A14

Jim Bakker is expected to testify in his own defense this week as the trial of
the former television evangelist on fraud and conspiracy charges nears its
close.    B6

New front in ozone battle; car air-conditioner    D1

Regional    B1-5

David Dinkins was in a car accident but was not badly hurt. In the crash, at the
intersection of Second Avenue and 112th Street, his car was hit broadside as it
rushed him between campaign stops.    B1

Mr. Dinkins and Rudolph Giuliani, the two major New York City mayoral
candidates, pursued the city's Jewish voters, with stops in the Orthodox
neighborhoods of Brooklyn and at a festival in the Bronx.    B5

G.O.P. chairman's suit trys to keep his finances secret    B5

Jim Courter has a fuzzy image, and a major factor in determining the success of
his campaign for New Jersey governor will be his ability to tell voters who he
really is.    B1

The new head of public schools for New York City, Joseph Fernandez, earned a
national reputation as an innovator and risk taker when he was the
Superintendent of Miami's public schools.    B1

A jail barge turned treatment center is being used to help prisoners with
substance-abuse problems. Nearly every aspect of an inmate's day, including
recreational time, is part of the program's approach.    B1

A woman was found beaten to death and the 19-month-old girl she had been
baby-sitting was found dead in a garbage bag in a Bronx apartment complex, the
police said.    B3

The last jetliner wreckage at La Guardia Airport was recovered from the East
River as Federal investigators prepared for a long inquiry into the cause of the
USAir crash.    B3

Asbestos delays use of subway at least a week     B5

Remembering a governor almost forgotten    B5

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 25, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 41 words


A headline Saturday on an article about monitoring of a Vietnamese military
withdrawal from Cambodia misidentifed the observer force that the Cambodian
Government is seeking. It would be international, but not sponsored by the
United Nations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 25, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodian Premier Appeals for Truce

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 678 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Sept. 24


Prime Minister Hun Sen appealed today to the opposition coalition to agree to a
cease-fire in Cambodia and asked China to stop supplying arms to the guerrillas
after the last Vietnamese troops leave the country Tuesday.

Mr. Hun Sen, who heads a pro-Vietnamese Government that was installed after
Hanoi's forces invaded Cambodia in December 1978, said a continuing civil war
was ''inevitable.''

''The scope of the war will depend on the attitude of foreign countries,'' he
said at a news conference here.

The end of Vietnam's military presence here, he said, has changed the nature of
the Cambodian problem. The central issues that remain are ''to prevent the
return of the Pol Pot regime,'' he said, and the cessation of foreign military
aid to the warring factions.

China Backs Khmer Rouge

The Vietnamese invasion ousted the Khmer Rouge Government headed by Pol Pot,
which had imposed a brutal rule that left at least a million Cambodians dead.
China is now the main arms supplier and diplomatic patron for the Khmer Rouge.

Mr. Hun Sen vowed that he would not allow the Khmer Rouge to share power here
and said any concessions he might make to Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the leader of
the opposition coalition dominated by the Khmer Rouge, would be dependent on the
Prince's breaking with that group. The opposition alliance includes the Khmer
Rouge and two smaller, non-Communist groups.

With the departure of Vietnamese troops, Mr. Hun Sen said, Prince Sihanouk ''has
no more reason to ally himself with Pol Pot against the Cambodian people.''

Denouncing the Prince for defending the Khmer Rouge while it was in power, Mr.
Hun Sen said, ''Prince Sihanouk has his hands soaked with blood.''

In other matters, Mr. Hun Sen said he had had productive talks with the Thai
Prime Minister, Chatichai Choonhavan, last week in Bangkok. The Thais formally
support the opposition coalition, transship Chinese arms to the guerrillas and
provide them sanctuary, but have been moving closer to Mr. Hun Sen, whose
Government they do not recognize.

Thais Seek Cease-Fire

Mr. Chatichai has been trying to engineer a cease-fire and a new round of peace
talks among the Cambodians, and Mr. Hun Sen said it was clear that Thailand
wanted to prevent further bloodshed and did not want to see a return of the
Khmer Rouge to power.

Though he was not specific, Mr. Hun Sen said that ''to some degree I think
Thailand will endeavor to prevent such supplies of arms'' to the guerrillas once
Hanoi's troops are gone.

Both Mr. Hun Sen and Prince Sihanouk have told Mr. Chatichai they are prepared
to start a new round of talks.

Mr. Hun Sen has offered the Prince the position of head of state if he would
break with the Khmer Rouge and China and return home. Prince Sihanouk said in
Jakarta in May that he would make his decision after Vietnamese troops go, but
relations between the two men seem to have soured again since then.

He also said that Cambodia was in a state of ''permanent neutrality,'' and that
any treaties with Vietnam or other nations violating that principle ''would not
be valid.'' Asked if Cambodia's treaty of friendship and cooperation with
Vietnam was thus abrogated, he said Cambodia was ''ready to discuss with the
Vietnamese any points that would contradict this neutrality.''

Mr. Hun Sen said journalists were making too much of the fighting around Pailin,
in an important gem-mining area near the Thai border. He said Pailin was under
Government control.

A Deputy Defense Minister, Gen. Ke Kim Yan, said that the Khmer Rouge were on
some hills overlooking military encampments in the otherwise-empty town and that
the two sides were shelling each other.

General Ke Kim Yan said supplying the army was difficult in the rainy season,
while the Khmer Rouge were close to depots in Thailand. But he said the fighting
was worse in August than now.

''As military men we will not abandon Pailin,'' he said. ''When we complete the
withdrawal and still hold Pailin, it means the Khmer Rouge have not been able to
do anything to Cambodia.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 25, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

In Campaign, Courter Aims To Pin Down His Identity

BYLINE: By ANTHONY DePALMA, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1382 words

DATELINE: MORRISTOWN, N.J., Sept. 21


Filled with the confidence born of a lifetime of winning and a faith in
self-determination, Representative Jim Courter set out on this last day of
summer to begin what he considers crucial in his campaign for governor: telling
voters who he really is.

Simple as that may sound for a six-term Congressman, it is necessary. Like his
sprawling 12th Congressional District in northwestern New Jersey, which has been
redrawn twice since he was first elected in 1978, Mr. Courter is a little hard
to pin down.

Considered a Reagan Republican and a free-market advocate, Mr. Courter once
registered as a Democrat and worked as a Legal Aid lawyer. Best known in the
House for his work on the Armed Services Committee, he served in the Peace Corps
and has never owned a gun.

He asserts that he is the rightful heir to Gov. Thomas H. Kean, a liberal
Republican. But twice so far Mr. Kean, while supporting him, has publicly taken
exception to his positions.

Kean Disagrees on Key Issues

Mr. Kean's insurance commissioner has questioned Mr. Courter's proposal to
deregulate the automobile insurance industry, on the theory that free
competition would force down prices. And when Mr. Courter stated that
homosexuals should be barred from working with children, Mr. Kean said he
disagreed.

On another issue, abortion, Mr. Courter has been a vocal opponent in Congress.
But when the United States Supreme Court ruled that states can place limits on
legal abortions, he said he would not impose his personal views on New Jersey.

''Jim Courter may not be out of step with the national Republican Party,'' said
Representative Robert G. Torricelli, a Democrat from Englewood, ''but he is out
of step with elements of the New Jersey party,''

Mr. Courter's campaign staff believes there is nothing contradictory about
serving in the Peace Corps and being strong on national defense. ''It simply
means there is no label that you can place on Jim Courter,'' said Ken Connolly,
his campaign manager.

This week the campaign began broadcasting television commercials that try to
overcome the perceived contradictions and project a new, positive image:

Open with Jim Courter at home with his wife, Carmen, and daughters, Donica and
Katrina. Cut to him in shirtsleeves as a narrator mentions the campaign's
issues: automobile insurance, the environment, crime. Close with Mr. Courter, in
a polo shirt, ambling along a New Jersey beach, an image used with great success
by Governor Kean.

''I'd like to be considered as a person who is compassionate, who is honest,
dedicated to public service,'' Mr. Courter said in an interview at his
headquarters here. ''That's the image I would like to have.''

Florio Attacks His Ethics

So far, however, Mr. Courter's campaign has had trouble fitting its candidate
into that suit. His Democratic opponent, Representative James J. Florio of
Camden, has sought to depict him as an overly ambitious man of situational
ethics.

Attacking Mr. Courter for owning stock in defense contractors while sitting on
the Armed Services Committee, and accusing him of using his office to advance a
real-estate transaction in which he had an interest, Mr. Florio has portrayed
Mr. Courter as lacking ''a moral compass.''

Mr. Florio is expected to raise some of those criticisms at tonight's debate
between the two candidates.

''Part of me sits here thinking Courter's just dumb, but part of me thinks he's
intelligent and has a sense of what's right and wrong,'' said Richard V.
Sinding, president of the Center for Analysis of Public Issues, a nonprofit
organization that publishes The New Jersey Reporter, a journal of statewide
issues. ''What I'm really not sure of is why Jim Courter wants to be governor.''


Focused on Defense, Not State

Unlike Mr. Florio, who has spent much of the last 12 years concentrating on
cleaning up the environment and other issues of importance to New Jersey, Mr.
Courter, as a Congressman, has rarely focused directly on New Jersey.

Instead, he gained a national reputation as an expert on defense issues, a
reputation that he says has overshadowed his work on behalf of programs like
urban enterprise zones and urban homesteading.

Even in the areas of his public persona that are most vividly etched, like his
hawkish positions on defense, there are parts of Mr. Courter that do not seem to
fit. A supporter of President Reagan's military buildup, he served not in the
Marine Corps but in the Peace Corps, spending part of the Vietnam era in the
Venezuelan town of Valera helping local officials revise the municipal tax
system.

A successful lawyer, occasional real-estate developer, tall, tanned and
square-jawed, Mr. Courter sees the role of government as limited to providing a
safety net for the disadvantaged and clearing the way for creative
entrepreneurship.

Making Most of Opportunities

His vision of governing New Jersey resembles the way he has led his own life:
prepare, look for opportunity, and when you see a chance, take it.

This is a lesson he learned 30 years ago at home, a two-story brick colonial on
Tuxedo Road in Montclair. Mr. Courter's father, Joseph, a high-school dropout,
eventually finished school and started a successful contracting company in New
York. His mother, Madeleine, a former Ziegfeld Follies dancer, started a
blood-testing laboratory in Montclair to help get through those early years.

Mr. Courter, who was born Oct. 14, 1941, attended a private academy in
Montclair. Before he entered high school, his family moved west to the exclusive
suburb of Essex Fells. He earned a bachelor's degree in English from Colgate
University in Hamilton, N.Y., and then entered Duke University School of Law.

His early professional experience might seem more typical of a fledgling
Democrat than of a Republican. After serving in the Peace Corps, he worked in
Washington before returning to New Jersey, where he became a lawyer for Legal
Services of Union County, serving poor clients in the Plainfield branch.

From Main Street to Cornfield

Within two years, however, Mr. Courter decided to move out of the crowded
suburbs of northern New Jersey and into the rural, northwestern corner of the
state, where there was little crime but great opportunities for young lawyers.
In 1972, he and his wife bought a rundown building on Main Street in
Hackettstown, and he set up his new firm there. He became first assistant
prosecutor in Warren County and started a Legal Aid bureau in the area.

Mr. Courter's firm - Courter, Kobert, Laufer, Purcell & Cohen - grew steadily,
and about a year ago it moved two miles out of town to a new building that he
built with one of his law partners, Joel A. Kobert, across the road from a
cornfield.

Mr. Courter first ran for the House in 1978, in a largely rural district
covering the northwestern corner of the state. The district, which now reaches
into the rapidly growing suburbs of Middlesex County, is 92 percent white, 5
percent black and 2 percent of Hispanic origin, according to the Census Bureau.

He unexpectedly won a tough and often unpleasant Republican primary, and then
went on to beat the popular liberal Democratic incumbent, Helen Meyner.

Once Registered as Democrat

During the campaign, his opponents revealed that Mr. Courter had once registered
as a Democrat and voted in a local primary. He says he did so to support a local
candidate.

Mr. Courter has enjoyed notable political success, never having lost an election
outside of his sophomore class presidency in high school. In his last few
congressional races he has not been seriously challenged, though last year he
spent $750,000 on television advertising in beating an unknown by more than 2 to
1.

When they consider the comfortable background in which he was raised and the
comparative ease with which he seems to have achieved success, some of his
critics believe that Mr. Courter's often professed optimism is unearned and that
he really does not understand what life is like for the sick and the poor, the
discriminated against and the unfortunate.

He says he does understand. ''It's not so much an optimism because I've had
political success or that I've been very blessed and very lucky,'' he said. ''I
just think there's no limit to what people can do.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Representative Jim Courter, shown campaigning for governor
last month in West New York, N.J. (NYT/John Sotomayor) (pg. B2)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 25, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
Reader's Digest Names Chiefs for New Groups

BYLINE: By Daniel F. Cuff

SECTION: Section D; Page 4, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 420 words


The Reader's Digest Association Inc. has hired Thomas M. Kenney, who most
recently has been an investment banker specializing in buying and selling
magazine publishing companies, to be president of a newly formed Magazine
Publishing Group.

The group is one of three new ones formed at Reader's Digest as part of a
realignment brought about by its ''continuing growth strategy,'' the company
said last week.

Mr. Kenney, who is 42 years old, will report to Richard F. McLoughlin, president
and chief operating officer. In turn, the publishers of the domestic magazines -
Reader's Digest, Travel-Holiday, The Family Handyman and New Choices for the
Best Years - will report to Mr. Kenney.

M. John Bohane, 53, was named president of the Direct Marketing Group, reporting
to Mr. McLoughlin. And Kenneth A. Gordon, 52, was picked to head the
International Group, reporting to George V. Grune, chairman and chief executive
officer of Reader's Digest, which is based in Pleasantville, N.Y.

Since 1986 Mr. Kenney has headed Thomas Kenney & Company, an investment banking
boutique working with the First Boston Corporation. ''I'm basically a publisher
who learned a little bit about investment banking,'' said Mr. Kenney, who worked
earlier at Time Inc., was president of the Charter Publishing Company and was
executive vice president of CBS Magazines.

At Time, he had a role in the development of People magazine and worked in
circulation management at Sports Illustrated and Time magazines. At Charter, he
served as publisher of Redbook magazine. At Charter and CBS, he said, he was
involved in acquisitions and mergers. ''I saw the investment banking world
operate first-hand, and I went to the other side,'' he added.

Mr. Kenney always seems to have found a spot not far from a publication. At
Dartmouth, he was chairman of The Daily Dartmouth newspaper, and in the Marines
he was editor of The Okinawa Marine, on his way back from Vietnam.

''My last assignment in the Marines was at Fifth Avenue and 53d as liaison with
the national press,'' he said. ''That was in the middle of Vietnam, and it was
more difficult than anything I've had to do.''

Mr. Kenney, Mr. Bohane and Mr. Gordon will begin their new jobs next Monday. Mr.
Gordon, the new international head, is a former publisher of Reader's Digest.
Mr. Bohane, who has been in charge of marketing in the United States, will
continue to be responsible for all domestic direct-mail activities for book,
music and home video products and financial services.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 26, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnamese Quit Cambodia Today But Face Heavy Burdens at Home

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 905 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, Sept. 25


For a country about to enjoy what could be its first prolonged period of peace
in many decades, Vietnam today displays little sense of celebration.

The long Cambodian military adventure, nearly 11 years requiring much sacrifice
from the common soldier and citizen, officially ends Tuesday when the last
Vietnamese infantryman is scheduled to cross the border at Moc Bai in Tay Ninh
Province.

But the experience in Cambodia is ending in ambivalence, with no ringing
victory. Vietnam's client regime in Cambodia is established, but not quite
secure. While at least 25,300 Vietnamese soldiers have died and 55,000 have been
seriously wounded, the Khmer Rouge still threaten the Cambodian Government that
Hanoi installed after it invaded on Dec. 25, 1978, quickly overthrowing the
Khmer Rouge regime of Pol Pot.

No Diplomatic Payoff

Diplomatically, too, there is no evident payoff for Vietnam for having finally
heeded Western and Asian calls for a withdrawal. The United States remains
standoffish, insisting on a comprehensive diplomatic settlement in Cambodia -
which now seems far away - before normalizing relations with Vietnam or, it
seems, lifting an embargo on aid and trade with Hanoi.

Rather than national joy, there is increased weariness as the Vietnamese, more
than a million of whom died in the Vietnam War, concentrate on the many problems
this tattered and still isolated nation continues to face. Among them is
overpopulation, unemployment, increasing crime, intermittent hunger, party
corruption, an aged leadership and even a Communist world that is no longer
familiar, with cracks in Poland, Hungary and the Soviet Union seeming to sunder
the bloc.

About Cambodia, a noted Vietnamese writer said: ''There is individual relief,
that our fighting is over, and collective resignation. We have borne a great
sacrifice, and we could bear no more.'' The Cambodians, he said, ''will just
have to do the best they can.''

For most individuals here, even the leadership question is scarcely worth
discussing. ''It's them and us,'' said a young man in a cafe. ''It seems that
they don't often think of us, and we don't think of them.''

'A Chance to Rebuild'

A Vietnamese official said: ''Withdrawing from Cambodia doesn't mean we have a
sigh of relaxation. But it is very important, for now we have a chance to
rebuild our own society in an easier atmosphere.''

The central issue for Vietnam today is the economy. Despite improvements since
recent moves away from central management and state subsidies, the economy still
lags considerably behind the aspirations of the people, whose numbers are
growing rapidly. Many of these economic concerns tend to be expressed as a
determination to try to give decent jobs, or at least job training, to returning
soldiers.

This city has already experienced difficulties caused by some demobilized
soldiers no longer content with the farm who come here but find little work, and
with city-born veterans who join criminal gangs.

''Spiritually,'' a senior editor said, ''all they get is a medal.''

The Government's policy is to give returning soldiers some priority in schools,
hospitals and job placement, and in chances to work abroad, a program intended
to ease the job pressure here and to help pay Vietnam's external debts.
Officially, veterans also have the right to return to their former employers.

In Conflict With Reality

''The problem is the reality and capacity of the society,'' the editor said.
''That very factory doesn't have material with which to work, so what can they
do? The policy and the reality are very different.''

Another senior journalist said: ''They think they have contributed to the
country, and they want society to be grateful. But in this economic situation,
there are many difficulties. We cannot afford what each one of them wants.
That's our most difficult problem.''

There has also been some friction between those who fought in brutal
surroundings, with rampant malaria and often inadequate food and shelter, and
those who remained at home.

''There are people in the same generation who did not have to participate in the
Cambodian war, who just stayed here and did smuggling and had a happy life,''
another writer said, ''I worry about the consequences.''

Crime Is on the Rise

These feelings mix with another source of national shame - the flight of
Vietnamese in flimsy boats to whatever country might possibly take them. People
joke bitterly, ''If the lamppost could walk, it would go, too.''

At the same time, the press is full of articles about increasing crime, of
housebreaking and acts of violence.

Responsible people speak with some despair of the growing ''chaos'' of life.

Despite the domestic problems, the Vietnamese feel much pride in having rid
Cambodia of Pol Pot, under whose rule more than a million Cambodians died.

Nguyen Duy, a much-admired poet who entered Cambodia with the Vietnamese Army as
a correspondent, remembers the color black - ''the black of the pajamas, the
black of the skin of those who were dying or very ill.''

''The long queues of the orphans have haunted me for 10 years,'' he said. ''The
people had become animals. They ate anything they could find along the road -
grass, leaves, frogs, insects. They were like the black ants of Africa that move
through a field and leave it devastated. and it was Vietnamese soldiers who gave
them their first grain of rice.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Vietnamese troops returning home from Cambodia (AP) (pg. A1);
map of Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam (pg. A13)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 26, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 914 words



INTERNATIONAL    A3-1

President Bush told the U.N. that the United States will destroy 80 percent of
its chemical weapons if the Soviet Union agrees to cut its stockpile to the
American level.    Page A1



News analysis: The weapons ban proposed by President Bush is the subject of much
debate among arms control experts. Critics say it didn't go far enough because
Washington's most advanced chemical weapons would not be affected.    A1



There is little joy in Vietnam, even though its occupaton of Cambodia is ending.
The country suffers many domestic woes, including overpopulation, joblessness,
increasing crime, intermittent hunger and party corruption.    A1



Sony may soon own Columbia, as the board of the movie corporation is expected to
approve a $3.5 billion sale to the giant Japanese electronics company on
Wednesday.    A1



Quayle tries to quiet Japan's trade concerns    A5


Narita journal: booming airport is strangled by crowds    A4



An I.M.F. agreement to raise its resources by as much as $80 billion, an
addition of 67 percent, is likely by the year's end, said officials who
indicated that the money would be used to cushion economic shocks in the 1990's
and to take an expanded role in Eastern Europe.    A1



Two rival Soviet republics, Armenia and Azerbaijan, were warned by President
Gorbachev that they have two days to negotiate an end to an extraordinary rail
blockade that has paralyzed Armenia.    A3



News Analysis: Hungary's leaders in the Communist Party are making efforts to
earn the good will of Western creditor nations as well as fellow Hungarians who
will vote in several important coming elections.    A8



East German leader, long absent, reappears    A8


Polish Foreign Minister pledges loyalty to Bloc    A17



A new U.S. immigration program, aimed at preventing labor shortages in American
agriculture, is causing confusion and controversy throughout Mexico, which would
supply most of the workers for the plan.    A3



Argentine chief, at U.N., presses Falklands stand    A17


Senators urge Baker to deny a visa to Arafat    A15


Lebanese rivals meet    A9



Opposition parties in India stage rally    A12



NATIONAL    A18-28, A32, B6-9

Workers are receiving instruction in basic reading and math at a growing number
of companies that find employees unable to handle increasingly complex jobs.
A1



Clean up efforts on the East Coast, four days after a hurricane struck, were
hampered by driving rains and winds. The death toll from Hurricane Hugo stands
at 51.    A1



Looting was widespread on St. Croix in the wake of Hurricane Hugo because of a
number of factors involving class, race, isolation and a lack of government
authority, residents and officials say.    B8



Americans like President Bush and the job he is doing, but they are skeptical
about the efficacy of his anti-drug and antipollution programs, along with his
pledge not to raise taxes, according to a New York Times/CBS News Poll.    A26



Samuel Pierce will not be prepared for a scheduled hearing today in the House,
his lawyers told a subcommittee investigating the Reagan era housing department,
which Mr. Pierce headed.    A20



A battle over a new tax plan, between the Administration and Congressional
Democrats, intensified as the House moved toward consideration of a tax and
budget package put forth by the Democrats.    A25



Senate tentatively agrees to increase money to fight drugs    A27



The Energy Department's contracts with companies that manange its troubled bomb
plants leave the Government liable for fines against the companies by state or
Federal agencies, a report says.    A18



A mother jailed in a custody dispute was released under a court order that
responds to a new Federal law designed to free her. President Bush had signed
the bill into law this weekend.    A18



The dollar dropped sharply after the United States and its economic allies sent
a strong message that they wanted a decline.    D1



Utah teachers boycotted classrooms in a one-day strike to protest what they say
is chronic underfunding of one of the nation's most crowded public school
systems.    A32



Whittier journal: '87 quake still stirs fears    A18



REGIONAL    B1-4

Benjamin Ward resigned, citing continuing problems with asthma. He was New York
City's first black police commissioner, a post he held for six years.    B1



David Dinkins is winning support in his race for mayor from business executives,
some of whom complain that his Republican opponent, Rudolph Giuliani, lacks
experience in city government.    B1



Mayoral candidates turn up their rhetoric    B1



Candidates for New Jersey governor had their first debate, attacking each other
for ethical lapses and portraying one another as ideological outsiders in a
moderate suburban state.    B1



Evidence from the jetliner crash at La Guardia Airport last week will be
presented to a grand jury, said theQueens District Attorney, raising the
possibility of criminal charges against the cockpit crew.

B3



Fear rises at site of slayings    B3


Midtown explosion spreads asbestos    B3


Dalai Lama meets Jews    B4


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 26, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Economists Are Optimistic

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 17, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 254 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 25


The economy will continue to grow through 1990, forestalling a recession until
at least 1991, top business economists said today.

Nearly two-thirds of the 72 forecasting experts surveyed by the National
Association of Business Economists said they thought a recession was not likely
before 1991. A third of them said a recession would not arrive until 1992 or
later.

The nation's economy is enjoying record peacetime growth, which will be seven
years old in December. The longest expansion ever occurred in the February
1961-December 1969 period, which included the Vietnam War.

The survey was presented at the association's annual meeting in San Francisco. A
copy was made available here.

In its previous quarterly survey last May, the economists group found that 63
percent of the respondents expected the next recession next year. Now, only 37
percent foresee a serious downturn by 1990.

The survey responses did imply a slowdown in economic growth in the last half of
this year, however. The forecasters' median growth rate for the gross national
product in the final three months of 1989 is 2.1 percent. That compares with a
3.1 percent growth in the first half of the year. The survey found a substantial
majority expected growth to continue at about the same 2.1 percent rate
throughout 1990.

At the same time, the economists scaled back their inflation forecast to 5
percent for the October-December quarter, down from 5.3 percent in the May
survey. The median forecast for inflation in 1990 is 4.3 percent.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

With Vietnamese Out, Cambodia Faces Bitter Fight

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1178 words

DATELINE: MOC BAI, Vietnam, Sept. 26


What Vietnam says is its last column of troops in Cambodia began moving through
this border crossing early this morning, nearly 11 years after Vietnamese
soldiers invaded Cambodia and ousted the brutal Khmer Rouge Government of Pol
Pot.

But with a diplomatic impasse over negotiations on a comprehensive settlement to
the Cambodian conflict, a battlefield test of strength seems to lie ahead for
the Cambodians, who have already known more than 25 years of warfare,
revolution, coups, invasion and mass killing.

In Phnom Penh, the Cambodian Communist Party General Secretary, Heng Samrin,
issued a statement calling on Cambodians to unite to defend the country against
the Khmer Rouge, who he said would try to take advantage of the Vietnamese
withdrawal to mount new attacks.

'A Moral Failure'

A Vietnamese official said today that it was ''sad'' that the world required
warfare to clarify what diplomacy could not and that ''it also represents a
moral failure to confront the reality of the Khmer Rouge.''

At the border today, there was a formal ceremony and speeches, with dancing
dragons, firecrackers and young women garlanding equally young soldiers with
flowers. But the crowds lining the road to Ho Chi Minh City, a short drive away,
seemed only moderately enthusiastic as the long column of what is said to be the
last 9,000 Vietnamese troops in Cambodia made its way home in the torrid sun.

The column was led by a regiment awarded a collective medal as Heroes of Vietnam
for its bravery in fighting the Khmer Rouge, which still threatens the security
of the Vietnamese-installed Government in Phnom Penh.

As one soldier crossed the border, he yelled, ''Mother, I'm home!'' But the
troops in their tanks, trucks and buses largely limited themselves to waving
shyly at the people lining the road, most of whom shaded their faces against the
sun with paper Vietnamese flags, the yellow star shimmering on a field of red.

Flowers for a Veteran

One truckload of soldiers, in an old American-made Dodge, noticed a man in army
fatigues but without insignia, apparently demobilized, who applauded them. Two
soldiers tossed their garlands to him and reached out to shake his hand.

Army officials said it was unclear when the last soldier would return from
Cambodia. They said some of the 700 vehicles in the column had broken down.
Journalists traveling from Phnom Penh this morning said a few trucks had
overturned and others had blown tires or had simply ceased to function,
sometimes blocking the road.

The ferry across the Mekong River at Neak Luong also became a major bottleneck.
But Vietnamese officers insisted, as they have done consistently, that all of
Vietnam's troops were on their way out of Cambodia and that none would be left
behind. They denied that any had remained to don Cambodian uniforms, as asserted
by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the leader of the opposition coalition fighting the
Phnom Penh Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen.

The total withdrawal of Vietnamese troops, if accepted as such by China, the
West and the countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, or Asean,
resolves one of the main elements of the Cambodian problem: Vietnam's long
occupation of its neighbor. But all of the non-Communist world except India
continues to regard Mr. Hun Sen and his administration as illegitimate while
supporting Prince Sihanouk and his coalition allies: the Khmer Rouge, under
whose rule more than one million Cambodians died, and the followers of former
Prime Minister Son Sann.

Future Looks Bleak

With the failure thus far of all international efforts to broker a solution in
Cambodia, the future for Cambodia is bleak. The formal proposal is for a
four-party power-sharing administration leading to new elections, but Mr. Hun
Sen absolutely rejects any pre-election role in government for the Khmer Rouge.
Warfare is expected to increase as all sides maneuver to improve their
negotiating strength.

The problem for the United States and Asean, Western diplomats in Bangkok say,
is that Mr. Hun Sen's Government and army remain the only real obstacle to a
return to power by the Khmer Rouge. The non-Communist forces remain a relatively
unimportant factor in the military equation.

That has led to awkwardness in American policy, Asian diplomats in Bangkok say,
because no administration wants to be seen as even indirectly aiding the Khmer
Rouge, who are supplied by China, to return to power.

''The United States does not want to legitimize Hun Sen, recognize a Vietnamese
fait accompli in Cambodia or sell out Prince Sihanouk,'' an Asian diplomat said.
''But Hun Sen is all that stands between Cambodians and the Khmer Rouge. What
will the United States do if Hun Sen's army starts to crumble?''

The Vietnamese, not surprisingly, ask the same question. While expressing public
confidence in Cambodia's ability to defend itself, they say that responsibility
for any new genocide in Cambodia will rest with those countries that demanded
Vietnam's unilateral withdrawal and continue to supply arms to Mr. Hun Sen's
opposition.

An Overture to Sihanouk

For well over a year Vietnam has tried diplomatically to tie its withdrawal to a
cessation of all external military aid to all the warring factions, but Asean
and the West have rejected any partial solution that does not include a change
of adminstration in Phnom Penh.

Mr. Hun Sen continues to try to persuade Prince Sihanouk to break with the Khmer
Rouge and join with him, as head of state, in a refashioned government. Such a
move would most likely bring immediate legitimacy to Phnom Penh and badly needed
Western aid.

Prince Sihanouk, who said in May that he would decide whether to accept Mr. Hun
Sen's offer in October or November, once he is sure Vietnamese forces have gone,
seems to have moved further away from the Prime Minister. The Chinese are said
to oppose the idea, diplomats say, as do the Prince's wife, Monique, and his son
Prince Norodom Ranariddh, who commands the Sihanouk army. In recent statements
from Beijing, Prince Sihanouk has derided the Vietnamese withdrawal as farcical
and fraudulent.

At the same time, large cracks have appeared in the international front against
Mr. Hun Sen, with Thailand in particular increasing informal commercial and
diplomatic contacts with him.

The Thai position has severely strained the unity of Asean, but Thai officials
say that Vietnamese troops were Bangkok's major concern and that Thailand cannot
afford to isolate a neighbor or try to pretend that Communist Indochina is not
an integral part of the region.

Indonesia and Malaysia have always worried more about China's intentions in
Southeast Asia than those of Vietnam, and while the Government of Singapore
seems unalterably opposed to Mr. Hun Sen, Singaporean businessmen are extremely
active in Phnom Penh.

The United States has made normalization of relations with Vietnam contingent
not only on the withdrawal of Vietnamese troops from Cambodia but also on a
comprehensive diplomatic settlement there.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Vietnamese troops receiving flowers yesterday as they crossed
the border from Cambodia into Moc Bai, Vietnam. (Agence France-Presse); map of
Vietnam showing location of Moc Bai (NYT)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

In Memory of a Son: Pension of $2 a Month

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 427 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, Sept. 26


The family of Tran Van Thiep provides a reminder of the cost of the long
Cambodian war to the Vietnamese.

The 66-year-old Mr. Thiep, who once fought against the French, insisted that his
son, Tran Dinh Luong, fulfill his duty as a citizen and join the army to fight
in Cambodia.

In 1984, Mr. Luong, then 20, was killed in action. His parents did not learn of
his death for two years, and then from two of his friends in his unit.

The sound of their mourning was so loud that a policeman came and told them to
stop, saying the news of Mr. Luong's death was only a rumor and a psychological
trick, Mr. Thiep said.

His son's friends were so angry that they wanted to beat the policeman; official
confirmation of Mr. Luong's death came much later.

A Pension of $2 a Month

Mr. Thiep receives about $2 a month, the equivalent of 30 pounds of rice, as a
pension for his son.

He has another son in the army who was stationed in western Cambodia; Mr. Thiep
and his wife, Pham Thi Nhi, 63, await his return.

Mr. Thiep regrets having compelled his son to join the army. ''He was a very
skillful worker,'' he said, beginning to weep, ''but I forced him, and I think
of him all the time.''

His wife says that the death caused Mr. Thiep to have a nervous breakdown and
that he still receives psychiatric treatment.

''I didn't want to send my son anywhere,'' she said. ''But he decided everyone
must do their military duty. If one son is martyred, other sons should not have
to serve.'' #2 Certificates on the Wall On the wall behind Mr. Thiep, who lives
in a little stucco house by the railroad tracks, were two certificates awarded
to his dead son. The first, signed by Phan Van Dong, then chairman of the
Council of Ministers, commends Mr. Luong as a ''war martyr who died building and
defending the country.''

The other is a war medal third class, awarded to ''a martyr who has bravely
sacrificed his life.''

The family expects their serving son to arrive home any time. But another of Mr.
Thiep's sons, Tran Van Hung, 33, says that when his brother comes back, ''he
will have nothing.''

''He will just wait for the Government to find a job for him,'' Mr. Hung said.
''But a lot of those who have come back before are still waiting.''

Mr. Thiep's wife wants to say something more of her dead son. ''All the time we
try to find out where he died,'' she said. ''It is the Government's duty to
bring him back, not the family's. We want all Vietnamese bones to be brought
back and buried in Vietnam, not in Cambodia. All the comrade soldiers want it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Washington Talk;
On Quayle In Search Of an Image As a Leader

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 709 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 26


Vice President Dan Quayle arrived in the Philippines tonight to discuss the
future of American bases there, and he was confronted by several hundred
left-wing demonstrators chanting, ''Quayle go home!''

Back home, there was fresh evidence that the former Senator from Indiana was
having more trouble than any Vice President in recent history in projecting a
clear picture of himself onto the national canvas. The evidence came in a new
New York Times/CBS News Poll, the fourth such survey since last November to show
that more Americans have an unfavorable view of Mr. Quayle than a favorable
view.

There was an even more extraordinary, indeed an almost unbelievable, aspect of
the poll results. At election time last year 25 percent of the respondents to
the poll said they had not heard enough about Mr. Quayle to have an opinion;
now, eight months into his term, 45 percent gave that response - almost twice as
many people, despite Mr. Quayle's efforts to carve out a niche for himself
through speeches and extensive travels in the United States and abroad.

How could it be that the more Mr. Quayle says and does, the less people know
about him? And if it continues, how long can he survive in the office that puts
him, as the banal but accurate phrase has it, a heartbeat away from the
Presidency?

To do so, people in Washington say, Mr. Quayle will have to be taken seriously.
Why isn't he now? Or rather, as one Republican Congressman put it, why does so
little he says seem to get through? Perhaps it is how young the Vice President
looks, some speculate, or the way George Bush seemed to pick him out of nowhere
to be his running mate.

Television comedians have turned Mr. Quayle into a favorite butt of their jokes,
treating him as a real-life Alexander P. Throttlebottom, the little-heeded Vice
President in the 1930's musical ''Of Thee I Sing.'' Wherever politicians or
journalists or others make speeches, they find that any mention of Mr. Quayle's
name, even with strongly partisan Republican audiences, often produces an
outburst of titters.

Certainly, it is not that Mr. Quayle says anything to contradict the party line
or, in any substantive way, to embarrass President Bush. Unlike Hubert H.
Humphrey, who was suspected of ''softness'' on Vietnam by Lyndon B. Johnson, and
unlike Spiro T. Agnew, who was used by Richard M. Nixon as a verbal hit man, Mr.
Quayle has been just as conventional as Mr. Bush expected him to be.

And it is not simply that many people have trouble envisioning Mr. Quayle as
President. That was true of Alben W. Barkley of Kentucky, Harry S. Truman's No.
2 man, and Barkley was not only widely recognized but also much liked.

Whatever the reason, Mr. Quayle remains an unknown quality to almost half of the
electorate, despite Time and Newsweek cover stories, dozens of newspaper
profiles and hundreds of appearances on television programs. Americans do not
choose Presidents because of their running mates, but weak ones can cost a
Presidential nominee two or three percentage points - vital in a close contest.

Mr. Bush, a loyalist through and through, might shrink from any suggestion that
he dump Mr. Quayle for the 1992 Presidential race, but Republican politicians
are already talking about the possibility. As one former Presidential aide says,
''he has a Cabinet full of potential replacements,'' including James A. Baker
3d, the Secretary of State, and Jack F. Kemp, the Secretary of Housing and Urban
Development.

In 1955, Dwight D. Eisenhower was told by his advisers, led by Sherman Adams,
the White House chief of staff, that polls indicated keeping Mr. Nixon on the
ticket would hurt Eisenhower's re-election bid. On the day after Christmas
Eisenhower called the Vice President in and offered to make him Secretary of
Defense, but Mr. Nixon demurred. The President did not insist.

So Mr. Nixon was able to hang on, unlike Henry A. Wallace, who was dumped by
Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1944 because Southern Democrats and big contributors to
the party considered him too left wing.

Mr. Bush has been a Vice President himself, and he knows the job's frustrations.
Some friends predict that he will soon cook up some special role for Mr. Quayle
in an attempt to give him some visibility.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Bankrupt and Immoral on Cambodia

SECTION: Section A; Page 28, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 437 words


Vietnamese troops have finally left Cambodia. But with no agreed transition
plan, Cambodians face a stark contest between the Vietnamese-installed Hun Sen
regime and the genocidal Khmer Rouge. And the Bush Administration now has to
face the bankruptcy of its policy of backing Prince Sihanouk along with his
Khmer Rouge allies and of opposing Hun Sen. Morality and practicality require a
new approach.

The Prince has headed an uneasy coalition of non-Communist and Khmer Rouge
forces whose presumed purpose was to resist the Vietnamese occupation. But that
occupation has now ended, and the real force in the coalition looks increasingly
like the old, unreformed Khmer Rouge. Incredibly, these killers, already to
blame for more than a million deaths, seem poised for a possible comeback.

U.S. policy collapsed in embarrassment last month when the 19-nation Paris peace
conference on Cambodia fell apart. That conference, intended to produce an
all-party interim government, saw Prince Sihanouk act like a broker for Khmer
Rouge interests. The Hun Sen regime, which has yet to demonstrate its
legitimacy, was fully justified in rejecting the Prince's demand that the Khmer
Rouge share power. With Vietnamese troops now withdrawn, U.S. relations with Hun
Sen, and with Hanoi, could usefully be reassessed.

Washington believed, reasonably, that any political settlement that excluded the
Khmer Rouge could be vulnerable to Khmer Rouge disruption from the outside. But
unreasonably, Washington then imagined that Prince Sihanouk somehow could bring
the Khmer Rouge into a settlement without conceding them real power. He was
unable to perform any such magic.

The Paris conference revealed the illogic of the U.S. position. If the Khmer
Rouge were so strong that they could not be safely excluded from a broad-based
interim regime, then weren't they also likely to dominate their non-Communist
partners?

The Prince appears to have become a prisoner of his Khmer Rouge allies, but
Washington need not be. It is unlikely that any U.S. policy can save Cambodia
from renewed civil war. But decency demands that Washington distance itself
further from the Khmer Rouge and from Prince Sihanouk.

Cambodia's future is likely to be discussed again at the current U.N. General
Assembly session, and perhaps at a reconvened Paris conference. That gives the
Administration a chance to make emphatically clear that no Cambodian settlement
offering the Khmer Rouge any political or military role is acceptable. Perhaps
the U.S. cannot now design the right peace formula, but at least it can abandon
a profoundly wrong moral course.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Don't Help Pol Pot. Try Him.

BYLINE: By Jim Leach; Jim Leach, Republican of Iowa, is ranking member of the
Asian and Pacific affairs subcommittee of the House Foreign Affairs Committee.

SECTION: Section A; Page 29, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 683 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Sometimes, nations are compelled to opt for the moral high ground rather than
comply with a policy of alleged pragmatism that may produce an ethical
abomination. Such is the situation in Cambodia today.

Between 1975 and 1979, upward of two million people - one-sixth of the Cambodian
population - fell victim to the genocidal policies of Pol Pot and the Communist
Khmer Rouge. In turn, Vietnamese imperialists used this tragedy as a rationale
for invading Cambodia, extending their military and political hegemony in
Southeast Asia.

In view of this history, our policies in Cambodia should be animated above all
by a refusal to countenance the return to power of Pol Pot. But that isn't the
case.

Since the Vietnam War, American policy toward Cambodia has been one of
disengagement, of principle as well as force. We have gone from the extreme of
thinking that we had the only answers in the region, as we did in Vietnam, to
the extreme of thinking we have no independent judgment to offer. Accordingly,
we have deferred too often in strategy and philosophy to the judgment of
regional actors.

As a result, Washington has fallen prey to the lowest policy denominator and
ceded American diplomacy to the Chinese, the Asean alliance and Cambodia's
Prince Norodom Sihanouk.

Credulously, the State Department has succumbed to the entreaties of these
parties, each of which has a private agenda. Thus, the U.S. is backing a
political solution involving a four-party transitional government composed of
the Vietnamese-installed Prime Minister, Hun Sen, Prince Sihanouk, a former
Prime Minister, Sonn Sann, and the Khmer Rouge.

Yet, there is no credible evidence that the political rehabilitation of the
Khmer Rouge, which this policy implies, does anything except strengthen the hand
of Pol Pot and his savage henchmen. Prince Sihanouk may have decided, again, to
make his bed with the Khmer Rouge and their sponsors in Beijing, but the U.S.
need not.

Communists and royalists are frequently at odds, but they have one thing in
common - an antipathy to democratic institutions. In Cambodia, the forces of
political elitism have formed an unholy alliance that should not be sanctioned.
Instead of giving our stamp of approval, we should wash our hands of the sordid
alliance and stand for our principles, not someone else's expediency.

Whether the Khmer Rouge is using Prince Sihanouk as a stepping stone to power or
vice-versa is not the issue. The U.S. cannot pursue policies that violate basic
moral precepts. With inexplicable reluctance, the State Department acknowledges
that genocide occurred in Cambodia. But this acknowledgement lacks conviction
because our policies contradict it.

Pol Pot should be tried as one of the great criminals of the 20th century, not
countenanced as the eminence grise behind a new Cambodian government. The Khmer
Rouge should be disarmed and universally discredited, not allowed to wreak havoc
again in a once gentle land.

Rather than sanctioning a four-party government in Phnom Penh, the U.S. ought to
employ whatever reservoir of good will we have at the United Nations to demand
the deployment of an international peacekeeping force. The force would be
mandated not just to oversee Vietnam's withdrawal but to make possible the
holding of credible, democratic elections. Most important, the force would serve
as a counterweight to Khmer Rouge militarism and would put a brake on Prince
Sihanouk's pathetic fronting for the Khmer Rouge.

Mass murderers must understand there is a day of reckoning. Whether the crime is
committed behind barbed wire at Auschwitz or in the killing fields of Southeast
Asia, justice must be pursued.

Unfortunately, there is no sitting international criminal court. The World Court
exclusively adjudicates disputes between states.

The U.S. should demand the establishment of an international tribunal, modeled
on Nuremberg, to hold international criminals accountable for their crimes, from
terrorism, genocide and torture to narcotics trafficking and attacks against
diplomats.

Pol Pot should be its first defendant.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 28, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Some of Hong Kong's People Get Pledge of Post-'97 British Refuge

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1153 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Sept. 27


The British Foreign Secretary outlined new proposals today that he said would
make it easier for some Hong Kong citizens to move to Britain if China limits
their Western-style freedoms after it takes control of the British crown colony
in 1997.

The British official, John Major, said in a speech to the United Nations General
Assembly that his Government plans to give people deemed ''essential to Hong
Kong's future stability and prosperity'' the right to move to Britain after the
territory is returned to China. He did not explain how the people would be
chosen or how many would be allowed to come.

British officials say the offer will encourage China to abide by its 1984
agreement to preserve Hong Kong's way of life so that these ''essential'' people
continue to live and work there, preserving the territory's position as a
leading Asian financial center. The declaration at this time is also intended to
encourage those ''essential'' people to stay in Hong Kong.

Mr. Major said Britain plans to give Hong Kong its own bill of rights, which, he
said, is intended to enshrine the fundamental rights of citizens that China has
agreed to respect. This guarantee would codify liberties such as freedom of
expression and travel.

In addition, Mr. Major said his country plans to speed the introduction of a
democratically elected government in the colony. The goal is for at least half
the seats in Hong Kong's current legislature, which consists of appointed
members, to be filled by direct election by 1995, two years before the Chinese
take control.

Both the bill of rights and the election of legislators, which would be in place
when China takes over, presumably leave on the Chinese the onus of dismantling
such democratic institutions.

These measures, intended to give Hong Kong citizens more confidence in their
future, represent a change of approach by Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's
Conservative Government, which in 1984 negotiated the agreement returning Hong
Kong to China. At first, the Government refused to grant any right of asylum to
Hong Kong citizens and was reluctant to draw up a bill of rights or introduce
greater democracy in advance of the Chinese takeover.

Officials say it was forced to change its position by a groundswell of popular
concern in Britain and Hong Kong about the credibility of China's promises that
was brought on by the massacre in and near Tiananmen Square and by the crackdown
on dissidents that followed.

Today, the British Foreign Secretary called on China's leaders to give
''practical reassurances'' to Hong Kong's approximately three million people
that it will respect their freedoms after 1997.

As he spoke, British officials started three days of talks with Chinese
officials on the future of the colony. Britain suspended the meetings of the
joint liaison group of British, Hong Kong and Chinese officials in protest
against the suppression of the democracy movement, then decided to resume the
talks to try to get Chinese pledges to bolster confidence in the colony.

Appeal on Boat People

Mr. Major also said that Hong Kong can no longer cope with the huge influx of
Vietnamese boat people, many of whom are seeking better economic situations and
thus do not qualify as refugees.

And he called on the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
to step up its efforts to persuade these refugees that no other country will
take them and that they should therefore agree to be resettled in Vietnam under
international supervision.

Britain has said that it wants to forcibly repatriate boat people who refuse to
return voluntarily. But the United States strongly opposed such forcible
repatriation.

The West German Foreign Minister, Hans-Dietrich Genscher, called on Western
nations to encourage the process of economic and political reform under way in
Eastern Europe.

Mr. Genscher said there is a chance to assure ''a peaceful order in Europe from
the Atlantic to the Urals.'' He called on East Germany to accept the reforms
under way in the Soviet Union, Poland and Hungary, saying that the two German
states should work together to support what he termed ''the process of European
unification.''

Appeal From Israeli

Israel's Foreign Minister, Moshe Arens, called on the United Nations to support
his Government's plan for elections in the occupied territories and invited Arab
leaders now in New York to ''meet with me to discuss how we can move from
belligerency to peace.''

Recalling that this week is the 50th anniversary of the Nazis' entry into Warsaw
at the start of World War II, the Israeli official devoted most of his speech to
describing Nazi Germany's persecution of the Jews and the Arab world's refusal
to accept Israel's existence.

In a right of reply, the United Nations observer of the Palestine Liberation
Organization, Zehdi Labib Terzi, criticized Israel for asking other countries to
support its election plan in the occupied territories when last year's General
Assembly endorsed a comprehensive Mideast peace settlement based on an
international conference under United Nations auspices.

Later, Mr. Arens conferred privately with Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d
before a three-nation meeting on Thursday, in which they will be joined by the
Egyptian Foreign Minister, Esmat Abdel Meguid. The Americans are hoping to bring
about negotiations between Israel and Palestinians based on a peace plan offered
by the Israeli Government and modified by the Egyptians.

The Philippine Foreign Secretary, Raul Manglapus, defended his proposal to
create an International Debt and Development Commission, a plan that has the
support of the third world. It would be a United Nations forum where debtors and
creditors could meet to discuss innovative solutions to the debt crisis. Cuban
Attacks U.S.  The Foreign Minister of Cuba, Isidoro Malmierca, strongly
criticized the United States as ''aggressive and hostile'' in a speech to the
General Assembly today.

''It is clear that, with respect to Cuba, the Bush Administration has begun to
take steps to become the eighth U.S. administration not wishing to establish a
climate of peace and good neighborliness and continues to embark on aggressive
and hostile actions against her,'' he said.

Replying, the United States representative, Thomas R. Pickering, accused Cuba of
casting aside ''the spirit of cooperation and conciliation'' that has
characterized this General Assembly session.

Other speakers today were Foreign Minister Joao de Deus Pinheiro of Portugal,
Foreign Minister Gianni de Michelis of Italy, Foreign Minister Anisul Islam
Mahmud of Bangladesh, Foreign Minister Mark Eyskens of Belgium; the Deputy Prime
Minister of Mauritius, Sir Satcam Boolell, the Foreign Minister of Somalia,
Abdurahman Jama Barre; the Foreign Minister of Brunei, Prince Bolkiah Mohamed,
and Oman's Foreign Minister, Youssef bin Alawi bin Abdullah.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 28, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 948 words



INTERNATIONAL    A3-12

Canada is becoming a money haven for drug profits as traffickers try to avoid
American banking laws intended to curb money laundering, law enforcement
officials say.    Page A1



A trial for Andreas Papandreou was ordered by Parliament. He is the first Greek
prime minister to face criminal charges, including bribery and receiving stolen
funds.    A1



The Olof Palme case continues more than three years after the Swedish leader was
killed. Though a man has been convicted of the crime, conspiracy buffs are
having a field day    A12



British plans for Hong Kong citizens were outlined at the United Nations. The
plans would make moving to Britain easier if China limits freedom taking control
of Hong Kong.    A1



More world economic aid for Poland was called for by President Bush, who pledged
that the United States would be ''out in front of this effort'' to insure
international success.    A9



News analysis: Eastern Europe appears to have become a ground of agreement
between Washington and Moscow. Both superpowers are treating the region
delicately.    A10



Latest Pentagon report lifts shadow of Soviet menace, a bit    A10



Soviets reveal space secrets    A3



Vietnam's Cambodian withdrawal has started a battle in the United Nations. The
Cambodian opposition says the pullout is a sham and is trying to block U.N.
approval of it.    A8



Gadgets taken to Cambodia ease strain of foreign press    A8



Johannesburg opened to all races the city's pools and recreational centers. It
proceeded with plans to desegregate buses, after a poll showed that whites
approve such moves.    A3



El Carmen journal: South America blacks assert African past    A4



NATIONAL    A16-25, B13-14

An audit of Federal housing funds that insure home mortgages shows that they had
a loss of $4.2 billion last year. H.U.D.'s troubles seem more serious than had
been thought.    A1



Ex-Pierce aide refuses questions    A18



To avoid repeal of a health plan for older Americans, House Democratic leaders
proposed eliminating most major features of the program and the surtax that
would pay for it.    A1



''Star Wars'' is facing trouble after six years of steadily increasing
financing. Now the anti-missile project's budget and its role in military
planning is declining.    A1



NASA is dependent on contractors, officials say. That dependency may hurt the
agency's ability to manage operations, maintain safety and control costs, they
say.    A1



Relief efforts in South Carolina are being hampered by fallen trees, as
thousands of residents continue to live in shelters. Truckloads of supplies
poured into Charleston.    B14



Donations to help victims    B14



The Senate agreed on a drug plan. It would cost more than $1 billion over
President Bush's request, and aims more money at prevention, treatment and local
law enforcement.    B14



President Bush's education meeting with governors opened in an atmosphere of
hope. But hope was tinged with division and uncertainty over how best to improve
schools.    B13



Election fever in Chicago schools as parents file for seats    B13



E.P.A. is seeking tougher penalties against polluters it says dump untreated
wastes into the Grand Calumet River, an industrialized waterway in northwest
Indiana.    A16



A sightseeing plane crashed on a hill near the Grand Canyon Airport, killing 10
people and injuring 11.    A16



F.A.A. picks three more airports for advanced bomb detector    A16


Braniff halts flights amid cash squeeze    D1


Northwest deal seen changing    D1



A high-speed train was proposed for Dallas-Houston travel by a private group.
The train would be like those that travel at speeds up to 185 miles an hour in
Europe and Japan.    A22



In Atlanta, abortion opponents protest at prosecutor's home    A25


Sony's vision for Columbia    D1


I.B.M. sees profit shortfall    D1



REGIONAL    B1-12, B24



Yusuf Hawkins's father has a cause after his son's killing in the Bensonhurst
section of Brooklyn last month. His goal is ''making black people aware that we
are open game.''    A1



Rudolph Giuliani cut Jackie Mason from his mayoral campaign after Mr. Mason was
quoted in a newspaper as making racially charged remarks about blacks and Jews.
    B1



Opposition to the proposed charter for New York City has been organized. A
coalition of about 50 officials and leaders announced they would work for the
charter's defeat.    B1



Koch orders hiring freeze    B3


Panel rejects plan for 400 new taxi medallions    B3



An examination of the USAir jet that plunged into the East River last week at La
Guardia Airport shows a rudder misalignment, a flaw that has drawn the attention
of investigators.    B1



In New Jersey's gubernatorial race, both candidates support the death penalty.
But the Republican, Jim Courter, says he is for the death penalty more than his
opponent is.    B1



Homosexuality among priests, nuns and religious brothers was the subject of
''Our Lesbian and Gay Religious and Clergy,'' a conference of New York Roman
Catholics.    B2



Ex-aide says Mrs. Helmsley took millions from husband    B5


Government's star witness against Garcia testifies    B9


93 kilos of cocaine are seized    B10


Phone-strike talks to resume    B24


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 28, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Gadgets Taken to Cambodia Ease Strain of Foreign Press

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 650 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Sept. 25


The invasion of at least 250 representatives of the foreign press here to report
what Vietnam and Cambodia say is the final withdrawal of Hanoi's troops has
strained the resources of this isolated country, which is still recovering from
the depredations of Khmer Rouge rule.

But the Cambodian Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen has given extraordinary
access to foreign journalists and their modern equipment, which has intrigued
even the most sophisticated Cambodians.

Official guides for journalists were drawn from practically any office that
contained people with even a middling fluency in a major foreign language. Many
of those Cambodians, who included ministry department heads, looked with awe on
the laptop computers and portable satellite ground stations suddenly beaming
information from a country that still does most of its bureaucratic work with
pen and rough Soviet-made paper.

Vietnam and Cambodia essentially allowed any journalist who wanted to come to
report the withdrawal to do so. The number of journalists - no one knows for
sure how many there were -also included at least two tourists, one of them a
former flight attendant and the other a schoolteacher, who passed themselves off
as journalists to get a rare visa here.

Few International Phone Lines

In ordinary times, Phnom Penh's aged hotels are nearly filled with the offices
and apartments of international relief workers. But they have recently been
allowed to rent housing and offices in the city, freeing some rooms for
journalists, many of whom were also staying in private homes.

In ordinary times, too, Cambodia has only a few international telephone lines at
the post office. Even those run through a recently opened Soviet satellite
station to Moscow, where Soviet operators connect callers to the rest of the
world.

It is possible to telephone Phnom Penh from Hanoi or Ho Chi Minh City, but even
that service is very slow and unreliable.

Nor is there any telex line open to the public or even to most officials,
including the Press Department of the Foreign Ministry and the Cambodia Shipping
Agency.

Crush of Journalists

Communications are normally made here by cable or by letter delivered through
some of the international relief agencies represented here, which have mail
pouches delivered on supply planes.

Until now, journalist in Phnom Penh could send daily reports only by telephone,
usually after waiting for hours at the post office.That exercise is delayed
whenever Moscow wishes to speak to its embassy, or vice versa, Cambodian
officials say.

Faced with the crush of journalists this time, the Cambodian Government agreed
to allow news agencies and networks to import portable satellite stations free.
Those stations fit into two large suitcases and consist of a small antenna dish
and a compact work area that includes a telephone with computer data or voice
capacity and a telex, and that entirely bypass the primitive national phone
network.

The system also allows color photographs to be transmitted directly from
negatives after computer cropping and contrast adjustment.

Rented Time on Satellite Stations

Most print and radio journalists arranged to file their stories and photographs
through the dishes brought in by The Associated Press, Agence France-Presse and
Reuters. Though the contracts of each agency differed, the cost for a minute on
the dish ranged from about $25 a minute to $80 a minute, depending on the degree
of use.

Some lined up at the Soviet satellite station, which had some lines devoted
mostly to the networks, while others waited at the post office to dictate their
stories on the usual scratchy connections.

Though long waits were common with some services, for those who normally report
from Cambodia it has been a magical moment sadly unlikely to be repeated: the
dishes are leaving Cambodia along with the Vietnamese troops.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 28, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodian Factions Cry Sham in Hanoi's Pullout

BYLINE: By MARVINE HOWE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 970 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Sept. 27


A new diplomatic struggle is being waged here over Vietnam's announcement of the
withdrawal of its occupation forces from Cambodia, with Cambodian opposition
leaders trying to convince the nations of the world that the pullout is a sham.

The Cambodian opposition coalition, headed by Prince Norodom Sihanouk and
recognized by the United Nations as the legitimate government of Cambodia, is
trying to stop the General Assembly from approving the Vietnamese pullout.
Today, as part of that effort, the coalition issued a detailed account of
military actions by rebel forces against the Phnom Penh Government forces and
Vietnamese troops. The latest engagement cited took place on Sept. 18 at the
Pailin front in the northwest.

Vietnam maintains that it has withdrawn all its forces from Cambodian soil.

Every year since Vietnam invaded Cambodia in 1978, the General Assembly has
condemned the Vietnamese occupation, calling for the withdrawal of its forces
under international supervision and the reconciliation of all Cambodian
political factions under the leadership of Prince Sihanouk.

'Disguised' Vietnamese Troops

This year, however, there is a mood of uncertainty over the Cambodian issue
because of the collapse last month of a conference on Cambodia in Paris, as well
as the Vietnamese pullout. Some diplomats say they believe there will be a
changes in the Cambodian resolution, but they add that they expect it will not
acknowledge or deny the Vietnamese withdrawal.

Even as Vietnam announced this week that the last of its troops had left
Cambodia, Prince Sihanouk's son Prince Norodom Chakrapong, asserted that some
74,000 Vietnamese remained in Cambodia ''disguised,'' either incorporated in the
Phnom Penh army or the militia. He said Hanoi was making a show of the
withdrawal because it sorely needed foreign aid, particularly the lifting of the
United States trade embargo.

''Nothing has changed,'' said Prince Chakrapong, who is a minister in the rebel
government. ''We must keep on fighting.'' He also said another important factor
was the presence of Vietnamese settlers, whom he said numbered as many as one
million and included some former soldiers.

Son Sann, the leader of one of the non-Communist opposition coalition factions,
accused Vietnam of leaving some troops in Cambodia. Mr. Son Sann, who is to
address the General Assembly tomorrow, said he would call for total withdrawal
of Vietnamese troops. He said he would also urge support for a provisional
government composed of the four main Cambodian factions: the three coalition
groups, which are his own group, the Sihanouk faction and the Khmer Rouge, under
whose rule more than a million Cambodians died and whose repression led to the
Vietnamese intervention, as well as the Vietnamese-backed Government led by
Prime Minister Hun Sen..

'There Are Civilian Advisers'

''This is the way to avoid civil war,'' Mr. Son Sann said, summarizing his
four-point program: withdrawal of all Vietnamese forces, establishment of a
government of national unity, disarming of all factions and elections under
United Nations supervision.

Trinh Xuan Lang, Vietnam's permanent representative to the United Nations, said
the withdrawal was ''total and complete.'' He said accusations to the contrary
were ''a pretext for continued fighting.''

Insisting that Vietnam had not left even military advisers behind, Mr. Lang did
concede ''of course there are civilian advisers.'' He could not say how many
Vietnamese civilians were helping the Phnom Penh Government or how many
Vietnamese settlers remain in Cambodia.

Mr. Hun Sen asserted that there are 80,000 Vietnamese settlers, while estimates
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations range from 400,000 to 450,000.

Mr. Lang said the Hun Sen troops may ''face some difficulties'' from the Khmer
Rouge, concentrated in the border area with Thailand, but added: ''basically the
situation is under control.''

American and United Nations experts on Southeast Asia said that at this point it
is impossible to know what Vietnamese presence remains inside Cambodia.
----Hanoi Says Pullout Is Finished HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, Sept. 27 - The
last Vietnamese soldier left Cambodia at 4 or 5 P.M. Tuesday, a senior
Vietnamese officer said today.

The last two vehicles of Vietnamese troops, which had broken down on the road to
Vietnam, were finally towed across the border, Gen. Nguyen Van Thai said, but
there were no special speeches or ceremonies.

''That is not in accordance with Vietnamese traditions,'' he said, leaving
unstated the comparison to the Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan on Feb. 15.

General Thai repeated in various ways that not a single Vietnamese soldier
remained in Cambodia. He said that it was possible some of the 200 to 300
Vietnamese troops still missing in action are prisoners or lost, but that the
army had adhered to the Government's order to get every Vietnamese soldier out
of Cambodia.

He said that to his knowledge, the last Vietnamese soldiers to die in Cambodia
perished on Sept. 23 on their way home. A truck rolled over into a river in
Stung Treng province, drowning a soldier, he said, and in another incident the
drivers of a Vietnamese truck and a Cambodian truck passing each other tried to
shake hands, and the Vietnamese driver was pulled out of his vehicle and fell to
his death.

He said no hostile action had been taken against the Vietnamese soldiers by the
opposition coalition opposed to the Phnom Penh Government.

He said the Khmer Rouge seemed to be massing troops in Thailand near Pailin, an
important ruby-mining area in northwestern Cambodia, but that only ''a couple
hundred'' Khmer Rouge were currently fighting the Cambodian troops about 9 miles
northwest of the town of Pailin and about 3 miles from the Thai border.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of a Cambodian malitiaman guarding a temple in Angkor (AP)

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 28, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Arnold Johnson Is Dead at 84; A Leading American Communist

BYLINE: By JOAN COOK

SECTION: Section D; Page 22, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 286 words


Arnold Johnson, a member of the national leadership of the Communist Party for
many years, died Tuesday at St. Vincent's Hospital after a long illness. He was
84 years old and lived in Manhattan.

Mr. Johnson was born in a lumber camp in Seattle and began working at the age of
12 in a lumber mill. He worked his way through college and later received a
master's degree from Teachers College at Columbia University and a bachelor of
divinity degree from the Union Theological Seminary.

Mr. Johnson joined the Socialist Party in New York in 1929 while he was still a
student. In 1931 he was arrested in Harlan, Ky., at a miners' strike. He later
became a leader of the National Unemployed Leagues and the Workers Alliance.

Ran for the Senate

After joining the Communist Party Mr. Johnson moved to Ohio, where he was the
party's state leader from 1940 to 1947. In the late 1940's he came to Manhattan,
where he served as national legislative director, public-relations director and
filled other posts in the party's national and New York State organizations. He
also ran for the United States Senate on the Communist line.

In 1953, Mr. Johnson and a group of other party leaders were convicted in
Manhattan of violating the Smith Act, which made it a crime to advocate the
violent overthrow of the Government. Sentenced to a three-year term, he was
released after two years and four months.

In 1970 he refused to testify before a subcommittee of the House Committee on
Internal Security, which had subpoenaed him in an investigation of the New
Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam. He was cited for contempt of
Congress, but the charge was later dismissed.

There are no immediate survivors.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 29, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. TELLS ISRAEL IT PLANS TO SELL SAUDIS 300 TANKS

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1601 words


The Bush Administration has told Israel that it intends to sell Saudi Arabia
about 300 United States Army battlefield tanks and will take steps to meet
Israel's security concerns if Jerusalem does not actively oppose the sale,
American officials said yesterday.

The officials said Defense Secretary Dick Cheney raised the plan to sell the
M1-A1 tank to the Saudis with Israel's Defense Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, when
they met in Washington three weeks ago. Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d
followed up on the plan in talks this week with Israel's Foreign Minister, Moshe
Arens.

The Administration has decided to try to reach an understanding in principle
with the Israelis that they not use their influence with Congress to try and
block the sale, before taking up the issue with Congress and giving it the
required legal notification of the proposed transaction.

Each Costs $2.6 Million

Each M1-A1 costs about $2.6 million, so if the Saudis decide to buy all 315
under discussion, the deal could be worth between $700 million and $1 billion,
depending on the associated equipment purchased, officials said.

Military analysts say Washington is particularly interested in this sale not
only because it would come at a time when many countries are simply upgrading
older models, but also because the cash it would bring in would allow the
manufacturer, General Dynamics, to keep its production lines open longer to make
even more advanced models.

While certainly not enthusiastic about such a deal, the Israeli officials have
not flatly rejected the compromise formulas sketched out by the Administration.
But once the incendiary issue of arms sales becomes a matter for public and
Congressional debate, no one can predict where it will end.

The Saudis have been considering buying M1 tanks, the principal tank of the
United States armed forces, since the early 1980's. The Saudi Army has about 550
tanks, a mixture of French-made AMX-30's and American-made M-60's, both of which
are based on designs of the Vietnam War era.

The M1-A1 is an improved version of the M1, and has a 120-millimeter cannon
instead of a 105-millimeter cannon, thicker armor and more advanced computers
and communications gear, making it what many believe to be the best tank in the
world today.

Israel makes a tank of its own, the Merkava, that is roughly comparable to the
M1.

The ideal arrangement for the Bush Administration appears to be the kind that
the Reagan Administration worked out in July 1988 when it sold 40 F-18 fighter
jets and 300 Maverick air-to-ground missiles to Kuwait. Congress and the
Administration agreed to downgrade the technical level of the Mavericks, while
the Administration gave Israel military sales benefits to help its military
high-technology industry. Israel then perfunctorily opposed the Kuwaiti sale,
but did not encourage its allies in Congress to block it.

In an effort to avoid a major battle with Congress and Israel over the
prospective Saudi tank sale - the kind of battle that occurred over the 1981
sale of five AWACS advanced radar planes to Saudi Arabia and over several other
sales - Mr. Cheney laid out the following arrangement to Mr. Rabin during his
recent visit.

The United States, it was noted, has been pre-positioning weapons and other war
materiel in Israel since the early 1980's, but most of the weapons involved are
''single use'' armaments, meaning that they do not fit with the parallel
equipment used by the Israeli Army. They are for use by the American military
only, in the event that it has to fight a war in the Middle East.

In South Korea, by contrast, the United States has long pre-positioned weapons
which are of dual-use capacity, suitable for both the South Korean and American
forces. The South Korean Army can draw on these weapons stocks on a ''pay as you
use'' basis, if the United States approves.

According to officials, Mr. Cheney has decided ''in principle'' to begin a
similar arrangement with Israel. The draft plan is for the United States to
pre-position up to $100 million worth of military equipment in Israel that would
be suitable for either army. Israel could draw on these stocks if Washington
approves.

Israel Short of Arms Funds

The cash-starved Israeli Defense Ministry, for budgetary reasons, has allowed
certain categories of weapons and ammunition to be reduced to below-normal
levels of inventory. Thus, the idea that the United States would maintain some
weapons inventories in Israel, in effect on Israel's behalf, has a great deal of
appeal.

Mr. Cheney is said to have suggested to Defense Minister Rabin that the pace at
which this prospective $100 million stockpile would be built up by the Pentagon
might be affected by the degree of Israel's cooperation on the proposed Saudi
tank deal.

Mr. Cheney also broached some other financial offsets, most involving complex
bookkeeping arrangements by which the Administration could pay out Israel's
annual $1.8 billion in military aid in a way that compensates Jerusalem for
erosion from inflation.

Mr. Cheney told Mr. Rabin that the Saudis will buy the tanks from some European
nation if they do not get them from the United States. And, Mr. Cheney added,
while there might be a marginal weakening of Israel's security by the fact that
the Saudis received higher-quality American-made tanks rather than slightly less
advanced European models, that would be more than offset by the increase to
Israel's security through American pre-positioning and better financing.

Compromise Is Possible

Mr. Rabin answered that Israel's official policy was to oppose any such arms
sale to any Arab nation still technically at war with it, which applies to Saudi
Arabia. Neverthless, while Mr. Rabin made clear that this would always be the
official position, he did not rule out some sort of unspoken, unwritten
compromise along the line that was reached in Kuwaiti arms deal. Foreign
Minister Arens took the same line with Mr. Baker, Israeli officials said.

In Congress, there appears to be some sympathy for the long-expected Saudi deal,
although the Administration may have antagonized some key pro-Israeli
legislators by floating the idea by the Israelis before consulting with
Congress.

''I think there is room for negotiations on this tank sale, but it would help if
the Administration bothered to consult with the Congress, which it has promised
to do and repeatedly failed to do on questions related to the Middle East,''
said Representative Mel Levine, the California Democrat who has been a central
figure in several Administration-Congress battles over arms sales to Arab
nations.

Mr. Levine said he would look at several factors in deciding whether or not to
oppose the Saudi tank sale. He said he would want to know if the tanks would be
equipped with depleted-uranium armor, an advanced technology that deflects
penetrating shells, the type of weapons the tanks would carry, where in Saudi
Arabia they would be stationed - that is how close to the frontier with Israel -
and what type of overall threat they might pose to Israel's security.

Egyptian and Israeli Meet

On the Middle East diplomatic front, Secretary Baker played host yesterday to a
meeting in his Waldorf Astoria suite between Mr. Arens and Egypt's Foreign
Minister, Esmat Abdel-Meguid. Earlier in the day Mr. Arens met with the Soviet
Foreign Minister, Eduard A. Shevardnadze. The four men were in New York for the
United Nations General Assembly session.

After his meeting with the Israeli and the Egyptian, Mr. Baker told reporters
that there ''may be some possibility for progress'' in getting Israelis and
Palestinians to discuss Israel's proposal for Palestinian elections.

The Secretary explained, however, that on the two key issues - which
Palestinians Israel would talk to and on what basis - no breakthrough was
forthcoming yesterday.

He said Mr. Arens had told him that next week the Israeli Cabinet would consider
Egypt's 10-point proposal for bridging Israeli and Palestinian differences over
how to organize elections in the occupied territories to choose Palestinian
representatives who would negotiate peace with Israel. Mr. Arens said he could
not commit himself until the Cabinet had made a decision.

The M1-A1 Tank at a Glance

Performance
The M1-A1 is the latest version in the M1 series of tanks developed by the
United States in the 1970's. The $2.6 million tank has improved computers and
communications gear. It can travel 41.4 miles an hour on the road, 30 miles an
hour cross-country and four miles an hour up a 60 percent grade. It has a
maximum road range of 300 miles. The tank is powered by a Lycoming Textron AGT
1500 gas turbine engine.

Armor
To deflect penetrating shells, the thicker hull is designed with low-level
radiation uranium encased in steel, which is 2 1/2 times the density of steel,
and reiinforced with depleted uranium mesh on the front and on the turret.

Weapons
The main weapon on the M1-A1 is a German Rheinmetall 120mm smooth-bore gun. To
its right is a 7.62mm machine gun with another mounted on the left side of the
turret. A total of 11,400 rounds of 7.62 mm machine gun, with 1,000 rounds of
ammunition available, is mounted at the commanders station. It can be aimed and
fired from within the turret in 360-degrees radius and at an angle up to 65
degrees. On each side of the turret is a six-barrelled smoke grenade gun.

Dimensions
The M1-A1 tank's hull is 26 feet long and 11.4 feet wide. Overall height is 8
feet.

Source: Jane's Armor and Artillery, 1988-89

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 29, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Afghan, at U.N., Says Rebel Campaign Has Failed

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 791 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Sept. 28


Afghanistan's Foreign Minister told the General Assembly today that the
American-backed guerrillas had lost any chance of winning a military victory
against his Government this year as the summer fighting season draws to a close.

As the speeches at the Assembly continued for a fourth day, the Afghan Foreign
Minister, Abdul Wakhil, appealed to the United States and Pakistan to abandon
their policy of seeking a military victory for the rebels. He invited President
Bush to send an envoy to Kabul to discuss a political settlement, saying his
Government now favors ''a democratic system based on political pluralism and a
free economy.''

Mr. Wakhil told the Assembly that the rebels' attempts to capture the cities of
Jalalabad, Khost and Kandahar this summer had been turned into ''crushing
defeats,'' ending any realistic prospect that they could overthrow the Kabul
Government by force.

''The hope of a military victory, which was crushed at Jalalabad, has been
further lost during what was termed the summer fighting season,'' he continued.

'Indiscriminate Murder'

As a result, the insurgents have resorted to a strategy of long-range shelling
and rocket attacks against the cities and towns they cannot capture, even though
these result in the ''indiscriminate murder of innocent children, women and
men,'' he said.

The Foreign Minister said that in Kabul alone, 1,384 rocket attacks had killed
671 people and wounded 1,014 from Feb. 15, when Soviet troops completed their
withdrawal from Afghanistan, to the end of August.

Appealing to Pakistan and the United States to seek a political compromise, he
said, ''How many more Afghans have got to go down the drain of a senseless war
of fratricide for the planners and executioners of this war to realize the
futility of the military option?''

Speaking for another Asian country gripped by civil war, Son Sann, a leader of
the Cambodian opposition coalition, denounced Vietnam's assertion that it had
withdrawn all its troops from the country by Sept. 26 as it promised.

He said Vietnam had left behind at least 30,000 soldiers concealed among the
forces of the Hun Sen Government, which Vietnam brought to power in Phnom Penh
after it invaded Cambodia in 1978. He said that a 100,000 more armed Vietnamese
are concealed among the one million Vietnamese settlers in Cambodia and that
Vietnam has also left behind thousands of ''advisers'' in the Hun Sen
Government.

Vietnam's aim, he said, is to persuade the United Nations to endorse its
pretended withdrawal so it will become eligible for foreign aid while still
maintaining effective control over the country through its grip on the Hun Sen
Government.

Hungarian Defends Changes

Like his Polish collegue earlier this week, the Hungarian Foreign Minister,
Gyula Horn, told the Assembly that his country's continued membership of the
Warsaw Pact did not give the Soviet Union any right to interfere with the
political and economic reforms Hungary was making.

''This is the only way that upheavals similar to the Hungarian tragedy of 1956
and to other dramatic events could be avoided in the future,'' he said,
referring to the crushing of the Hungarian uprising.

On the other hand, Rumania, which opposes economic and political changes and has
been accused of extensive human rights abuses, called on the General Assembly to
oppose attempts to ''turn private the public sector or impose free market and
other structural changes proper to the capitalist ecocomy'' on other countries.

Speaking in the name of President Nicolae Ceausescu, Foreign Minister Ioan Totu
of Rumania said the United Nations should also take steps to insure that the
mass media promote ''relations of friendship and cooperation, rapprochement and
mutual respect among governments and peoples.''

In his speech, the President of Bolivia, Jaime Paz Zamora, said his country must
find lucrative agricultural alternatives to the coca crop if it is to eradicate
drugs.

In their speeches today, the Alternate Foreign Minister of Greece, George
Papoulias, and the Prime Minister of Malta, Eddie Fenech Adami, both addressed
the subject of Cyprus.

Mr. Papoulias said there had been a ''lack of willingness on the Turkish side to
reach a solution that would allow the two communities of Cyprus to enjoy the
full fruits of independence.'' He added that Ankara ''has encouraged acts of
secession and partition unequivocally condemned by resolutions of the Security
Council.''

Other speakers who addressed the Assembly today were Foreign Ministers R. J.
Ouko of Kenya; Hans van den Broek of the Netherlands; Ali Alatas of Indonesia;
Francisco Fernandez-Ordonez of Spain; Fernando Solana Morales of Mexico, and
Jacques Roger Booh-Booh of Cameroon.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 221 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 29, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Autocrat With a Regal Manner, Marcos Ruled for 2 Decades

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2596 words


Ferdinand E. Marcos was as tough as he was debonair, and he came to rule the
Philippines with an iron hand before popular unrest forced him to flee in 1986
after two decades in power.

Mr. Marcos was first elected President in 1965 and converted his country's
sputtering democratic system into a personal fief, with his luxury-loving wife,
Imelda, as virtual co-ruler. He came to control most of the apparatus of power
and acquired the right to rule by decree. For most of that time, he had the firm
support of the United States.

While he was President, Mr. Marcos was not apologetic about departing from the
norms of Western democracy. ''What we ask of the developed countries,'' he wrote
in 1982, ''is to let the third world find a third way. We must now create a
political and economic system responsive to our unique character and our special
realities.''

A skillful lawyer and orator, Mr. Marcos entered public life in 1949 and served
successively as a member of the Philippine House of Representatives, Senator and
president of the Senate before he was first elected President in 1965. He was
re-elected in 1969, later proclaimed that the governmental machinery was not
operating and set about transforming it.

He entrenched himself as the Philippines' autocratic ruler during the nine
years, from 1972 to 1981, in which he imposed martial law. He held on to
sweeping powers afterward, and his regal manner and sumptuous way of life seemed
to enhance his authority over his poverty-plagued, largely rural nation of 60
million people, a former American colony that became independent in 1946.

Defending his right to rule by decree, if he chose, he asserted that otherwise
''you will have Communists going back and forth, causing the dastardly ruin of
our country, the killing of people and the rape of women.''

Over the years, Mr. Marcos's hand was strengthened by the support of the armed
forces, whose size he tripled, to 200,000 troops, after declaring martial law in
1972. The forces included some first-rate units as well as thousands of unruly
and ill-equipped personnel of the civilian home defense forces and other
paramilitary organizations. In the martial-law years, he also consolidated his
parliamentary power and curbed civil liberties, harassing or exiling political
opponents.

Eventually, in the 1980's, corruption and mismanagement left the Philippine
economy in obvious trouble, and Mr. Marcos's prestige and power shrank. His
health faltered, the United States moved away from him and political opponents
and Communist insurgents grew more assertive.

And he was put on the defensive after Aug. 21, 1983, when Benigno S. Aquino Jr.,
the main opposition leader, was shot and killed at the Manila airport as he
returned home after three years of self-exile in the United States.

The indignation caused by the killing, coupled with longstanding discontent, led
to demonstrations and rioting that undermined his authority and ultimately
brought Corazon C. Aquino, Mr. Aquino's widow, to power.

Corruption Within

Mr. Marcos's aura was also tarnished by accusations and problems concerning his
country's business and economic life. Under his rule, the Philippines was
afflicted with widespread corruption and vast unemployment. There was widespread
poverty, along with a few sectors of great wealth.

Mr. Marcos was said to suffer kidney problems, and 1984 there was speculation
that he was close to death. A passionate golfer and physical fitness buff who
was proud of his physique, he disputed the accounts.

With Mr. Marcos ailing, his long-powerful wife emerged as the Government's main
public figure, meeting high-ranking visitors as though she were the chief of
state. Her actual position was Minister of Human Settlements, which gave her
cabinet rank.

Over the years, the life that the Marcoses came to lead in their riverside
palace became regal indeed. When Pope John Paul II visited the Philippines in
1981, Mr. Marcos had bronze medals struck depicting himself and the Pope.

Ferdinand Edralin Marcos's early years were rather more austere. He was born
Sept. 11, 1917, in the town of Sarrat in a rice- and tobacco-growing area in
Ilocos Norte in northern Luzon. His father, Mariano R. Marcos, was a politician
and educator. His mother, the former Josefa Edralin, was a teacher from a
well-to-do landowning family.

The Marcos family moved to Manila in 1925, and the future President graduated
from secondary school in 1934 and went on to study law on a scholarship at the
University of the Philippines.

While he was a student, he was convicted of the murder of a political rival of
his father, but the verdict was reversed by the Philippine Supreme Court after
the young man argued his own appeal.

He then became a trial lawyer in his father's Manila law firm. In World War II,
he was a much-decorated officer in both the Philippine and United States Armies.


Question of Medals

The decorations that Mr. Marcos claimed to have earned for military service
against the Japanese became a campaign issue four decades later, when Mrs.
Aquino denounced what she called his ''false medals.''

The Government's count of his war decorations ranged from 26 to 33. When their
validity was challenged by American and Philippine journalists, his Government
argued that documentation of his exploits as a wounded army officer and
guerrilla leader had been destroyed by fire.

In 1946 and 1947, Mr. Marcos was special assistant to President Manuel Roxas. He
was a member of the Philippine House of Representatives from 1949 to 1959 and of
the Senate from 1959 to 1966, serving as president of the Senate from 1963 to
1965.

As President of the Philippines, Mr. Marcos ran the country jointly with a
disputatious two-party Congress until he imposed martial law. He suspended
Congress, declared himself absolute ruler and had a constitutional convention
draw up a charter that gave the Philippines a Prime Minister as head of
government. He then named himself Prime Minister under the new Constitution as
well as President under the old.

Mr. Marcos remained Prime Minister from 1973 until 1981, when he stepped down
from that post and, while retaining the presidency, also served as leader of the
New Society Movement, his political party. He was easily elected again as
President, Early Support, Then Furor Early in the martial law period, Mr. Marcos
enjoyed widespread support, in part because crimes of violence decreased. Other
successes of his presidency, over the years, included rural irrigation and
electrification projects and increased rice harvests.

Yet the boasts of Mr. Marcos and his supporters seemed to be drowned out, in his
final years, by the furor over the Aquino slaying, the Communist insurgency and
the clamor of his emboldened political foes.

In the months after the killing, he made concessions to his opponents under
pressure from the United States, which had provided hundreds of millions of
dollars in aid. That assistance had been important over the years in buttressing
his rule.

But by late 1984, there were signs that the Reagan Administration was distancing
itself from his Government somewhat. And Mr. Marcos also had to contend with
opposition from his country's Roman Catholic Church.

Many Filipinos came to believe that Mr. Marcos, a shrewd political tactician,
had no hand in the killing of Mr. Aquino but that he was involved in cover-up
measures.

A civilian investigative panel issued a report in October 1984 naming Gen.
Fabian C. Ver, the armed forces Chief of Staff and a close friend of Mr. Marcos,
and two dozen others, mostly soldiers, as ''indictable for the premeditated
killing'' of Mr. Aquino and of Rolando Galman, who was earlier said to have been
the lone assassin killed by airport guards. An indictment was handed up in
February 1985.

Mr. Marcos asserted that the evidence backed the military's contention that Mr.
Galman had been hired by Communists and had acted on his own. But some
opposition politicians contended that Mr. Marcos had ordered the slaying, while
others accused the military and Mrs. Marcos.

In late 1985, when the court found the defendants in the Aquino murder trial not
guilty, the verdict was widely seen as a miscarriage of justice.

While the Aquino controversy continued in the capital, the Communist insurgency,
which began in 1969, was making political as well as military inroads around the
country.

Mr. Marcos estimated that the insurgent regulars numbered 10,000 to 12,000 by
early 1985. But the rebel organization, the New People's Army, said it had
around 20,000 armed fighters. And its popularity and influence were growing.

As a result, by May 1985, many opposition figures had begun striking a more
nationalistic and anti-American note - partly in reaction to leftists' charges
that the Marcos Government was dictatorial and was being sustained by United
States aid.

His ties with Washington were of long standing. Early in his presidency, Mr.
Marcos was a strong defender of American involvement in Vietnam, and he
maintained close relations with Washington in the years that followed.

Those relations soured somewhat under the Carter Administration, which included
the Philippines among the targets of its human-rights campaign. But Vice
President George Bush appeared to signal a different tack in 1981 when he
visited Manila and told Mr. Marcos: ''We love your adherence to democratic
principles and to democratic processes. We will not leave you in isolation.''
Mr. Bush said the next day that he had been speaking generally of American
allies in Southeast Asia, but his remarks were associated in the public mind
with the Philippines and came to be quoted with ironic intent.

The Bases Factor

As criticism of the Marcos Government grew in the United States, American
officials let it be known that the Administration was particularly worried that
instability in the Philippines might impede use of the two major American
military bases there, Clark Air Base and Subic Bay Naval Station. Accordingly,
they indicated, the Administration wanted to prepare to deal with a Philippine
power struggle after Mr. Marcos's rule.

By October 1984 the Reagan Administration had altered its attitude toward Mr.
Marcos, and was prodding him to relax his authoritarian rule.

Mr. Marcos was evidently nettled by the American appraisals. Shaking his fist,
he declared in one speech, ''I am surprised why some people would classify us
with the Central and Latin American countries.''

''We don't want to appear to our Asian brothers as if we were the pet dogs of
any Western ally,'' he said, suggesting that his handling of the Aquino
assassination case was not meant just to satisfy Washington.

Criticism from the Philippine business sector, having flared up after the Aquino
killing, continued, with many company executives urging that the economic power
of Mr. Marcos and his entourage be reduced to permit decentralization and to
bolster investor confidence.

After the assassination, the Philippine economy worsened so markedly that the
nation was not able to keep pace with the payments due on loans from overseas.
The country's foreign debt soared to more than $25 billion by the beginning of
1985, and international lending organizations and banks, ascribing the economic
travail to cronyism and heavy-handed Government control of the economy, pressed
for changes.

In the embittered political climate, Mr. Marcos found himself confronted by Mrs.
Aquino.

The widow of his leading foe became a rival candidate for President in a special
election that the confident Mr. Marcos, in a decisive political misstep, called
for February 1986. The date was 16 months before the end of his six-year
presidential term. The Marcos-controlled National Assembly declared him the
victor, on the basis of a vote tally that was marked by pervasive violence and
fraud by his side.

Resentment simmered, and later that month, Juan Ponce Enrile, the Defense
Minister, and Gen. Fidel V. Ramos, the army deputy chief of staff, led an
anti-Marcos military rebellion that was noteworthy for its lack of bloodshed.
Hundreds of thousands of Filipinos turned out into Manila's streets, forming a
vast human wall to protect Mr. Enrile, General Ramos and others who had
barricaded themselves in a military installation.

The human buffer made it impossible for the Marcos forces to strike at the
rebels without causing many civilian casualties, and it added to the manifold
pressures on Mr. Marcos to cease trying to rule.

Finally, after asking in vain for Reagan Administration help in staying in
power, he fled the Presidential Palace in the evening of Feb. 25, accompanied by
his family, and a United States Air Force plane flew the Marcoses to Guam en
route to Hawaii, where they took up residence in Honolulu.

In the months after his ouster, details emerged about the enormous wealth Mr.
Marcos had amassed in his years in power.

Recovering the Plunder

A Manila commission, trying to regain what it called the concealed Marcos
fortune, took over 268 companies, in many industries ranging from banking to
mining to steel-making, by early 1987. Not long after Mrs. Aquino took power,
Philippine officials estimated that the fortune built up by Mr. and Mrs. Marcos
totaled $5 billion or more, and the Aquino Government estimated that as much as
$10 billion in stolen wealth was involved. Mrs. Marcos was found to have left
behind 1,060 pairs of shoes and slippers at the Presidential Palace, along with
508 floor-length gowns.

As time went by, the Aquino Government filed several civil suits before a
Philippine court asking damages of as much as $100 billion against Mr. Marcos,
his relatives and ''cronies.''

In 1986, the Government filed suit in the Honolulu Federal District Court to
recover $100 million in assets that the Government charged the Marcoses had
stolen. New legal dcouments were filed on June 20 in Los Angeles charging that
the Marcoses stole $5 billion during the presidential years. The suit has not
come to trial and is still pending.

Investigations were also carried out by American officials, and in October 1988,
Mr. Marcos, his wife and eight associates, including Adnan M. Khashoggi, a Saudi
businessman, were indicted by a Federal grand jury in New York in a racketeering
case. It included charges that Mr. Marcos and the others had embezzled tens of
millions of dollars during his presidency.

On April 6 Federal prosecutors said Mr. Marcos had become too ill to stand trial
on the criminal charges pending in New York. But on June 9 they moved to
guarantee claims against his fortune in the event of his death, filing a civil
suit against him and his wife in Federal District Court in Manhattan.

Yet while Mr. Marcos remained of keen interest to investigators and prosecutors,
as his years of exile went by, he became less of a political factor in the
Philippines.

The mass support Mr. Marcos had once enjoyed mostly faded away, and his
remaining supporters had come to be seen as a minority in his homeland. Indeed,
even though his political legacy continued to trouble the nation, Mr. Marcos
came to be widely seen in the Philippines as largely irrelevant.

He is survived by his wife, of Honolulu; a brother, Dr. Pacifico Marcos, and a
sister, Fortuna Barba, both of Manila; two daughters, Maria Imelda Manotoc, who
has been living in Morocco, and Irene Araneta, who lives in Menlo Park, a suburb
of San Francisco; an adopted daughter, Aimee Marcos, of Honolulu; a son,
Ferdinand, Jr., and five grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: President Ferdinand E. Marcos being carried by supporters at a 1969
rally. (UPI); Mr. Marcos, with his wife, Imelda, spoke from presidential palace
after gaining re-election in 1986. Shortly afterward, he was forced to flee the
country. (AP); Mr. Marcos with President Reagan during a visit to Washington in
1982. Ties between the Marcos Government and the United States were of long
standing. (UPI); Airport security officers dragging the body of Benigno S.
Aquino Jr. into a van after killing Rolando Galman, left, as Mr. Aquino returned
to Manila from self-exile in the United States. The 1983 killings were widely
attributed to the Marcos Government. (AP)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
